num standard specifications for highway construction num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the official version of the num standard specifications for highway construction is located at www.itd.idaho.gov .
americans with disabilities act ada information .
materials can be provided in alternative formats by contacting the departments ada coordinator at num .
ttyttd users dial num or num to use the idaho relay system .
title vi notice to public .
the department is committed to compliance with title vi of the civil rights act of num and all related regulations and directives .
in accordance with title vi of the civil rights act of num the civil rights restoration act of num section num of the rehabilitation act of num the americans with disabilities act of num ada the age discrimination act of num and executive orders num environmental justice and num limited english proficiency the department does not and will not exclude from participation in or deny the benefits of its programs or activities or subject anyone to discrimination or treat persons unfavorably based on race color national origin sex age disability limited english proficiency or economic status .
in addition the department will not retaliate against any person who complains of discrimination or who participates in an investigation of discrimination .
those with discrimination complaints are encouraged to contact the office of civil rights at or call the title vi coordinator at num .
cover photo of thornton interchange us hwy num idaho western construction inc. num on behalf of the idaho transportation department i hereby certify this document as the current official edition of the num standard specifications for highway construction .
on behalf of the federal highway administration idaho division i hereby certify this document as the current official edition of the num standard specifications for highway construction .
standard specifications for highway construction idaho transportation department copyright num .
all rights reserved .
john p. bilderback p.e .
state construction materials engineer idaho department of transportation jason r. giard p.e .
operations engineer design and maintenance federal highway administration idaho division jason r giard digitally signed by jason r giard dn cus ou.s .
government oufhwa fhwaboiseid oudot fhwaboiseid cnjason r giard date num num num john paul bilderback digitally signed by john paul bilderback dn cnjohn paul bilderback oidaho transportation department ouconstruction and materials emailjohn.bilderbackitd.idaho.gov cus date num num num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table of contents section num general provisions num section num general abbreviations and definitions num num active voice imperative mood .
num num organization of specifications .
num num abbreviations and acronyms .
num num definitions .
num section num bidding requirements and conditions num num contents of proposal forms .
num num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule .
num num examination of plans specifications and project site .
num num preparation of a proposal .
num num conditional proposals .
num num proposal guaranty .
num num delivery of a proposal .
num num withdrawal or revision of a proposal .
num num public opening of proposals .
num num irregular proposals .
num num disqualification of bidders .
num num protesting a proposal .
num num licensing of bidders .
num num tied bids .
num section num award and execution of contract num num consideration of proposals .
num num award of contract .
num num return of surety proposal bond num num contract bonds .
num num execution and approval of contract .
num num failure to execute contract .
num section num scope of work num num intent of contract num num contract revisions .
num num notification of contract revision .
num num value engineering change proposals vecp .
num section num control of work num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num authority of the engineer and suspension of work .
num num plans and working drawings .
num num conformity with plans and specifications .
num num coordination of contract documents .
num num administrative cooperation .
num num cooperation between contractors .
num num utility facilities .
num num construction stakes lines and grades .
num num authority of the engineer .
num num duties of the inspector .
num num inspection of work .
num num unacceptable and unauthorized work .
num num load regulations .
num num maintenance during construction .
num num acceptance .
num num administrative resolution process for claims .
num num technical analysis support tas .
num num claim resolution .
num num contract specific alternate claim resolution process dispute review board .
num section num control of material num num source of supply and quality requirements num num ordering producing and delivering materials .
num num samples tests and cited specifications .
num num certification of materials .
num num plant inspection num num storage and handling of material .
num num test result dispute resolution .
num num test facilities .
num num material sources .
num num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
num num production of material in departmentcontrolled sources .
num num depletion of designated sources .
num num departmentprovided material .
num num trade names and alternatives .
num num qpl and nonqpl products .
num num disposal of materials .
num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num laws to be observed .
num num permits and licenses .
num num licensing of contractors .
num num patented devices materials and processes .
num num restoring surfaces opened by permit .
num num traffic control devices .
num num use of explosives num num preservation protection and restoration of property and landscape .
num num forest protection .
num num responsibility for injury damage .
num num contractors responsibility for work .
num num contractors responsibility for utility facilities and property num num personal liability of public officials .
num num no waiver of legal rights .
num num access to records .
num num sanitary health and safety provisions .
num num environmental and cultural resource protection .
num num fencing .
num num survey monument preservation .
num num weed control .
num num seeding and vegetation special guaranty .
num section num prosecution progress and termination num num subletting of contract .
num num contract time .
num num project schedule .
num num preconstruction and preoperational conferences num num limitation of operations .
num num methods equipment and character of workers .
num num extension of contract time .
num num failure to complete on time .
num num default and termination of contract .
num num termination for convenience of the department .
num section num measurement and payment num num measurement of quantities .
num num scope of payment .
num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num payment for quantity variations contract revisions and delays .
num num increases or decreases due to taxes .
num num partial payments .
num num payment for material on hand num num allowance for material left on hand .
num num acceptance and final payment num section num civil rights num num general requirements .
num num equal employment opportunity num num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe program requirements .
num num training .
num num tribaltribal employment rights ordinances tero .
num section num earthwork num section num clearing and grubbing num section num selective removal of trees or stumps num section num miscellaneous removals num section num obliteration of old road num section num excavation and embankment num section num stripping designated source material deposits num section num interceptor ditches num section num small ditches num section num structure excavation and compacting backfill num section num source reclamation num section num erosion and sediment control num section num topsoil num section num roadside cleanup num section num migratory bird treaty act mbta compliance num section num bases num section num granular subbase num section num emulsion treated base num section num aggregate base num section num reconditioning num section num opengraded base num section num cement recycled asphalt base stabilization crabs num section num surface courses and pavement num section num tack coat num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num prime coat num section num chip seal coat warranty num section num surface treatment num section num superpave hot mix asphalt num section num road mix pavement num section num scrub coat num section num fog coat num section num portland cement concrete pavement num section num urban concrete pavement num section num microsurfacing num section num concrete pavement rehabilitation num section num cold inplace recycled cir pavement num section num cold milling num section num structures num section num structures num section num concrete num section num metal reinforcement num section num structural metals num section num piling num section num prestressing concrete num section num corrugated plate pipe num section num nonstructural concrete num section num concrete overlay num section num concrete waterproofing systems num section num gabion structure num section num predrilling for piling num section num dynamic pile testing and capwap analysis num section num controlled density fill cdf num section num polyester polymer concrete ppc overlay num section num epoxy overlay num section num dewatering foundation num section num asphaltic plug expansion joint system num section num compression seal expansion joint num section num strip seal expansion joint num section num elastomeric concrete header num section num removal of expansion joint num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num textured concrete surface num section num glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp reinforcement num section num pile sleeves num section num precast concrete culvert num section num bond reinforcing steel num section num removing asphalt overlay num section num concrete crack repair num section num patch and repair of concrete num section num superstructure jacking num section num temporary shoring num section num utility conduit num section num painting structural steel num section num ancillary construction num section num conduits general num section num culverts num section num pipe siphons num section num irrigation pipelines num section num sewers manhole and valve covers num section num pipe underdrains and urban and rural edge drains num section num embankment protectors num section num pipe aprons num section num minor structures num section num fences num section num cattle guards num section num guardrail num section num crash cushions num section num sidewalks driveways and curb ramps num section num curb and gutter num section num signs and sign supports num section num delineator and milepost assemblies num section num marker posts witness posts and street monuments num section num illumination num section num planting num section num seeding num section num precast concrete headgates num section num concrete slope paving num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num riprap num section num joints num section num temporary traffic control num section num painting num section num snow poles num section num mobilization num section num pavement markings num section num rumble strips num section num removal of bridge deck concrete num section num mailbox num section num antiskid num section num construction geotextiles num section num biaxial geogrid num section num field laboratories num section num temporary turbidity curtain num section num timelapse camera num section num lawn construction num section num underground sprinkler system num section num compost num section num traffic signal installation num section num surveying num section num record of existing pavement markings num section num record drawings num section num materials num section num portland cement num section num asphalt num section num aggregates num section num joint fillers and sealers num section num grout and mortar num section num pipe num section num paint num section num metals num section num concrete curing materials and admixtures num section num timber and preservatives num section num roadside improvement material num section num signing materials num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num illumination and traffic signal materials num section num secondary cementitious materials num section num gabion and revet mattress num section num geotextiles num section num miscellaneous num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num u.s .
customary measurement symbols symbol unit name symbol unit name plus or minus w watt f degree fahrenheit ohm a ampere yd yard acre acre yd² or sy square yard cp centipoises yd³ or cy cubic yard cst centistokes π or pi num cwt centum weight hundred weight num lb db decibel fc footcandle ft or foot ft² or sf square foot ft³ or cf cubic foot gal gallon gpm gallons per minute hp horsepower hr hour hz hertz in or inch in² square inch in³ cubic inch j joule kip num poundforce ksi kilopound per square inch kw kilowatt lb pound lbf poundforce lbfft poundforce foot lm lumen ls lump sum ma milliampere mg num gallons mi mile mi² square mile mil num inch min minute mph miles per hour ms millisecond oz ounce p poise pii poundsinchinch pli pounder per linear inch psf poundforce per square foot psi poundforce per square inch pt pint qt quart rpm revolutions per minute station or sta num feet s second toa tons of asphalt ton ton short num lb µm micrometer v volt va voltampere vpm vibrations per minute num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num general provisions num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num general abbreviations and definitions num active voice imperative mood .
these standard specifications are written with an emphasis on the active voice .
in a sentence written in the active voice someone acts on something .
for example the contractor will place the concrete .
a similar sentence in the passive voice the concrete will be placed would be unclear about who was responsible for placing the concrete .
the standard specifications also are written in the imperative mood .
the imperative mood is used when the party issuing an instruction and the party receiving it are already understood .
the department is stating its requirements or directions for the work to the contractor such statements have the same force as if they contained the words the contractor will .
in an imperative sentence such as place the concrete the department is indicating that it requires the contractor to place the concrete .
before contract award imperative statements are directed to the bidders .
after contract award imperatives are directed to the contractor .
the department will identify parties other than the bidder or the contractor to whom it gives a responsibility in these standard specifications .
in phrasings where the responsible party is clearly identified or in factual statements when it is not important to do so the department may use the passive voice .
all approvals and consents are granted and all direction is given by the engineer .
all submittals are sent to the engineer .
num organization of specifications .
a .
general .
with the exception of section num general provisions and section num materials standard specification sections are written in a fivepart format .
each section contains the following primary subsections xxx.num description .
xxx.num materials .
xxx.num construction requirements .
xxx.num method of measurement .
xxx.num basis of payment .
the subsections contain varying numbers of titled subordinate subsections composed of higher and lower levels .
b .
hierarchy of organization .
subsection requirements apply to subordinate subsections .
in addition many subsections begin with a lowerlevel subsection titled general .
general subsection requirements apply to the associated samelevel subsections that follow they do not apply to the higher level .
c. title or headings .
sections and subsection titles or headings are for referencing convenience and do not necessarily bear on the text meaning or interpretation .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction d. references .
the standard specifications rely on many internal cross references and to external sources in other contract documents department manuals and other industry resources .
to minimize the text necessary for internal cross references the standard specifications will not precede internal cross references with the terms section and subsection .
external cross references will contain just enough information to find the intended source .
num abbreviations and acronyms .
num .
organizations .
aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute acpa american concrete pipe association agc associated general contractors aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standard institute aosca association of official seed certifying agency area american railway engineering association astm american society for testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society crd united states corps of engineers controller of research and development crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute deq idaho department of environmental quality epa united states environmental protection agency ectc erosion control technology council fcc federal communications commission fhwa federal highway administration icri international concrete repair institute ies illuminating engineering society idwr idaho department of water resources isda idaho state department of agriculture isu idaho state university itd idaho transportation department ite institute of transportation engineers nema national electrical manufacturers association ngs national geodetic survey noaa national oceanic and atmospheric administration npca national precast concrete association nrmca national ready mix concrete association nrtl nationally recognized testing laboratory ntpep national transportation product evaluation program nvlap national voluntary laboratory accreditation program pcaa precast concrete association of america pci precastprestressed concrete institute plib pacific lumber inspection bureau ptcsi pedestrian traffic control signal indicator sae society of automotive engineers num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num shpo state historic preservation office sspc society for protective coatings ul underwriters laboratories usdol united states department of labor usdot united states department of transportation waqtc western alliance for quality transportation construction wclib west coast lumber inspection bureau wwpa western wood products association wwpi western wood preservers institute num .
acronyms .
aap affirmative action program abs acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ac alternating current acza ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate anfo ammonium nitrate and fuel oil ada american disabilities act apa asphalt price adjustment or asphalt pavement analyzer asr alkali silica reactivity atpb asphalttreated permeable base atplc asphalttreated permeable base leveling course au acre unit awg american wire gauge bai base asphalt index bb balled and burlapped bfi base fuel index bmp best management practice cao calcium oxide caconum calcium carbonate ca contingency amount cai current asphalt index cca chromated copper arsenate cfi current fuel index cfr code of federal regulations cgp construction general permit cir cold inplace recycling cjmf contractors job mix formula conum carbon dioxide cpm critical path method crabs cement recycle asphalt base stabilization cri color rendering index cuf commercially useful function cvn charpy vnotch dbe disadvantaged business enterprise dctr distributor certified test report dp dust proportion drb dispute review board dti direct tension indicator eara emulsified asphalt recycling agent num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction ec electrical conductivity eeo equal employment opportunity ems electronic marker system esa endangered species act escp erosion and sediment control plan esp exchangeable sodium percentage fifra federal insecticide fungicide and rodenticide act fob free on board fop field operating procedure fpa fuel price adjustment gfe good faith effort gpr ground penetrating radar hecp hydraulic erosion control products hma hot mix asphalt ia independent assurance idapa idaho administrative procedure act num idaho code ipcea insulated power cable engineers association publications iri international roughness index jmf job mix formula led light emitting diode loi loss of ignition ls lump sum mcpd multistate control point database mctr manufacturer certified test report mph miles per hour mtr mill test report or minimum test requirement mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices as adopted idapa num nanumo sodium oxide naptpap north american proficiency testingperformance assessment program nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electric code nepa national environmental policy act nmas nominal maximum aggregate size noi notice of intent not notice of termination npt national pipe tapered ojt onthejob training pcms portable changeable message sign pdf portable document format pe professional engineer or polyethylene pg performance graded ph potential of hydrogen pls professional land surveyor or pure live seed plss public land survey system ppv peak particle velocity pvc polyvinyl chloride qa quality assurance qap quality assurance program qasp quality assurance special provisions num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num qc quality control qpl qualified products list rap recycled asphalt pavement ras recycled asphalt shingles recp rolled erosion control products rms root mean square rohs restriction of hazardous substances row right of way rtfot rolling thin film oven test scm secondary cementitious material sds safety data sheet sgc superpave gyratory compactor spcp spill prevention and control plan spmdt superpave mix design technician srrpe steel reinforced ribbed polyethylene swppp stormwater pollution prevention plan tas technical analysis support te technical expert tmecc test methods for evaluation of compost and composting trm turf reinforcement mat tsr tensile strength ratio ttyttd telecommunications device for the deafteletypewriting device ucp united certification program usswg united states steel wire gauge uv ultraviolet vecp value engineering change proposal voc volatile organic compound vtcsh vehicle traffic control signal head wma warm mix asphalt xcu explosion collapse and underground num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num definitions .
acceptance .
work that has met all contract requirements including minimum sampling and testing andor certification requirements .
acceptance testing .
samples and tests that are conducted to determine whether the department will accept a product or service for payment .
addenda .
contract revisions issued after notice of letting and before bid opening .
anticipated profit .
profit for work not performed .
automated machine guidance amg .
amg is the computerized guidance of construction equipment to follow the line and grade of an engineered design .
guidance is by direct control of the machinery or through visual or audible signals to the operator .
operation is based on digital input from positioning systems and may increase levels of precision speed and accuracy .
award .
department execution of a contract .
bid opening .
the public opening and reading of proposals .
bidder .
an individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination submitting a proposal .
bid schedule .
a list of contract pay items and their estimated quantities included with the proposal forms on which bidders provide unit prices .
board .
idaho transportation board .
as established by num idaho code .
bridge .
a structure including supports constructed over a depression or obstruction e.g .
water highway railway and having a track or passageway to carry traffic or other moving loads and a length more than num feet measured along the center of the traveled way or railroad between abutment undercopings or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
business day .
any day except saturdays sundays and holidays .
calendar day .
any day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
time described in days will be calendar days .
central materials laboratory .
the departments headquarters materials testing laboratory located at num e jordan st boise id num .
change order .
a written order to the contractor detailing changes to the specified work quantities or modifications within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
chief engineer .
an administrator within the department who is designated by the director as established by num idaho code .
chip seal coat warranty guide .
the departments guide that describes the intent evaluation method and criteria for a warranty chip seal coat contract .
the guide includes examples of commonly seen damage defects or other imperfections with its respective likely cause .
claim .
a written contractor request or demand for a contract adjustment equitable adjustment additional time or compensation delay damages passthrough subcontractor claims or for any other remedy arising from an unresolved dispute disagreement or controversy concerning respective rights and obligations under the contract .
concurrent delay .
are independent critical activity delays occurring at the same time .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num confidence points .
random survey points measured in the field within the boundary of a digital terrain model dtm for the purpose of documenting that the natural ground dtm is a reasonable representation of the original natural ground for computation of catch points volumes and pay quantities .
contingency item .
a contract pay item for which the department provides a set price on the bid schedule .
the department will pay for authorized work performed under a contingency item as required by the contract .
contract .
the written agreement between the department and the contractor covering the work performance of the work basis of payment time accounting and other obligations of the parties .
the contract includes the notice of letting proposal forms plans specifications contract bonds change orders the standard specifications special provisions quality assurance qa manual quality assurance special provision qasp and other documents designated by the department as part of the contract .
contract amount .
the original total bid amount at the time of award .
contract date .
the date the contract is signed by both parties .
for the purchase of supplies or services by contract modification the term contract date means the date of the contract modification .
contract bonds .
statutory bonds executed by the contractor and the surety including the performance bond and payment bond guaranteeing performance of the contract and payment of lawful indebtedness pertaining thereto .
contract pay item pay item .
a specific unit of the work for which a price is provided in the contract .
each individual work item is considered a major item of work .
contract pay items are numbered to correspond to the appropriate sections of the standard specifications .
special provision contract pay items are numbered beginning with an s followed by a section number to which work is similar or to a num generic series number .
contract time .
the time allowed by the contract for substantial completion of the work .
contractor prime contractor .
the individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof contracting with the department for performance of the work .
contractorobligated defects cods .
contractorobligated defects cods are the loss of asphalt or chips or action simulating the loss of asphalt or chips due to poor contractor workmanship andor materials which diminish the chip seal coats effectiveness and appearance .
some of the most common cods are described in the departments chip seal coat warranty guide .
control network .
an array of control stations established by the contractor or provided by the department established by a surveyor .
control station .
any item identified in the project records as having an authoritative position or elevation on the project datum and intended to be used to control the phases of the work .
critical habitat .
critical habitat ch is a term that has special significance and meaning under the endangered species act esa .
it is a specific geographic area that contains features essential for the conservation of a threatened or endangered species and that may require special management and protection .
critical habitat may include an area that is not currently occupied by the species but that will be needed for its recovery .
critical habitat areas and boundaries are established by regulation and published in the federal register where more specific information on each critical habitat area is included .
esa listed species and their habitat are protected whether or not they are in an area designated as critical habitat .
critical path .
the longest path of continuous activities through the project schedule that establishes the scheduled substantial completion date and typically has the least amount of total float .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction cultural resource .
sites structures objects or districts significant in history architecture archeology or culture that is on or eligible for the national register of historic places .
culverts .
a structure under the traveled way with a clear opening of num feet or less measured along the roadway centerline .
delay .
an unanticipated deferment of the start progress or finish of a scheduled activity .
department .
idaho transportation department acting on behalf of the board .
digital terrain model dtm .
an electronic computer model of the shape of the natural ground .
director .
the chief administrative officer of the department as established by num idaho code and the directors authorized agents .
dispute .
a disagreement between the engineer and the contractor related to interpretation of the contract or the engineers decision under the contract which is not a claim under the contract and is handled informally between the engineer and the contractor .
dispute review board drb .
a contractspecific board of three neutral individuals selected by the department and the contractor to help in the administrative resolution process at the resident engineer level .
engineer .
the district engineer of the department acting directly or through the resident engineer and is an authorized representative of the department having general supervision over construction and maintenance work in one of the several districts of the department .
the district boundaries are on file in the office of the department .
equipment .
machinery tools apparatus and supplies necessary for upkeep maintenance proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
erodible material or surface .
exposed earthen material except solid rock that may be carried or displaced by wind rainfall snowmelt or mechanically applied water .
extra work .
work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found essential for satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope as determined by the engineer .
float total float .
the total number of days in the project schedule that a scheduled activity can be delayed and still achieve substantial completion within the contract time .
force account .
a payment method for work performed by the contractor .
grade verification points .
random survey points measured in the field to verify that a constructed grade has been built according to the line and grade of the design .
highway .
a public way for vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
holidays .
in the state of idaho the recognized holidays are new years day martin luther king jr.idaho human rights day presidents day memorial day independence day labor day columbus day veterans day thanksgiving day and christmas or on a day proclaimed as a holiday by legal authority .
incidental .
work necessary to fulfill the contract that is not measured or paid for separately .
independent assurance ia .
an unbiased and independent evaluation of sampling and testing procedures .
inspector .
the engineers authorized representative assigned to inspect work and materials .
laboratory .
a laboratory used for materials sampling and testing qualified through appropriate programs as determined by the department .
an independent laboratory is a qualified laboratory not owned or controlled by the department or the contractor .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance .
the engineers written acknowledgement the chip seal coat appears to have been satisfactorily constructed including excess chips have been removed and the warranty period can begin .
lost day of work .
when work on critical activities can not proceed for at least num hours per day as determined by the engineer .
lot .
a specified material quantity from a single source or a measured construction quantity assumed to be produced by the same process .
materials .
a substance or product specified for incorporation in the work .
manufacturer .
a firm that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that produces on premises materials supplies articles or equipment for use in the work .
neat line .
the line established on the plans that designate the location shape and border to which work is to be built or formed .
noncontractorobligated defects ncods .
noncontractorobligated defects ncods are damage to the chip seal coat beyond the control of the contractor as described in the departments chip seal coat warranty guide .
nonexcusable delay .
delays in the work that are the contractors fault or responsibility .
notice of letting .
a public notification of the departments intent to receive proposals and award a contract for construction .
the notice of letting contains information regarding the receipt and opening of proposals .
notification of award .
written notice to the contractor to begin the work .
overburden .
surface soil or granular material which may or may not be suitable for construction purposes and which overlays other material suitable for road or bridge construction .
pavement structure .
the structure constructed on the roadbed and typically includes pavement surfacing base courses and granular subbase .
pay item .
see contract pay item .
payment bond .
see contract bonds .
performance or warranty bond .
see contract bonds .
plastic pipe .
acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs polyvinyl chloride ribbed or solid corrugated polyethylene type s polypropylene double wall or triple wall or steel reinforced ribbed polyethylene .
plan quantity .
the quantity listed on the bid schedule paid for as specified in num.b .
plans .
approved drawings or approved drawing reproductions included in the contract showing the location type dimensions and details of the work .
professional engineer .
an engineer licensed in accordance with num idaho code to practice the profession of engineering in the state of idaho .
project project site .
the highway section or the area on the plans where the work is to be performed .
for contracts where davisbacon wages apply the project site also includes the physical place or places where the work called for in the contract will remain and any other site where a significant portion of the work is constructed provided the project site is established specifically for the performance of the contract and it is within one mile of the project limits .
job headquarters tool yards batch plants borrow pits etc .
are part of the project site of work provided they are dedicated exclusively or nearly so to performance of the contract and they are within num mile of the project site .
not included in the project site are the contractors or the subcontractors permanent home offices branch plant establishments fabrication num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction plants tool yards etc .
whose location and continuance in operation are determined wholly without regard to a particular contract .
in addition commercial or material supplier fabrication plants batch plants borrow pits job headquarters tool yards etc .
which were established before bid advertisement and not on the project site are not included in the project site .
such permanent previously established facilities are not part of the project site even where the operations for a period of time may be dedicated exclusively or nearly so to the performance of a contract .
prompt payment .
when the contractor pays each subcontractor or supplier by the numth day after receiving payment from the department .
proposal .
a bidders written offer to perform the work .
proposal forms .
the forms and information provided by the department to prospective bidders to use in composing a proposal .
proposal guaranty .
the required security e.g .
bid bond submitted with the proposal to ensure execution of the contract .
quality analysis qa .
evaluation performed to determine percent of material within limits and to assign a corresponding pay factor .
quality assurance program qap .
the planned and systematic actions necessary to provide adequate confidence a product or service will satisfy contract requirements for quality assurance program and includes quality control independent assurance verification testing and acceptance testing .
quality control qc .
the activities to make sure a product meets contract requirements .
activities may include materials handling and construction procedures calibration and maintenance of equipment production process control sampling testing and inspection .
quality level analysis .
a mathematical procedure that provides an estimate of the percentage of a lot that is within the specification limits i.e .
percent within limits .
quickset emulsion .
an emulsion used for microsurfacing designed to allow acceptance of rolling traffic on a num inchthick surface placed at num f and num percent humidity within an optimal time of num hour .
random sample .
a sample selected where every element of the population has an equally likely opportunity to be included .
recreational resource .
a publicly owned site used solely for recreational purposes .
recycled asphalt pavement rap .
salvaged milled pulverized broken or crushed bituminous material that may have minor coatings of dust or aggregate particles with no discernable seams pockets or amounts of base soil or deleterious material .
record drawings .
a revised set of drawings submitted by the contractor upon completion of the work showing all changes from the plans in the permanent work on the project site by the contractor any subcontractor any utility companies or municipal local county state or federal agencies completed from the time of contract award until substantial completion including final quantities and will include all revisions to the contract design made during the construction phase .
also known as asconstructed or as built drawings or simply asbuilts .
reference stakes .
stakes set away from but with information relating back to the intended location and grade .
regular dealer .
a firm that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other facility that supplies materials articles or equipment for purchase or lease and regularly stocks sells and leases to the public during the usual course of business .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num regulatory floodway .
the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas regulated by federal state or local requirements that must be reserved in an open manner i.e .
unconfined or unobstructed horizontally or vertically to provide for the discharge of the base flood so the cumulative increase in water surface elevation does not exceed a designated amount .
resident design construction engineer .
the authorized engineer representative .
responsible bidder .
a bidder that possesses the ability to perform the work and complete the contract .
right of way .
a general term denoting land property or an interest therein acquired for or devoted to highway purposes .
roadbed .
the top of subgrade on which the pavement structure curbs sidewalks median and other incidental facilities are constructed .
roadside .
the areas between the outside edges of the shoulders and the right of way boundaries and areas between the roadways of a divided highway .
roadway .
a portion of the highway for vehicular use including the shoulders and the portion of the highway within the limits of any construction .
roadway prism .
the engineeredstructural portion of the highway which includes the pavement structure plus the area between the roadbed shoulders or back of curb extending downward and outward at the slope of numhnumv to the intercept of natural ground removal limit or slope of embankment keying benches .
included elements are the roadway pavement structure embankment fill foundations for embankment and soft spot excavationbackfill .
embankment fill outside of the numhnumv slope is not considered part of the roadway prism .
roller coverage .
the rolling of the entire width num time including roller overlap .
roller pass .
the passing of the roller over an area roller width one time .
run chart .
a plot of data in time sequence .
shoulder .
the portion of the roadway adjacent to the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
significant change .
when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed plans or work and when a contract pay item is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
an allowance for an increase in quantity will apply only to the portion in excess of num percent of the original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
slope catch .
the location where a design slope intersects the existing natural ground and where excavation or embankment work should begin to provide the intended earthwork .
slope staking .
the process of using measurements and calculations in the field to determine the slope catch .
slope staking will normally include setting stakes to mark the slope catch and setting a reference stake for every catch stake .
snugtight .
is the tightness reached by a few blows from an impact wrench or the full effort of a person using a num inch spud wrench .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard specifications covering conditions specific to the contract .
specifications .
a general term applied to all written provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction specialty item .
a contract pay item not chargeable to subcontract percentages if designated on the bid schedule .
stakes .
stakes nails marks stringlines or other devices or mechanisms set or established for the purpose of indicating or controlling the location orientation or grade of any feature intended for construction or for the purpose of limiting or influencing the work .
staking .
the act of placing stakes .
standard drawing .
detailed engineering drawings approved for repetitive use for specific work items .
standard specifications .
the departments accumulation of specifications into a book or pdf document and approved by the fhwa .
state .
the state of idaho acting through an authorized representative .
statistical analysis .
a method of analyzing inspection test results to determine conformity with the contract .
structures .
bridges culverts headwalls retaining walls cribbing riprap underdrains pipelines buildings catch basins manholes and similar features that may be encountered or constructed in the work .
subcontractor .
the individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof with the departments written approval which sublets part of the contract .
subgrade .
materials directly below the pavement structure .
the subgrade is natural inplace material e.g .
excavated areas or compacted fill material e.g .
embankments .
sublot .
the quantity represented by num complete test .
substantial completion .
when the work is to the point the traveling public can safely use the improvements without further delays disruption or impediments .
for conventional bridge and highway work substantial completion is when bridge deck parapet pavement structure shoulder permanent signing and markings traffic barrier and safety appurtenance work is complete .
substructure .
a part of the structure below the bridge beambearing seats below the skewbacks of arches below the top of footings of rigid frames below the top of caps of trestle bents or below the top of columns on box girders .
wingwalls and backwalls of abutments are part of the substructure .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative responsible for and in charge of the work .
superstructure .
a part of the structure not defined as substructure .
surety .
the corporation firm partnership or individual supplying the contract bonds provided by the contractor .
survey marker .
any survey monument control station or stake .
survey monument .
any physical structure along with any references or accessories used to mark the location of a land boundary survey corner geodetic control point or local control point .
there are many different types of survey monuments e.g .
public and private land corners highway and interstate monuments national geodetic survey ngs horizontal control monuments and benchmarks .
survey monuments may be marked stones brass or aluminum caps reinforcing bar with or without metal or plastic caps and various other installations or combinations intended to mark locations e.g .
public and private land corners control points benchmarks .
surveyor .
the individual designated by the contractor and licensed in the state of idaho as a professional land surveyor pls and placed in responsible charge of the survey work as defined in num idaho code .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num temporary benchmark tbm .
a control station established for the purpose of providing authoritative vertical control for the work .
a tbm may or may not have an established horizontal position .
topsoil .
surface soil suitable for seed germination and the support of vegetative growth .
traffic control device .
signs signals markings and devices placed on over or adjacent to a street or highway by authority of a public body or official with jurisdiction to regulate warn or guide traffic .
traffic lane .
the traveled way portion for the movement of a single line of vehicles .
traveled way .
the right of way portion for the movement of vehicles excluding shoulders .
truck volume .
the truck volume created by the num inside dimensions of a truck box with the length and width confined by the physical limits of the truck box and the height measured from the truck box floor to the top of the shortest side .
verification testing .
the sampling and testing carried out independent of acceptance sampling and testing to verify the contractors results .
wetland .
those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions .
wetlands generally include swamps marshes bogs and similar areas .
work .
the construction activity including the labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary for project completion as required by the contract and the carrying out of the duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
the terms include buildings structures and improvements of all types e.g .
bridges highways parkways streets sewers mains pumping stations railways drilling blasting excavating clearing landscaping .
the manufacture or furnishing of materials articles supplies or equipment whether or not a federal or state agency acquires title to such materials articles supplies or equipment during the course of the manufacture or furnishing or owns the materials from which they are manufactured or furnished is not work .
working day .
all calendar days except the following num .
saturdays sundays holidays july num and july num .
num .
for work on the critical path days of engineer ordered suspensions for reasons other than contractor negligence or noncompliance .
num .
contractidentified nonworking days .
num .
days during december january and february .
num .
days where one or more of the following prevent the contractor from working on critical path items with normal production rates for at least num hours a. earthquakes and other natural cataclysmic phenomena the contractor can not foresee or avoid .
b .
weather conditions .
c. job conditions caused by weather .
d. during excusable delays as specified in num.b and num.d .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num bidding requirements and conditions num contents of proposal forms .
the department will provide proposal forms to a bidder through the questcdn.com website for purchase .
bidders must appear on the plan holders list for their proposal to be accepted by the department .
the proposal forms will include the following num .
the proposed project location and description .
num .
a schedule of items with an estimated quantity for each .
num .
the proposed project contract time .
num .
the proposal guaranty amount .
num .
the bid opening date time and location .
num .
special provisions .
num .
requirements not contained in the standard specifications .
documents bound with or attached to the proposal forms are a part of the proposal forms .
the plans specifications and other documents referenced in the proposal forms are a part of the proposal form whether attached or not and do not need to be submitted with the proposal .
do not detach or alter bound or attached documents from the proposal forms when submitting the proposal .
pay the amount stated in the notice of letting required for downloading of the proposal forms and the plans using the questcdn.com website .
num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule .
the quantities provided in the bid schedule are approximate and are used to compare proposals .
the department may change these quantities or eliminate contract pay items as specified in num .
the department will only pay for accepted work quantities as specified in num .
num examination of plans specifications and project site .
carefully examine the proposed contract project site plans and the proposal forms before preparing and submitting a proposal .
if a bidder chooses to not perform project site investigations and the department awards the contract to that bidder the bidder will be responsible for onsite project conditions that would have been discovered had the bidder performed a reasonable onsite project investigation .
a reasonable project investigation includes investigating the project site borrow sites hauling routes and other locations related to the performance of the work .
a reasonable onsite project investigation also includes inspection of these documents .
departmentprovided information is for the bidders general knowledge only and is not a substitute for the bidders own reasonable investigation interpretation or judgment .
on request the department will provide electronic design data to the bidder .
the electronic design data is provided for the bidders convenience and information and will not become part of the contract .
the department does not guarantee or warranty the electronic design data provided to the bidder is compatible with any of the systems used by the bidder is complete is representative of actual conditions at the project site or accurately reflects the quantities and character of the actual work required .
providing electronic design data does not relieve the bidder from risks or of duty to make onsite project examinations and investigations or other responsibilities .
immediately notify the department of errors or omissions on the plans and proposal forms or inconsistencies between these documents and the project site .
if the department performed borings and subsurface investigations at the project site or other areas e.g .
possible material sources the department obtained and used these records num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num for study estimating and design purposes only they may not necessarily reflect the actual subsurface conditions existing at the project site .
a submitted proposal is prima facie evidence the bidder understands and is satisfied with the conditions of the project site plans and proposal forms .
the department does not consider written or oral explanations instructions and interpretations provided before contract award as binding unless confirmed by addenda .
it is the departments intent to provide bidders an equal opportunity to access and acquire information to formulate a responsive proposal .
if the department discovers information specifications plans data or interpretations important for the bidding process to be deficient the department will provide this data to bidders as addenda .
bidders must acknowledge receipt of addenda .
num preparation of a proposal .
complete purchase proposal forms as described in num .
submit an electronic or hardcopy proposal on the departmentprovided forms .
submit hardcopy proposals that are typed or handwritten in ink .
provide a numeric unit price for each contract pay item on the bid schedule .
multiply each unit price by the corresponding contract pay item quantity and provide the numeric product in the amount bid column .
add the numeric products of the contract pay items and provide a numeric total bid amount at the bottom of the same column .
if discrepancies exist between the unit prices and the products or total bid amount the department will use the unit prices and calculate a corrected total bid amount .
the department accepts bids in electronic ebid using bidx.com and expedite software or hardcopy formats .
addenda are uploaded to the questcdn.com software and plan holders are then notified to download the addenda .
acknowledgement of each addendum must be included with the submittal of the proposal .
the no bidding errors statement in electronic bidding programs output in the bid summary is only a verification of an entry made in provided ebid fields .
it does not mean the information provided is correct acceptable or complies with requirements or specifications .
based on the bidder organization type the department requires the following on the submitted proposal num .
ink signatures or electronic digital identification for the following individuals based on the bidders organization a .
the owner of a sole proprietorship .
b .
at least num member of a partnership .
c. at least num member or officer from each firm representing a joint venture .
d. at least num officer of a corporation .
e. an agent of the bidder legally qualified and accepted by the department .
num .
name and business address of the following based on the bidders organization a .
the owner of a sole proprietorship .
b .
each member of a partnership .
c. each member or officer of the firms representing a joint venture .
d. the corporation and its corporate officials .
if the contract includes mechanical or electrical work e.g .
plumbing heating air conditioning electrical include the names addresses public works contractor license number and contract or subcontract amount of work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num conditional proposals .
if a bidder wants to bid on more than num proposal at a single bid opening and wants protection from the department awarding the bidder more contracts than it can successfully perform the bidder may submit bid proposals for a number of proposals by signing and attaching the following statement to num or more of the hardcopy bid proposals this proposal is conditioned on myour receiving the award for only insert number of the contracts for which iwe have submitted proposals at this bid opening .
if proposals for a greater number of contracts than specified are accepted then this proposal will be considered withdrawn .
a bidder may also condition as above to bids submitted in subsequent bid openings if the department has not made a determination of intent to award the prior projects .
the written condition for hardcopy bid proposals must include this proposal is conditioned on myour receiving the award for only insert number of contracts for which iwe have submitted proposals at this bid opening or for proposals submitted at previous bid openings for which the department has not made a determination of intent to award .
if proposals for a greater number of contracts than specified are accepted then this proposal will be considered withdrawn .
for either conditional proposal above electronic bids require a completed conditional withdrawal form in the ebs file .
if a bidder submits conditional bid proposals and becomes the apparent low bidder on more than num conditional bid proposal the board will choose which contracts to award to that bidder .
num proposal guaranty .
provide a proposal guaranty of the type and at least in the amount stated in the proposal forms .
if using a surety bond submit the bond on an acceptable form signed by the surety .
include a power of attorney for the person who executes the bond on behalf of the surety as attorneyinfact .
num delivery of a proposal .
submit a complete proposal on the departments proposal forms described in num and prepared as specified in num .
submit the proposal electronically or in a sealed envelope marked on the outside with bid enclosed proposal name and key number addressed to the department in the care of contracting services .
submit before the bid opening date and time and to the location stated in the notice of letting .
submittals received after the bid opening date and time will be returned to the bidder unopened .
num withdrawal or revision of a proposal .
to withdraw or revise a proposal submit a written request before the date and time set for the bid opening .
num public opening of proposals .
the department will publicly open and read proposals on the date time and place stated in the notice of letting .
num irregular proposals .
the department will consider a proposal to be irregular and may reject it for the following reasons num .
submitting the proposal in pencil .
num .
not signing the proposal .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
submitting the proposal on proposal forms not purchased from the department .
electronic submittals must represent the purchased proposal forms .
num .
altering or detaching part of the proposal forms as provided by the department .
num .
submitting the proposal with unauthorized additions conditional or alternate bids addenda omissions or irregularities that might make the proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous .
num .
adding provisions to the proposal reserving the right to accept or reject an award or to enter into a contract except as specified in num .
num .
submitting the proposal without a proposal guaranty bid bond .
num .
submitting the proposal without a unit price for each contract pay item on the bid schedule except for alternate contract pay items as specified in num .
num .
not listing an electrical subcontractor when required by the department and in accordance with num idaho code .
num .
not acknowledging the number of addenda issued by the department if applicable .
num .
not completing the itd dbe acknowledgement form in the bid submittal for federallyfunded projects .
num .
not submitting a completed itdnum dbe commitments form and supporting documentation within the time allowed on federallyfunded projects .
num .
not completing statefunded contract acknowledgement form in the bid submittal for statefunded projects .
num disqualification of bidders .
the department may disqualify a bidder and reject the bidders proposals for the following reasons num .
a bidder submits multiple bid proposals for the same proposal under the same or a different name .
num .
the department finds evidence of collusion among bidders .
the department will not allow a bidder that participated in collusion to bid future work until the department reinstates the bidder .
num protesting a proposal .
to protest a proposal or the waiver of an irregularity in a proposal submit a written protest to the chief engineer within num calendar days after notification of irregularity .
num licensing of bidders .
for contracts that include federalaid funding bidders and subcontractors that are required to be listed in the proposal will possess the appropriate license as specified in num before the department awards the contract .
for contracts without federalaid funding bidders will possess the appropriate license as specified in num before submitting a proposal and if the proposal forms require bidders to list subcontractors the subcontractor will possess the appropriate license as specified in num and as stated in num before the bidder submits a bid proposal .
num tied bids .
if num bids tie a drawing will be conducted to determine the low apparent bidder .
the award may be made by drawing lots or tossing of a coin in the presence of a witness in accordance with idapa num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals .
after the bid opening the department will post the total proposal amount for each bid received to the departments website no later than numpm the next business day .
after each bid opening bid proposals will be reviewed to ensure the necessary requirements have been met e.g .
valid public works license electrical contractor no later than numpm the next business day .
the contractor will be notified if their bid proposal was deemed irregular as specified in num and for what specific reasons .
the departments website will be updated showing the bid proposal being marked only as irregular .
the department will then review all proposals received on federalaid projects for dbe commitment compliance .
if a proposal fails to meet the dbe requirements the proposal will be deemed irregular .
the apparent low bidder will be notified if their proposal was deemed irregular as specified in num and for what specific reasons .
the departments website will be updated showing the proposal was deemed irregular .
once contracts have been distributed to the apparent low bidder with a letter of intent the department will post the bid abstracts i.e .
the dollar amount bid per bid item to the departments webpage .
for proposals with only one bidder the bid abstracts are not posted to the departments website .
the department may take the following actions if the department determines the action is in its best interest num .
award the contract .
num .
reject proposals .
num .
waive technicalities in proposals .
num .
advertise for new proposals .
num .
proceed to do the work by other means .
a .
release of bid abstracts .
the department will post bid comparison results i.e .
bid abstracts to the departments website for projects with more than one bidder after contracts have been distributed to the apparent low bidder for execution .
num award of contract .
the contract will be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder within num calendar days after the bid opening .
the department and the lowest responsible bidder may mutually agree in writing to defer the award beyond num calendar days .
a. federalaid contracts .
for contracts that include federalaid funding the numday period may be extended for a reasonable time for the lowest responsible bidder to secure a license provided license application is filed with the public works contractors license board within num business day following receipt of the notice of intent to award letter .
if either of the following conditions precludes award the department will release the lowest responsible bidders proposal guaranty num .
public works contractors license board denies the bidders application .
num .
the department determines it is not in the public interest to defer construction pending licensing .
if the lowest responsible bidder does not submit the license application on or before the first business day following receipt of the notice of intent to award letter or if the lowest responsible bidder withdraws the application the bidder forfeits the proposal guaranty the same as if the bidder does not execute a contract .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
release of engineers estimate .
the engineers will be released only upon contract execution and posted to the departments website .
num return of surety proposal bond .
after the department opens and compares the proposals the department will immediately return proposal guaranty received in the form of a certified or cashiers check to the bidders except for the num lowest responsible bidders .
the department will return the surety proposal bonds received in the form of a certified or cashiers check to the unsuccessful of the num lowest responsible bidders within num business days after the contract notice of intent has been sent .
the department will return the proposal guaranty received in the form of a certified or cashiers check of the successful bidder after the successful bidder submits the required contract bonds and signed contract .
num contract bonds .
as the lowest responsible bidder provide a performance bond and a payment bond each equal to the original contract amount as specified in num idaho code .
execute the contract bonds on the departmentprovided forms .
the department will release the performance bond within num calendar days after final contract acceptance .
the department will subtract monies owed as a result of this contract from the obligations .
for settlement of claims the department will hold obligations deposited as the payment bond for one year from the last day labor equipment or material was provided by the contractor or from the final payment date to the subcontractors in accordance with num num idaho code .
num execution and approval of contract .
sign and return the contract with the contract bonds within num calendar days after contract receipt .
if the department does not execute the contract within num calendar days after the departments receipt of the signed contract and bonds the bidder may withdraw the proposal without penalty .
the contract will not be effective until fully executed .
num failure to execute contract .
if the bidder does not perform the following within num calendar days after contract receipt the department may cancel the contract award and keep the proposal guaranty as liquidation of damage num .
execute the contract .
num .
file the contract bonds .
the department may choose to proceed award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder or advertise for new proposals .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num scope of work num intent of contract .
the contract intent is to define the scope of work and identify the rights and obligations of the department and the contractor for the construction execution and completion of the work .
perform the work as required by the contract .
num contract revisions .
a .
general .
the engineer and the contractor will provide the appropriate contract revision notices as specified in num .
on receiving the engineers written authorization or change order proceed immediately with the revised work .
the department and the contractor are responsible for mitigating contract revision cost and time impacts .
the engineer will calculate the contract revision time and cost impacts as specified in num and num respectively .
if the engineer issues a change order revising the contract return the change order signed or unsigned to the engineer within num business days after receipt .
if returning an unsigned change order to the engineer include a written explanation for not signing .
the department may withhold payment for the change order work until the contractor submits a signed change order or unsigned change order with a written explanation .
num .
engineer initiated .
the engineer may make changes in quantities and alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered without invalidating the contract or releasing the surety .
an alteration in the work includes extra work which is not otherwise required by the contract .
num .
contractor requested .
if the contractor requests a contract revision the contractor will notify the engineer using the departments request for change form .
provide a detailed description of the change the reason for the change the benefit to the department the benefit to the contractor and a detailed cost analysis .
the engineer will review the request and respond as follows a .
if the engineer approves the request the engineer will issue a change order revising the contract .
b .
if the engineer does not approve the request the engineer will provide a written response as specified in num .
b .
extra work .
when necessary or desirable to complete the contract the engineer may direct the contractor to perform extra work .
the department will pay for extra work as specified in num .
the engineer will determine time extensions if warranted as specified in num .
the engineer will provide direction to the contractor as specified in num .
c. differing site conditions .
during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the project site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the project site the party discovering such conditions will promptly notify the num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
on written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not a contract adjustment is warranted .
a contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will not be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
d. suspensions of work ordered by the engineer .
if the performance of work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time i.e .
not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes additional pay andor contract time are due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor will submit in writing a request for an adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request will set forth the reasons and support for the adjustment .
on receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost andor time are required for contract performance has increased as a result of the suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or its subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the engineers determination whether or not a contract adjustment is warranted .
a contract adjustment will not be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
a contract adjustment will not be allowed under this clause to the extent that work performance would have been suspended or delayed by other causes or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under other contract terms or conditions .
e. significant changes in the character of the work .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether the alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause the other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment will be agreed on before the work begins .
if a basis can not be agreed upon an adjustment will be made for or against the contractor in an amount the engineer determines to be fair .
if the alterations or quantity changes do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
if the engineer determines alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work the engineer will issue a change order revising the contract as specified in num.a .
if the engineer determines the alteration or change in quantity is not a significant change to the character of work and the contractor disagrees follow the notification procedures as specified in num .
if the alteration or change in quantity does not significantly change the character of the work the department will pay for the altered work at the contract unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction f. eliminated contract pay items .
the engineer may eliminate a contract pay item determined to be unnecessary to complete the work .
eliminating a contract pay item will not invalidate the contract .
the contractor when notified of the elimination will be reimbursed for the direct costs incurred before notification of elimination .
num notification of contract revision .
a .
general .
the stepbystep notification and documentation process to speed up the resolution of contract revisions is defined in num .
the responsibilities of the department and the contractor are outlined .
the contractors noncompliance with the notification requirements of this subsection may constitute a waiver of entitlement to a pay adjustment under num or a time extension under num .
entitlement is waived if the engineer is not afforded the opportunity by the contractor to examine the project or is not afforded the opportunity to review the contractors records .
num .
engineers notification .
a .
engineers notification and request for proposal .
the engineer will notify the contractor of a contract revision identify the scope of the revised work and request a detailed cost and time proposal for the revised work .
the request will specify a time requirement for the contractors response .
b .
contractors proposal .
provide the engineer with a complete and itemized proposal within the time specified in the request at no additional cost to the department and include the following information num the estimated increase or decrease in the contract amount .
num the estimated increase or decrease in the contract time .
num other perceived adjustments necessary to complete the work .
c. engineers direction .
the engineer may issue a change order to the contractor as specified in num.a .
if the contractor disagrees with the engineers decision the contractor may pursue a claim as specified in num. d. contractors initial written notification .
if required by num or num or if the contractor believes the departments action the departments inaction or some other situation has caused a contract revision the contractor must immediately provide initial written notification .
on notification the engineer will investigate the issue .
the contractor is encouraged to provide additional information requested as early as possible to help the engineer in the prompt resolution of the issue .
the engineer will not require in subsequent submissions duplication of information already provided .
e. engineers response to the contractors notification .
within num business days after receiving the contractors notification the engineer will provide a written response to the contractor with one or more of the following responses num if the engineer determines that a contract revision exists the engineer will issue a change order as specified in num.a .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num if the engineer determines that a contract revision does not exist the engineer will provide the contractor with a statement as to why the issue does not necessitate a contract revision .
num if the engineer needs more information to make a determination the engineer will request the information and specify a due date .
if the engineer does not provide a response or when the contractor believes the engineer has no further basis to request additional information as specified in num.a.num.a or disagrees with the engineers decision the contractor may pursue the claim as specified in num .
num value engineering change proposals vecp .
to reduce construction cost without impairing the project functions or characteristics the contractor may submit proposals to modify the plans specifications or contract .
the engineer will not consider a vecp that changes the following num .
basic design or components of elevated structures .
num .
type size elevation or structural requirements of foundations .
num .
the types thickness or joint designs of a concrete bituminous or stabilized surface or base course .
num .
environmental mitigation commitments .
the department and the contractor will equally share cost savings as a result of a departmentapproved vecp .
the department will pay for a vecp through the change order process as specified in num and the payment will be considered as full consideration for performance of the change order work .
do not base prices in a bid proposal on an anticipated vecp approval .
the engineer will determine the acceptability of a vecp and the estimated net savings in construction cost .
if the engineer believes the contract unit prices do not represent the work the engineer may use other calculated costs e.g .
fair market value for determining the estimated net savings .
the department will assume no liability in considering a vecp including delays and vecp refusals .
a. submittal and review of vecp concept or idea .
to illustrate the vecp submit the preliminary plans specifications and costs .
show whether sufficient time is available in the project schedule for a formal submittal and review before vecp implementation .
the savings generated by the vecp must be sufficient to warrant a vecp review and processing .
the engineer will review the vecp concept or idea and will reject or approve the vecp concept or idea within num calendar days of the initial submittal .
if the engineer approves the vecp concept or idea the engineer will provide the contractor with written authorization to submit a formal vecp .
the engineer may evaluate the need for a contract time extension based on the additional time needed for the engineers review and the expected impact on the contractors schedule .
b .
formal submittal of the vecp .
the engineer will only consider a formal vecp after approval of the initial submittal as specified in num.a .
submit a formal vecp within num calendar days after written authorization and include the following num .
a statement the final proposal is submitted as a vecp .
num .
a description of the difference between the existing contract and the proposed change .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
the advantages and disadvantages of each difference including effects on service life economy of operations ease of maintenance benefits to the traveling public desired appearance and safety .
num .
a complete set of plans and specifications that show the proposed revisions relative to the original contract features and requirements including design calculations supporting the revision .
num .
a complete cost analysis indicating the original estimated costs and quantities proposed to be replaced compared to the new costs and quantities in the vecp .
num .
a schedule or date for the engineer to issue a change order to maximize cost reduction during the remainder of the contract and the reason for this schedule .
num .
a statement detailing the impact of the vecp on final project completion .
num .
a revised cpm schedule showing changes to the construction schedule resulting from the vecp .
num .
a description of the conditions and results of previous use of the vecp .
num .
if the proposal was previously submitted provide the date itd contract number and the action taken by the department .
c. conditions .
a contractor submitted vecp only applies to the contract referenced .
when submitted the vecp will become the departments property .
the department may duplicate and disclose data unless the contractor specifically restricts the use of certain portions of the vecp .
this provision is intended to protect trade secrets bidding and pricing methods and rights provided by law with respect to patented designs materials or processes .
the department will not consider requests for additional costs or delays resulting from a vecp rejection .
the department will not consider a submittal as a vecp if savings are the sole result of the elimination or reduction of a single contract pay item .
the department will consider the vecp if savings result from the elimination or reduction in quantity of a contract pay item specified as part of a vecp .
if specified as individual contract pay items the department may consider contingency items when reduced as part of a vecp to change the scope method or procedure .
d. acceptance rejection and payment .
after the contractor formally submits the complete vecp the engineer will accept or reject the vecp within num calendar days .
the engineer will issue a change order that pays the contractor num percent of the net savings amount .
the engineer will calculate the net savings amount by using the difference between the cost of the proposed changes to the work and the cost of the work as required by the contract using contract unit prices or other calculated costs .
the department will not reimburse the contractor for the development design and implementation of the vecp .
the departments estimated cost to evaluate review and implement the vecp will not be included in the calculation of net savings .
the engineer will calculate the incentive payment using the following equation s abnum where s share in quantifiable cost savings from the vecp .
a cost of the work as required by the contract .
b cost of the work as revised by the vecp .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num control of work num authority of the engineer and suspension of work .
the engineer decides questions regarding the quantity quality acceptability of materials provided and work performed work progress contract interpretation and acceptable contract fulfillment .
the engineer may order the contractor in writing to suspend delay or interrupt the work for a condition or reason considered to be in the departments best interest .
the engineer may also suspend the work wholly or in part for the contractors failure to num .
correct conditions unsafe for project personnel or the public .
num .
complete contract provisions .
num .
comply with the engineers direction .
during periods of suspensions perform the following tasks num .
maintain traffic .
num .
prevent damage to the project .
num .
provide normal drainage .
num .
protect erodible surfaces using approved erosion and sediment control measures .
num .
prevent water pollution .
num .
prevent damage by sedimentary deposits .
num .
erect temporary facilities as directed .
num .
maintain and protect the condition of newly planted living material .
if a suspension increases the cost andor time required to perform the work the engineer will determine the responsibility for and impacts of the suspension as specified in num.d .
num plans and working drawings .
the engineer will provide the contractor with electronic plans and proposal sets .
the plans show structures detail and roadway lines grades and typical crosssections .
the plans also show structure design and location and a schedule of items .
supplement the plans with working drawings to adequately control the work .
working drawings include shop and erection drawings associated trade literature calculations schedules manuals and similar documents to detail required work .
keep num plan set including approved working drawings available at the project site .
submit working drawings including demolition plans in pdf format .
include on each drawing and calculation sheet the project name as shown on the plans district county route bridge drawing number contract number contract drawing number and key number .
obtain working drawing approval before starting work represented on the working drawings .
working drawing approval does not waive or relieve the contractors responsibility for working drawing accuracy including details and dimensions .
for structures submit working drawings in pdf format that include the following num .
stress sheets .
num .
shop drawings .
num .
erection plans .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
cofferdam plans .
num .
bending diagrams for reinforcing steel .
num .
demolition plans .
num .
other supplementary plans or similar data if required .
for structures the engineer will require up to num calendar days from each submittal or resubmittal receipt for review and response to the contractor .
for other submittals and resubmittals the engineer will require up to num business days .
working drawing costs are included in the contract unit prices of the contract pay items covering the work reflected in the working drawings .
before project completion submit record drawings in pdf format for any permanent part of the completed structure as specified in num .
num conformity with plans and specifications .
perform work and provide materials to meet the contract .
if the engineer determines the contractor did not perform the work or provide materials as specified the engineer will decide on the acceptability of the work .
if the engineer accepts the work the engineer will document the basis of acceptance and adjust the contract price accordingly .
the engineer will use the schedule of price adjustments in the departments laboratory operations manual for materials not meeting the specifications and when allowed to stay in place .
if the engineer does not accept the work the engineer will direct removal and replacement or repair of the work or materials as specified in num .
num coordination of contract documents .
the specifications plans special provisions and supplementary documents are all essential parts of the contract .
in case of discrepancy between contract documents num .
calculated dimensions govern over scaled dimensions .
num .
plan sheets govern over standard specifications and standard drawings .
num .
plan details govern over general notes .
num .
special provisions govern over standard specifications and plans .
num .
details on the bid schedule govern over other contract documents .
do not take advantage of errors or omissions in the contract documents .
immediately notify the engineer of an apparent error or omission encountered in the contract documents .
the engineer will determine if an error or omission exists interpret and correct the error or omission to fulfill the intent of the contract documents and determine if a contract revision is required as a result of the error or omission as specified in num .
num administrative cooperation .
give the attention necessary to promote work progress and cooperate with the department inspectors and other contractors .
provide a superintendent to serve as the contractors representative who is capable of reading and understanding the contract documents and have experience in the type of work being performed .
the superintendent will cooperate and communicate with and receive directions and instructions from the engineer .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num delegate authority to the superintendent to immediately execute the engineers directions and instructions and to supply materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
num cooperation between contractors .
other work may be ongoing on or near the work covered by the contract .
cooperate with other contractors that are working within or adjacent to the project site .
do not interfere with or hinder work being performed by other contractors .
perform the work and place materials to avoid interference with other contractors operations .
properly perform join and sequence the work with other contractors .
each contractor involved will assume liability in connection with their contract and will protect and save harmless the department from damages or claims that arise because of inconvenience delay or loss from the presence and operations of other contractors working within or adjacent to the project site .
num utility facilities .
the plans or special provisions will identify the location of known utility facilities requiring removal relocation or adjustment .
before beginning construction verify location of identified utilities at no additional cost to the department .
immediately notify the engineer on discovery of an unidentified utility facility that may require removal relocation or adjustment to continue the work .
the engineer will immediately notify the utility owner that an unidentified utility facility has been discovered .
coordinate the necessary utility facility removal relocation or adjustment with the utility owner .
if the engineer directs the contractor to remove relocate or adjust the utility facility the department will consider this as extra work as specified in num .
if performed by others the contractor will not be responsible for the cost of the removal relocation or adjustment of the utility facility .
for utility facilities identified in the contract perform the following num .
coordinate the work with utility owner operations and provide sufficient time in the project schedule for utility operations .
num .
provide sufficient prior notification to utility owners of when they need to schedule and perform their operations .
num .
provide required notification to utility owners in accordance with num idaho code .
do not interfere with or delay utility work being performed by utility owners or their authorized agents .
the contractor is liable to the utility owners for damage or service interference resulting from the contractors operations as specified in num .
the contractor is responsible for cost and time impacts caused by utility removals relocations or adjustments not required by the contract and made only for the contractors benefit or convenience .
if the contractor believes a utility owner caused a delay immediately notify the engineer in writing of the location and circumstances as specified in num .
if the engineer determines a utility owner delay occurred under the following conditions the engineer will issue a change order revising the contract as specified in num num .
the utility owner failed to remove relocate or adjust the facility within the time agreed to by the contractor and utility owner .
num .
the contractor attempted to minimize the delay impact .
num .
the contractor showed the utility owner delayed the work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the department will consider delays caused by the contractors failure to communicate coordinate and schedule with utility owners or railroads as nonexcusable delays as specified in num .
the contractor will request locations of buried utility facilities by contacting the appropriate locate entity .
num .
for all counties except kootenai bonner boundary shoshone and benewah contact dig line inc. phone num num or num diglinedigline.com or fax num .
num .
for kootenai bonner boundary shoshone and benewah contact pass word inc. for emergencies call num. a. kootenai county phone num b. bonner and boundary counties phone num c. shoshone and benewah counties phone num the contractor must notify the utility companies in the project site before digging .
buried utility facilities e.g .
traffic signals illumination traffic recording sites weather monitoring sites video detection systems electronic message signs owned by the state of idaho could be located within the project site and may or may not be shown on the plans .
for location requests contact the district traffic signal electrician .
contact the appropriate utility company and arrange the initial utility hook up when utility service e.g .
electrical phone water for highway components e.g .
luminaries signals its is required .
supply utility service in a timely manner to allow for testing of highway components .
pay any fees charged by the utility company and provide the engineer acceptable proof of payment for reimbursement .
num construction stakes lines and grades .
the department will provide initial surveying unless the contract requires the contractor to provide surveying services .
the engineer will set or provide the following num .
construction stakes to establish lines slopes and continuous grade for road work .
num .
roadway centerline and benchmarks for bridge work .
num .
structure centerline and benchmarks for culverts and other structures .
num .
additional information on lines slopes and grades to allow the contractor to establish other necessary controls required to perform the work .
the engineer will not provide additional stakes or marks .
the engineer may spot check the lines and elevations established by the contractor .
spot checks do not relieve the contractor of the following responsibilities num .
performing normal checking and testing as required by the contract .
num .
producing work that meets the contract requirements .
the contractor is responsible for correcting their surveying errors and work resulting from the error at no additional cost to the department .
preserve construction stakes and benchmarks and replace stakes or benchmarks destroyed or disturbed by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
the department will be responsible for the accuracy of survey work performed by the department and information provided by the engineer .
the contractor will be responsible for controls provided and work performed by the contractor .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department assumes no responsibility for staking delays unless the engineer is notified num calendar days before the contractor begins work on an item and num hours before if stakes are subsequently needed .
num authority of the engineer .
as the authorized representative of the engineer and under the direction of the district engineer the resident engineer has immediate charge of the engineering details of the work and has direct supervision of contract administration .
num duties of the inspector .
inspectors authorized by the department will inspect the contractors completed work and the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials .
inspectors will not alter or waive the contract requirements issue instructions contrary to the contract or direct the contractors work .
inspectors may reject work or material and will refer disputes to the engineer .
num inspection of work .
the engineer may inspect the contractors work and materials .
allow the engineer access to the work and provide information and cooperation for inspection .
the engineers inspections will not relieve the contractor from the responsibility for providing quality control to ensure the work meets the contract .
the engineer may reject defects when discovered .
the lack of discovery of a rejected defect before this decision will not prevent this decision nor obligate the department to accept .
the engineer may direct the contractor to remove work to access other portions of the work for inspection .
after inspection restore the removed work as specified .
if the engineer determines the inspected work is acceptable the department will pay for the restored work as extra work as specified in num .
if the engineer determines the inspected work is unacceptable proceed as specified in num and restore the removed work to the standard required by the contract at no additional cost to the department .
when a government agency utility or railroad company is to accept or pay a portion of the contract cost that organizations representatives may inspect the work .
inspections by organizations do not make them a party to the contract and do not interfere with the department or the contractors rights to the contract .
num unacceptable and unauthorized work .
except as otherwise specified in num the contractor is responsible for removing and replacing or repairing unacceptable work at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not pay for unauthorized work and the engineer may direct the contractor to remove and replace the unauthorized work at no additional cost to the department .
the department defines unauthorized work as any of the following num .
work performed contrary to the engineers instructions .
num .
work performed beyond the lines shown on the plans .
num .
extra work performed without the engineers authorization .
if the contractor does not comply with the engineers instructions the engineer may direct others to remove and replace or repair unacceptable or unauthorized work and deduct the cost of this work from monies due or become due to the contractor .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num load regulations .
observe legal load regulations if hauling materials on public roads .
the engineer will not allow the contractor to operate equipment that will damage structures roadway or completed work .
do not exceed legal load limits on structures subbase base and pavement unless otherwise approved in writing .
num maintenance during construction .
a .
general .
the department does not consider snow removal part of the maintenance work covered in this subsection and will provide snow removal for the traveled way .
provide a safe smooth surface usable by snow removal equipment .
do not interfere with snow removal operations .
b .
maintenance of work .
until the department accepts a portion of or all of the work as specified in num continuously maintain the work as specified in the contract .
maintain previously constructed work when the contract involves placing material on or the use of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure .
if the contractor does not correct unsatisfactory maintenance as directed the engineer may direct others to maintain the work and will deduct the cost of the maintenance work by others from monies due or become due to the contractor .
the cost of maintaining work in place is included in the contract unit price of the contract pay items covering the work being maintained .
c. maintenance of public haul roads .
the contractor is responsible for any damage to public highways and streets resulting from hauling on public haul roads at no additional cost to the department .
use water to abate accumulated dust on public highways and streets resulting from hauling as directed .
the department will measure and pay for dust abatement as specified in num and num respectively or if the contract does not specify a dust abatement contract pay item as extra work as specified in num .
the engineer will measure acceptable soft repair by contingency amount .
d. maintenance of traffic .
maintain the road for use by traffic and minimize traffic delays during roadway construction unless otherwise directed .
ensure individual traffic delays do not exceed num minutes and traffic delays do not exceed a total of num minutes through the length of the project site unless otherwise approved in writing .
implement remedial action to eliminate the excess traffic delays .
before starting the work submit a traffic control plan for approval including the following information num .
construction phasing .
num .
areas of work .
num .
proposed detours .
num .
traffic control devices .
num .
pavement markings .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num submit proposed measures to address traffic delays resulting from emergencies highway incidents emergency vehicles and scheduled school bus routes within the project site for approval .
notify the engineer at least num business days before making traffic control plan changes and submit the revised traffic control plan for approval .
provide a project traffic control supervisor certified by the american traffic safety services association or an approved equal to direct the required installation modification and maintenance of traffic control devices .
ensure vehicles used to perform traffic control activities e.g .
traffic control device installation removal maintenance or monitoring are equipped with a working highintensity rotating flashing oscillating or strobe light meeting the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd requirements .
perform the following functions at no additional cost to the department num .
maintain traffic so the roadway and structures are kept passable to traffic .
num .
provide and maintain temporary approaches crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms in a safe condition .
the cost of monitoring traffic control work during working hours is included in the contract unit prices for the respective traffic control devices .
monitor and maintain traffic control devices during nonworking hours and nonworking days .
during nonworking hours have an employee available to maintain traffic control devices .
during nonworking days perform required maintenance and review the traffic control at least once per day as approved .
provide a written statement describing the time and work performed during nonworking hours and nonworking days .
the department will pay for approved time and work performed during nonworking hours and nonworking days under the traffic control maintenance contract pay item as specified in num .
e. maintenance of temporary detours .
if approved in writing the contractor may reroute traffic over detours constructed and maintained at no additional cost to the department instead of maintaining traffic through the project site .
the department will not pay for quantities that exceed the estimated quantities provided by the department on the bid schedule for traffic control devices flagging and pilot cars used to maintain traffic on approved temporary detours .
use water to abate accumulated dust on public highways and streets resulting from hauling as directed .
the department will measure and pay for dust abatement as specified in num and num respectively or if the contract does not specify a dust abatement contract pay item as extra work as specified in num .
f. protection of existing utilities .
the contractor will comply with all applicable state laws regarding the protection of existing utilities and other underground structures unless otherwise specified .
damage to utilities will be repaired at no additional cost to the department .
g. postal delivery .
coordinate with property owners and ensure u.s. mail delivery to area residents remains in service during the work .
if necessary the contractor will provide temporary mailboxes until the permanent mailboxes are reset .
temporarily relocating mailboxes providing temporary mailboxes and coordinating u.s. mail delivery is incidental .
the contractor will be required to work with the local u.s. postmaster to determine their requirements .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction h. property owner coordination .
provide reasonable access to adjacent property owners throughout the duration of the work with only temporary closures during paving or earthwork directly in front of driveway entrances or when driveway improvements are under construction .
coordinate with property owners when construction of the roadway or driveway will impact their access .
num acceptance .
before the engineer declares all or a portion of the work complete clear the project areas and applicable authorized areas outside of the project site except established commercial sites of waste excess material temporary structures and equipment .
leave the work in an acceptable condition .
a .
partial acceptance .
after completing a portion of the work e.g .
a structure a section of road the contractor may submit a written request to the engineer for final inspection of that portion .
for a portion of the work to receive partial acceptance it must be able to be open to the traveling public with no restrictions .
after inspection if the engineer determines the contractor completed the portion of work as specified in the contract the engineer will consider this a final inspection for that portion .
the engineer will deem that portion of the work completed by written notification to the contractor and relieve the contractor of work responsibilities for that portion .
if the inspection discloses work not completed as specified in the contract the engineer will give written notice to the contractor of the noncompliant work found .
the resident engineer will not declare that portion complete until the contractor addresses the noncompliant work to the engineers satisfaction to obtain declaration of completion .
if after partial completion the contractor or its subcontractor damages the work the contractor will repair or replace the damaged work as specified in the contract to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
partial acceptance occurs after the contractor executes and submits all documents certificates and proofs of compliance for that portion .
when the contractor submits and the engineer accepts required documentation the engineer will make the partial acceptance for that portion and notify the contractor in writing .
a partial completion and acceptance decision does not void or alter the terms of the contract .
b .
final acceptance .
after completing the required work provide a written notice of completion to the engineer and the engineer will inspect the work .
if the engineer determines the contractor completed the work as specified in the contract the engineer will deem the contract complete by written notification to the contractor and relieve the contractor of all contract responsibilities .
if the inspection discloses work not completed as specified in the contract the engineer will give written notice to the contractor of the noncompliant work found in the inspection .
the engineer will not declare the contract complete until the contractor addresses the noncompliant work to the engineers satisfaction to obtain declaration of completion .
final acceptance occurs after the contractor executes and submits all documents certificates and proofs of compliance .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num administrative resolution process for claims .
the department and the contractor will seek to avoid or promptly resolve claims related to the contract or performance of the work .
the district engineer maintains authority for the contract per num all other notice and coordination of work obligations remain in effect .
the department and the contractor will follow the administrative resolution process defined in this subsection to resolve all claims that arise out of the contract or the performance of the work unless the contract specifically allows the use of an alternate resolution process in accordance with num to assist the administrative resolution process .
if the contractor fails to follow the claim procedures as specified in this subsection the contractor will waive its right to pursue the claim under the contract .
the contractor bears the burden of proving entitlement damages quantum and causation related to its claim .
the contractors burden includes providing all supporting documentation .
at the request of the department or if determined to be necessary by the contractor the contractor may supplement the information provided to the department at the district engineer level of review as specified in num.a .
in such event additional claim review time may be required for the district engineer level of review .
the contractor will continue to perform the work during review of its claims .
the department and the contractor may mutually agree to extend any time requirement related to the administrative resolution process .
at any time during the administrative resolution process the department and the contractor may mutually agree to obtain technical analysis support from a technical expert as specified in num .
the contractor must exhaust all steps in this administrative resolution process before commencing litigation as specified in num .
a .
district engineer level of review .
if a claim arises out of the contract or the performance of the work the contractor will immediately provide a signed written notice of intent to file a contract claim .
to preserve the right to pursue a claim in accordance with the contract the contractor will perform the following num .
provide timely notice of intent to file a claim to the district engineer .
num .
allow the department to examine the project site .
num .
provide the district engineer with daily records and other pertinent supporting documentation to demonstrate damages and actual costs incurred performing the disputed work .
num .
allow the department to review all of the contractors contract records relevant to the claim .
the contractor will submit unrelated claims separately .
the contractor will supplement the written notice of intent to claim within num calendar days with a written statement provided to the district engineer that contains the following num .
date of the dispute giving rise to the claim .
num .
nature and circumstances causing the claim .
num .
contract provisions that support the claim .
num .
estimated cost of the claim and supporting calculations .
num .
an analysis of the project schedule showing schedule changes disruptions and delays .
if the circumstances causing the claim continue provide the district engineer with timely updates that supplement the above information .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction submit to the district engineer full and final documentation to support the claim within num calendar days following the date the claim has fully matured .
a claim fully matures when all the direct damages i.e .
money andor time resulting from the dispute can be reasonably quantified .
impact damages may be submitted later as separate claims .
the possibility of impact damages will not delay the submittal of full and final documentation of claims with direct damages .
the contractor will include the following information in the full and final documentation to support the claim num .
a factual narration of events that detail the nature and circumstances causing the claim including dates locations and the items of work affected by the claim .
num .
specific provisions of the contract or laws supporting the claim and a statement explaining how these provisions support the claim .
num .
identification and copies of all documents and oral communication that support the claim .
num .
reference to standard industry manuals that pertain to the claim .
num .
any other known information arguments and data relevant to the claim .
for time extension requests the contractor will provide the following num .
specific days or events that justify the request .
num .
reasons supporting the request .
num .
contract provisions supporting the request .
num .
detailed analysis of the contractors project schedule supporting the request in accordance with num .
for additional compensation requests identify the amount and provide justification in the following categories num .
labor including a list of individuals classifications and hours worked .
num .
material including invoices and purchase orders .
num .
equipment including a detailed description and the hours and dates operated .
use equipment rates in accordance with num .
num .
field office overhead .
num .
home office overhead general and administrative if applicable .
num .
other categories as necessary or as requested by the department .
provide a signed and notarized statement that contains the following certification under penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned hereby certifies that the claim is made in good faith that the supporting data are accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief that the amount requested accurately reflects the contract adjustment for which the contractor believes the department is liable and that i am duly authorized to certify the claim on behalf of the contractor .
during performance of the disputed work the contractor will keep complete records of extra costs and time incurred .
provide copies of these records to the district engineer during performance of the disputed work daily if necessary so that they can be verified concurrently .
after the contractor provides a complete claim submittal the district engineer will review the claim submittal and issue a written letter of determination to the contractor within num .
sixty num calendar days from the date the district engineer receives the complete claim submittal if the claim amount is less than or equal to num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
ninety num calendar days from the date the district engineer receives the complete claim submittal if the claim amount is greater than num .
the district engineers time to issue a written letter of determination may be extended if the district engineer and the contractor mutually agree that additional time is necessary to obtain full documentation and information from the contractor andor to further review the claim .
in the event additional documentation is needed the district engineer and the contractor acknowledge that failure to extend the time may lead to a claim denial based on insufficient documentation .
at the district engineers discretion or upon timely request by the contractor the district engineer and the contractor will meet to discuss the claim ask and respond to questions and suggest possible resolutions .
if the district engineer does not provide a written decision within the specified time the contractor will consider no response as a claim denial decision .
if the district engineer decides a contract revision is justified a change order will be issued in as specified in num .
if the contractor disagrees with the decision the contractor may appeal the claim as specified in num.b .
the district engineers decision will be final unless the contractor submits a written appeal and a copy of the complete claim submittal to the chief engineer within num calendar days of the district engineers decision .
the district engineer will compile and keep an administrative record of the claim review during the district engineer level of review .
b .
chief engineer level of review .
the chief engineer will provide written acknowledgment of the contractors appeal .
the chief engineer will review the claim submittal and schedule a chief engineer claim review meeting within num calendar days after the date the chief engineer receives the appeal and complete claim submittal .
the chief engineer and the contractor may agree to extend any deadlines related to the chief engineers claim review .
the chief engineer and the contractor acknowledge that failure to extend the time may lead to claim denial based on incomplete claim information .
additional information can not be submitted to the chief engineer unless the chief engineer makes an affirmative determination that the department or the contractor have shown good cause as to why such information was not previously submitted to the district engineer .
if the chief engineer finds good cause and allows the receipt of new information from the contractor num. the matter will be remanded for further review at the district engineer level with revised deadlines as specified by the chief engineer num. any subsequent appeal to the chief engineer will reset the chief engineers claim review deadlines and num. any interest claimed to be accruing on the claim will be suspended during the remand period .
the chief engineers claim review meeting will proceed as follows num. the contractor may present its claim num. the department may provide claim analysis num. the contractor may provide rebuttal in support of its claim num. the department may provide rebuttalclosing argument in support of the claim analysis and num. the contractor may provide a closing argument .
the district engineer will attend the chief engineers claim review meeting .
at any point during the claim review meeting the chief engineer may ask questions or make suggestions as to resolution .
within num calendar days of num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the claim review meeting the chief engineer will issue a written decision to address the claim .
the chief engineer will compile and keep an administrative record of the claim review .
if the contractor accepts the chief engineers decision the department will as needed issue a change order as specified in num .
if the contractor disagrees with the chief engineers decision the contractor may bring a lawsuit in idaho state court as specified in num .
the chief engineers decision will be final and conclusive unless subsequently changed by a court of competent jurisdiction .
c. audits .
department auditors or independent auditors under contract with the department may perform inspections and audits .
the contractor and its subcontractors will allow authorized auditors to perform an audit andor inspection on wage payroll materials and equipment costs and cpm schedules related to the claim .
the contractor and its subcontractors will retain these records at the respective company offices .
during normal business hours the contractor and its subcontractors will provide facilities acceptable to the authorized auditors for the inspection andor audit .
the contractor and its subcontractors will cooperate with the authorized auditors .
the department will notify the contractor before the first scheduled day of the audit .
the contractor will retain cost records supporting the claim value until the claim is resolved .
the department will maintain information obtained in an audit as confidential to the extent provided by law .
the contractor and its subcontractors will perform the following for all parts of a claim or waive the right to that claim part num .
maintain and retain sufficient records .
num .
allow authorized auditors to verify the claim .
num .
allow authorized auditors to access the records of the contractor or its subcontractors .
the contractors and its subcontractors will allow the authorized auditors to access the following documents relating to the claim num .
daily time sheets and supervisors daily reports .
num .
union agreements .
num .
insurance welfare and benefits records .
num .
payroll registers .
num .
earnings statements and records .
num .
payroll tax statements and records .
num .
material records invoices and requisitions .
num .
material cost distribution sheets .
num .
equipment records .
num .
vendors rental agencies its subcontractors and lowertier subcontractors invoices .
num .
subcontractors and lowertier subcontractors payment certificates .
num .
proof of payment for payroll and vendors .
num .
job cost reports .
num .
job payroll ledgers .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
general ledgers .
num .
cash disbursement journals .
num .
financial statements for all years reflecting operations on the contract .
the department may require additional financial statements for num years before the work began and for num years after final acceptance of the contract .
num .
documents that relate to each claim for this contract including documents that support the claim amount .
num .
documents used to prepare the elements of the contract claim including labor benefits and insurance material equipment subcontractors time periods individuals involved and the hours and rates for the individuals .
num .
documents and computation sheets used during the course of bidding to the extent the claim is based upon the original bid proposal .
num .
cpm scheduling documentation .
num technical analysis support tas .
if the department and the contractor agree to use tas in the administrative resolution process as specified in num the department and the contractor will interview potential technical experts tes jointly .
the selected te will be a neutral impartial and objective te on the claim or dispute issues and represent the interests of the contract .
the department and the contractor will sign a written agreement of the following num .
scope of the te services .
num .
budget for the scope of te services .
num .
to not retain the services of the te or to allow the te to represent either party in subsequent steps in the administrative resolution process and if necessary any alternate resolution process related to this contract .
the department the contractor and the te will sign a written agreement of the following num .
notice to proceed with the analysis of the claim issues .
num .
deadline for the te to report the findings and recommendations .
the te will provide their findings and recommendations to the department and the contractor jointly .
if requested by the department or the contractor the te will discuss clarifications of their findings and recommendations with both parties present .
the department and the contractor will separately accept or reject the tes findings and recommendations and will notify the other party in writing of their decision within num calendar days of receipt .
if the department and the contractor agree with the tes findings and recommendations the resident engineer will issue a change order as specified in num .
the tes findings and recommendations are nonbinding on the department and the contractor .
however the following information may be admissible as evidence in any subsequent claim resolution proceeding or forum to the extent permitted by law num .
qualifications of the te .
num .
the fact that an independent te considered the claim .
num .
tes findings and recommendations .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the department and the contractor will equally share the cost and expenses of the tas .
the te will invoice the contractor .
after the department and the contractor each approve the invoice the contractor will pay the te invoice .
the contractor will submit to the department an invoice for num percent of the total te invoice .
the department will reimburse the contractor for the invoiced amount representing num percent of the total te invoice .
num claim resolution .
a .
mediation .
notwithstanding the formal claims procedure specified in num the parties may enter into mediation by mutual agreement at any time in which case the claim review time requirements in num will be suspended pending the outcome of the mediation process .
the rules time and place for mediation as well as the selection of the mediator will be established by mutual agreement .
the mediators costs will be divided equally between the department and the contractor .
either party may terminate mediation at any time upon notice to the other party .
the suspension of the claims review time requirements in num will automatically end if either party terminates the mediation .
b .
district court .
claims unresolved by the procedures specified in num will be brought in idaho state court .
unless affirmatively agreed to otherwise the department and the contractor agree the jurisdiction and exclusive venue will be in idahos fourth judicial district ada county .
the district court will review the administrative record compiled by the chief engineer .
if the district court remands the matter to the departmentchief engineer for lack of jurisdiction or any other reason num. the chief engineer will designate any additional review procedure num. the chief engineer will reset appropriate deadlines and num. any interest claimed to be accruing on the claim will be suspended from the date of the chief engineers decision and throughout the remand period .
nothing in the contract is intended to nor will be deemed in any manner to waive modify or limit the departments administrative authority as granted by the idaho legislature .
the contractor will include num and num in subcontracts and contracts with suppliers .
the contractor will manage its subcontractor and supplier disputes .
num contract specific alternate claim resolution process dispute review board .
the contract may specifically allow the following alternate resolution process to assist in the administrative resolution process specified in num .
the drb review may not be used as a substitute for the departments and the contractors responsibilities to make a goodfaith effort to resolve the dispute using the administrative resolution process .
this subsection describes the purpose procedures function and features of the drb process .
if a drb is used the department the contractor and the drb members must sign a threeparty agreement to num .
formalize the creation of the drb .
num .
establish the scope of services for the drb .
num .
establish the rights and responsibilities of the department and the contractor .
in the event of a conflict between this subsection and the threeparty agreement the latter will govern .
use of an alternate resolution process i.e .
drb does not relieve the department or the contractor from complying with the contract and with the requirements specified in num .
in general the drb will operate as specified in num however it is desirable to allow flexibility in the drb process in order to adapt to changing situations and num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num facilitate resolution of a dispute .
the department and the contractor may mutually agree in writing on new procedures or modifications to the existing procedures for a specific dispute .
the drb may also establish new or modified procedures with the mutual written agreement of the department and the contractor .
if the department and the contractor can not agree the department will determine the new or modified procedures .
the purpose of a drb is to address and seek to resolve issues that may arise during the work .
the contractor agrees that the drb process will either be used before submission of a claim or will stay the claim process including the district engineer review time until the drb process is concluded or until the department after consultation with the contractor affirms in writing that the drb process should be withdrawn or abandoned .
the drb will consist of num members selected jointly by the department and the contractor in accordance with num .
num .
member criteria and selection .
a .
experience qualifications and annual recertification .
prospective drb members should have experience with the construction process including design construction contract administration contract law industry practices and resolution of disputes .
typical drb members are retired or semiretired engineers contractors claim consultants or construction attorneys .
it is not necessary that prospective drb members be intimately familiar with the specific type of construction involved in the dispute .
if necessary the drb may consult technical and legal experts as specified in num.g .
prospective drb members must have attended the dispute review board advanced update workshop offered by the dispute resolution board foundation or its substantial equivalent in other training or will be a prequalified drb member in another state that has training as a prerequisite to qualification for services on a drb .
b. drb prequalification roster .
the department after consultation with representatives of the idaho associated general contractors agc will establish and maintain a drb prequalification roster of at least num qualified individuals available to serve on drbs .
the department with input from the idaho agc will select members to the drb prequalification roster from the prospective members as specified in num.a .
each january the department will contact each drb member listed on the prequalification roster to have them recommit to serving as a drb member .
the department will attempt to contact the drb member at least twice using two different methods e.g .
phone call and email within a num day period .
drb members who do not recommit or who the department is unable to reach will be removed from the prequalification roster .
the agc will be notified and provided with reasoning e.g .
member is no long interested for each roster removal .
c. neutrality .
drb members must be neutral act impartially and in the best interest of the contract and be free of any conflict of interest .
for the purpose of this subsection the term member also includes the members current primary or fulltime employer and involved means having a contractual relationship with the department the contractor or any entity involved in the dispute e.g .
subcontractors suppliers architects engineers construction managers consultants .
prohibitions or disqualifying relationships for prospective members include any of the following num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num an ownership interest in any entity involved in the contract or a financial interest in the contract except for payment for services on this drb .
num previous employment by or financial ties to any party involved in the contract within a period of num year before award of the contract except for feebased consulting services on unrelated contracts .
num a close professional or personal relationship with any key member of any entity involved in the contract that in the judgment of the department or the contractor could suggest partiality .
num previous involvement in the contract of a nature that could compromise the members ability to participate impartially in the drbs activities .
prohibitions or disqualifying relationships for members include any of the following num current employment including feebased consulting services by any entity involved in the contract .
num discussion concerning or the making of an agreement with any entity involved in the contract regarding employment after the contract is complete .
d. disclosure statement .
all prospective members for a drb will submit complete disclosure statements to the department .
each statement will include the following num resume of experience .
num declaration that describes all past present and anticipated or planned future relationships including indirect relationships through the members primary or fulltime employer to the department the contractor or any entity involved in the contract e.g .
subcontractors suppliers architects engineers construction managers consultants .
num disclosure of any close professional or personal relationships with key members of the department the contractor or other entity involved in the contract .
e. selection process .
to form a drb the department will provide the contractor with access to all members on the current drb prequalification roster .
within num calendar days after contract award the department and the contractor will each nominate num individuals from the roster and notify the other party of their nominees .
the department and the contractor will each confirm the availability and neutrality of their nominees .
within num calendar days after contract award the department and the contractor will jointly select the drb using the following procedure num combine all nominees into num list .
num flip a coin to see which party goes first .
num take turns striking names off the list until there are only num names left .
num the num remaining nominees will constitute the nummember drb .
the department will notify all members of their selection to the drb .
the members of the num member drb will choose one member to act as chairperson .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num if necessary the department and the contractor will use the same selection process for selecting replacement members .
f. threeparty agreement .
within num calendar days of the department notifying the members of their selection to the drb the drb members the departments authorized representatives and the contractor will execute a drb threeparty agreement .
g. tenure of the drb .
the drb becomes effective upon execution of the drb threeparty agreement and dissolves when the department and the contractor mutually agree to dissolve the drb .
num .
ongoing contract involvement .
a .
contract documents reports and information .
the department will provide each drb member with the contract a set of the plans and the specifications .
to keep the drb members informed of work activity and other developments the department and the contractor will provide in a timely manner relevant information and documentation requested by the drb .
the drb may request information and the work documentation that the department and the contractor produce in the normal course of construction including but not limited to periodic reports and minutes of progress meetings .
the drb may not request information or documentation that the department or the contractor would not have normally produced .
b .
periodic meetings and site visits .
the drb members may visit the project site and meet with representatives of the department and the contractor at regular intervals and during significant construction events as agreed to by the department and the contractor .
to minimize the time and expense of meetings the department and the contractor may decide to use conference calls videoconferences or any other means .
each meeting will consist of an informal roundtable discussion followed by a field observation of the work .
representatives from the department and the contractor will attend the roundtable discussion .
the meeting agenda will generally include the following num meeting convened by the drb chairperson .
num contractor discussion topics such as the following a work performed since the last meeting .
b status of the work schedule and schedule for future work .
c anticipated or potential problems and proposed solutions .
d status of past current and potential issues disputes and other controversies .
num department discussion topics such as the following a the schedule and schedule updates .
b perspective on potential issues disputes and other controversies .
c status of past current and potential issues disputes and other controversies .
num any other topics the department or the contractor wants to discuss with the drb .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num setting a tentative date for next meeting .
the department the contractor and the drb members will agree on the frequency and scheduling of visits depending on the progress of the work .
observations by the drb members during project site visits will cover all active segments of the work .
a representative from the department and the contractor will accompany the drb members on project visits .
num .
informal review process .
the department and the contractor may involve the drb in the review of an emerging dispute .
use of an informal review by the drb does not relieve the department or the contractor from complying with all contract requirements .
however if informal review by the drb is used the dispute submittal time frames and review time frames of num may be revised by mutual written agreement of the department and the contractor or if they are unable to agree will be established by the department .
at the request of the department or the contractor the drb is available to provide informal nonbinding preliminary review regarding an emerging dispute .
after a dispute is initially brought before the drb for informal review the department and the contractor will have sufficient notice and time to prepare for informal review by the drb .
upon the request of the department or the contractor to the drb chairperson for an informal drb review the chairperson will contact the other drb members to make necessary arrangements for the review .
informal review meetings will consist of informal oral discussions with input and comments encouraged from the department and the contractor .
after private deliberation the drb will provide initial impressions and oral guidance which will be limited to the dispute only and will not offer any opinion as to legal questions .
minority guidance should it exist will also be offered .
the drb will not make written findings and recommendations or any record of the informal review .
the drb is not bound by its oral recommendations to the department and the contractor in the event that a dispute that was considered in informal review by the drb is later submitted to the drb for formal review .
it is the intent of the department and the contractor to establish informal review by the drb as a method of dispute mitigation .
to the extent permitted by law the department and the contractor agree that all written or oral communications and documentation submitted andor discussed during informal review by the drb will be privileged and confidential pursuant to idaho rules of evidence num and num .
rule of evidence num will also apply to all written or oral communications prepared for or exchanged during the informal review process .
num .
formal review process .
a .
general .
the department and the contractor will cooperate to ensure that the drb considers disputes promptly by taking into account the specific circumstances of the dispute and the time required to prepare documentation .
b. prerequisites to request for review .
the department or the contractor may request a review once negotiations will be or have become unsuccessful .
c. requesting review .
the requesting party will prepare and submit a written request for review to the drb chairperson and the other party .
the request for review will state clearly and in full detail the specific issues of the dispute to be considered by the drb .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the drb chairperson will confer with the department and the contractor to establish a submittal schedule to allow adequate time before presentations for both parties to review the requesting partys request for review and for both parties to prepare and submit position statements as specified in num.e .
the contractor will provide each drb member with a complete copy of the dispute submittal at least num calendar days before the hearing if available at the time of the request for drb .
d. scheduling the hearing .
after receiving a request for review the drb chairperson will schedule a hearing date .
e. prehearing requirements .
the department and the contractor will prepare and submit concise written position statements with page number references to any supporting documentation .
first the contractor will submit its position statement to the drb and the department then the department will submit its position statement to the drb and the contractor .
f. hearing .
unless otherwise agreed by the department the contractor and the drb members the hearing will occur at the nearest department district office .
the num parties may agree to any another location that would be more convenient and still provide the required facilities and access to necessary documentation .
the department and the contractor will each have representatives in attendance at all hearings .
the contractor will make its presentation first .
the department and the contractor will take successive turns for rebuttals until all aspects of the dispute are fully covered .
the drb members the department and the contractor representatives may ask questions request clarification or ask for additional data during the presentations .
for difficult or complex disputes the drb may schedule additional hearings to facilitate full consideration and understanding of the information presented by the department and the contractor .
the drb will allow the department and the contractor adequate opportunity to present evidence documentation and testimony supporting their position regarding all issues of the dispute .
the department and the contractor can not present and the drb can not consider in its review any documents reports analysis or other information unless the same was previously provided to the other party as supporting documentation for the position statement .
unless otherwise agreed to by the department and the contractor the drb will limit the position statements presentations and reviews to issues of entitlement only .
if the department and the contractor agree to the drb reviewing or giving guidance on issues of entitlement and quantum the department and the contractor will complete their presentations on entitlement before presenting issues of quantum .
a formal transcript of the hearing is usually unnecessary .
the department or the contractor may request that the drb allow recordation and transcription by a court reporter .
the department and the contractor will agree on the allocation of the associated cost .
this transcription if prepared will not constitute the official record of the drb review .
the drbprepared record will be the official record of the drb review .
the drb may provide for audio or video recordings of the hearing for drb use only .
unless affirmatively agreed to by the department and the contractor no attorney for either entity will appear at or participate in the drb proceeding .
the department and the contractor may num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction mutually agree to allow the attorneys to attend and minimally advise or to play a more involved role in the hearing e.g .
making brief opening and closing remarks to the drb .
if the department or the contractor representatives fail to appear before the drb on the date scheduled for the hearing without justifiable cause the party that is in attendance will prevail in their position on the dispute .
g. deliberations .
after the conclusion of the hearing the drb members will hold private deliberations to prepare the drbs findings and recommendations .
the drb may hold its private deliberations at any location .
the individual views of the drb members will be kept strictly confidential from disclosure to anyone other than the drb members .
if necessary the drb may submit a written request to the department and the contractor that briefly describes the scope and budget for special services e.g .
legal technical accounting data research or other expert assistance consultation testimony .
if the department and the contractor agree to the request both parties will execute a written agreement with a provider of the necessary special services chosen by mutual agreement .
the drbs findings and recommendations will not be bound by any information provided by a special service provider .
the department and the contractor will share and pay for the cost of the service provider as specified in num .
typically the special service provider will respond to the drbs questions in private consultation and the department and the contractor may not request a permanent record of the questions or responses .
h. findings and recommendations .
the drbs findings and recommendations concerning any dispute are nonbinding and inadmissible in any subsequent proceeding pursuant to rule num of the idaho rules of evidence .
the drb is not responsible for resolving disputes that responsibility remains with the department and the contractor .
the drb will base its findings and recommendations on the contract applicable contract law industry practices and the facts of the dispute .
the drb must also evaluate whether the burden of proof has been met .
within num calendar days from completion of the hearing the drb will provide the department and the contractor with a written copy of its findings and recommendations by certified mail return receipt requested .
for difficult or complex disputes and in consideration of the drbs availability the department the contractor and the drb may mutually agree to revise the time requirement .
the drb will set forth as clearly as possible the logic and reasoning behind its findings and recommendations .
the findings and recommendations will address entitlement only unless the department and the contractor mutually request the drb review entitlement and quantum as specified in num.f .
if the drb can not expeditiously determine the exact value of the quantum the drb may address quantum in its findings and recommendations by providing guidelines for determining the quantum .
the department and the contractor will then make the final determination of quantum .
if the department and the contractor continue to disagree on the determination of quantum the department and the contractor may submit the disagreement back to the drb for further review and amended findings and recommendations .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num if the drb is unable to reach unanimity in its deliberations the drb will advise the department and the contractor of that fact in their findings and recommendations .
a dissenting drb member may prepare a minority report to be included in the drb findings and recommendations .
i .
acceptance or rejection .
within num calendar days of receipt of the drbs findings and recommendations the department and the contractor will provide a written notice of acceptance or rejection of the drb findings and recommendations to the drb and each other .
if with the aid of the drbs findings and recommendations the department and the contractor are able to resolve the dispute the department will promptly process any necessary contract revisions as specified in num .
if the department or the contractor rejects the drbs findings and recommendations the dispute will continue under the administrative resolution process as specified in num. j. clarification and reconsideration .
if the dispute remains unresolved because the department or the contractor has a bona fide lack of understanding of the drbs findings and recommendations either party may request the drb clarify specific parts of their findings and recommendations .
the department or the contractor will provide a written request to the drb and the other party within num calendar days of receipt of the drbs findings and recommendations .
if evidence becomes available that was not available at the time of presentations the department or the contractor may request that the drb reconsider its findings and recommendations with the new evidence .
the drb will decide if reconsideration is necessary .
k. admissibility .
any drb findings or recommendations will be deemed within the purview of rule num of the idaho rules of evidence or comparable provision in any other forum and hence precluded from admissibility in any subsequent proceeding .
l. legal relations .
each drb member in the performance of his or her duties on the drb is acting as an independent agent and not as an employee of the department or the contractor .
each drb member is acting in a capacity intended to facilitate resolution of the dispute .
accordingly the department and the contractor agree to the fullest extent permitted by law that each drb member will be accorded quasijudicial immunity for any actions or decisions associated with its review findings and recommendations .
the department and the contractor may not call any drb member as a witness in subsequent proceedings on a dispute .
other than the drbs findings and recommendations all records proceedings and deliberations of the drb are to be kept confidential to the fullest extent permitted by law .
the drb will upon completion of the contract turn all records of the drb over to the department for storage and preservation .
each drb member will by agreement be held harmless for any personal or professional liability arising from or related to drb activities .
to the fullest extent permitted by law the department and the contractor will indemnify all drb members for disputes losses demands and damages including reasonable attorney fees for bodily injury property damage or economic loss arising out of or related to the drb members carrying out drb functions .
this indemnity is a joint and several obligation of the department and the contractor .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
payment .
the department and the contractor will equally bear the following costs and expenses related to the drb work activities preauthorized by the department and the contractor including the following a .
time spent on the project site at hearings at meetings or reviewing the dispute away from the project site .
b .
travel time to and from the location of the drb activities listed in num.a .
c. travel expenses .
d. approved special service providers .
the department and the contractor will pay each drb member for actual time spent at the rate of num per hour with a maximum of num per day .
this rate includes all normal incidental expenses e.g .
telephone fax postage courier printing computer services .
the department and the contractor will compensate each drb member at the same daily and hourly rate .
the department and the contractor will pay each drb member for actual travel time to and from drb meetings at the rate of num per hour with a maximum of num each way .
the department and the contractor will reimburse drb members at the state of idahos standard rates for transportation lodging and meals for each day or portion thereof for drb member travel to or from or attending a drb activity .
the department will not pay for markups applied to the cost and expenses of the drb by the contractor or the drb members .
the department will provide administrative services e.g .
conference facilities secretarial services for the drb at no cost to the contractor .
each drb member may submit invoices for payment for drb activities completed and qualified expenses no more often than once per month during the progress of their drb activities .
the invoices will be in a format approved by the department and accompanied by a general description of drb activities performed during that period .
the value of drb activities accomplished for payment will be established from the billing rate and hours expended by the drb member together with qualified expenses incurred .
the contractor will pay the invoices of all drb members within num calendar days after approval by the department and the contractor .
the contractor will then invoice the department for num percent of the approved drb invoices .
the cost records and accounts related to drb activities will be kept available for inspection by representatives of the department and the contractor for num years after final payment to the drb members .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements .
provide materials meeting the contract and produced using acceptable quality control practices .
the contractor is responsible for quality control .
the quality control process cost is included in the contract unit prices for the respective contract pay items .
use new materials unless otherwise specified .
notify the engineer of proposed material sources to allow for inspection before manufacture fabrication and material delivery .
the engineer may inspect and approve material at the source before delivery .
if the engineer determines the source no longer produces material meeting the contract use another source to provide material that meets the contract .
use material from the qualified products list qpl as specified in the contract and in num .
install or apply material in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
if a conflict exists between the contract and the manufacturers written instructions immediately notify the engineer in writing .
a .
buy america .
for contracts that involve federalaid funding ensure steel or iron materials permanently incorporated into the work are products of the united states .
all manufacturing processes for these materials including the application of coatings for such materials must occur in the united states .
coating includes all processes which protect or enhance the value of the material to which the coating is applied .
buy america requirements apply to any steel or iron components of a manufactured product regardless of the overall composition of the manufactured product and to miscellaneous steel or iron components and hardware e.g .
cabinets covers shelves clamps fittings sleeves washers bolts nuts screws tie wire spacers chairs lifting hooks faucets or door hinges .
the fhwa clarification of manufactured products under buy america dated december num num which established the num percent threshold and the miscellaneous products exception is no longer valid .
obtain certifications from the manufacturer which document that steel and iron have been manufactured and that coatings for steel or iron have been applied in the united states .
submit the required certifications before incorporating these materials into the work .
the department will also require certifications for manufactured and fabricated products purchased by the contractor .
provide certifications conforming to num .
the engineer will permit small quantities of foreign manufactured steel iron or applied coatings for steel or iron so long as their total cost does not exceed num percent of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
if foreign steel iron or applied coatings for steel or iron in excess of the quantities allowed become incorporated into the work remove such materials in excess of the allowable maximum and replace them with materials complying with these specifications at no additional cost to the department .
b .
use tax .
the exercise of control over stateowned material by a contractor who is improving real property e.g .
roadways will incur the imposition of a use tax by the state .
contact the idaho state tax commission telephone no .
num concerning num idaho code and idapa num and num .
for aggregates the amount of the use tax will differ depending on whether the material is obtained from a state owned material source or whether it is obtained from a stateowned stockpile .
use tax is due on the fair market value of the material and the crushed value processed material is higher than for unprocessed material .
the use tax will also differ depending on whether a contractor crushed the material and placed it on the roadway or if the contractor only performed one of these operations and hired a subcontractor to perform the other .
if the contractor hires a subcontractor to crush the material he must pay a sales tax to the crusher for this fabrication num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction labor .
if the contractor crushed and applies the material or gives material he crushed to a subcontractor for application the contractor owes use tax on the royalty value .
num ordering producing and delivering materials .
quantity estimates are only approximate .
do not place orders for or produce full quantities of materials required to complete the work until the work has advanced to a stage that allows the quantities to be determined with reasonable accuracy .
the department is not responsible for num .
materials the contractor may order produce or deliver in excess of requirements except as specified in num .
num .
extra expense the contractor may incur because materials were not ordered produced or delivered earlier .
num .
the contractors expenses related to materials ordered produced or delivered by the contractor that are not approved for use .
before ordering pipe pipe culvert guardrail pipe siphon or sign posts obtain approval of the quantities .
num samples tests and cited specifications .
refer to the quality assurance special provisions qasp for information on samples tests and cited specifications .
num certification of materials .
the engineer may base the acceptance of specified material on certifications provided by the manufacturer .
standard forms as specified in the qa manual must be completed in their entirety and be signed by the manufacturers representative who has quality control responsibility for the material manufacture or fabrication .
the manufacturers certification will not prevent the engineer from sampling and testing the material and considering acceptance or rejection on the basis of the test results .
ensure the manufacturers certificate references the project identifiers e.g .
name number contract pay items and numbers .
for the engineer to accept material based on manufacturer certification provide the certificate and backup documents e.g .
mill reports with each shipment and identify the certified material type and quantity in the shipment .
num plant inspection .
the engineer may inspect materials at the source .
the engineer may inspect manufacturing plants periodically for compliance with contractrequired manufacturing methods .
the engineer will obtain material samples for testing to verify the material meets contract quality requirements .
the engineer may approve material by manufactured lot based on these test results .
the engineer will inspect plants under the following conditions num .
the contractor and the material manufacturer will cooperate with and help the engineer .
num .
the contractor and the material manufacturer will allow the engineer entry during normal business hours to the plant location that produces the material .
num .
the contractor and the material manufacturer will provide adequate safety measures and maintain the safety of the plant .
after delivery to the project site the engineer may inspect or retest materials the engineer has already inspected tested and approved at the source .
the engineer will reject inspected or retested material that does not meet requirements .
the engineer will base final material acceptance on the materials inplace condition .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num storage and handling of material .
provide material storage to maintain its quality .
the engineer may reinspect stored material before use .
provide the engineer with access to stored material for inspection .
store material at least num feet off the traveled way .
if the posted speed limit for the traveled way is num mph or less the engineer may approve storage of material at least num feet off the traveled way .
if the contract allows or the engineer approves the contractor may use specified portions of the right of way or other approved locations for material storage and for plant and temporary facility placement .
the contractor may use private property for material storage if the property owner or lessee provides written permission .
the contractor must submit a copy of the written permission .
before storing material at storage locations obtain clearances for the locations as specified in num .
prevent separate stockpiled material from mixing .
num test result dispute resolution .
refer to the quality assurance special provisions qasp for information on the test dispute resolution process .
num test facilities .
provide necessary test facilities and equipment including field laboratory trailers for quality control and acceptance testing required by the contract to be performed by the contractor .
provide field laboratories with standard equipment and supplies necessary to perform the required tests .
provide field laboratories that are qualified through the departments laboratory qualification program .
if the department requires a field laboratory the contractor will provide the features and services specified in num needed to place and operate the departments lab e.g .
allweather parking area minimum electrical service trash containers water portable toilet .
if the contract specifies the contractor is responsible for testing the contractor will provide the field laboratory .
num material sources .
the department divides material sources into num groups designated sources and contractorprovided sources .
construct and maintain haul roads including dust abatement from material sources to the project site or to the nearest public road .
do not discharge turbid water into streams or other bodies of water that does not comply with the contract .
a .
designated sources .
the department may acquire and make available to the contractor material sources specified on the plans and in the special provisions .
the contract lists the designated sources by number and location .
variations in the limit location quality and volume of material meeting requirements may occur .
the engineer may direct the contractor to extract material meeting requirements from locations within a designated source but will not require removal of material from below water .
determine the amount of equipment and work necessary to produce material that meets the requirements .
the department may acquire and make available to the contractor the right to take materials from a designated source and the right to use the designated source property for plant sites stockpiles and hauling roads .
the department will deduct royalty payments from partial payments and will pay the designated source property owner for material removed by the contractor .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction if the state of idaho or federal government does not own or control the designated source provide the engineer with num copies of a letter of release from the designated source owner .
the release will verify the following num .
the contractor left the designated source in a presentable condition with the debris resulting from the contractors operations removed and disposed of .
num .
the contractor met the approved reclamation plan requirements .
the department will not require a letter of release from commercial sources .
b. contractorprovided sources .
the contractorprovided sources are sources not specified by the contract as designated sources .
the engineer will provide the contractor with a list of departmentcontrolled sources on request .
if approved the contractor may use departmentcontrolled sources as contractorprovided sources .
if approved the engineer will include requirements specifying the final condition and appearance of a departmentcontrolled source .
determine if material from a departmentcontrolled source meets the requirements .
for departmentcontrolled sources if the engineer approves the contractors written request for use the engineer will establish the terms and conditions and prepare an agreement for the contractors signature within num calendar days .
the department will not allow access to departmentcontrolled sources until the contractor returns a signed agreement .
for contractorprovided sources that are not departmentcontrolled the department will require the contractor to obtain written approval from the source owner before using material .
submit a written request for using a contractorprovided source and allow the department num calendar days for review .
before beginning work at a contractorprovided source comply with the requirements of num .
obtain the rights including access and conditional use permits for exploring developing and testing a contractor provided source for approval and use at no additional cost to the department .
do not use material from a contractorprovided source until sampling and testing results show the material meets the contract requirements .
sample from areas within the contractorprovided source where material will be extracted .
use a qualified independent laboratory to perform the sampling and testing .
ensure the independent laboratory provides test report copies for approval .
maintain and verify material quality during the work .
ensure the material meets the contract requirements .
the contractor may use contractorprovided sources instead of designated sources at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor will be responsible for providing the material quantity necessary to complete the work .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
the contractor with approval may use stone gravel sand or other material found on the project site .
the department will pay the contractor for these materials as follows num .
at the corresponding contract unit price for excavating these materials .
num .
at the contract unit price for which the excavated material is used .
the contractor will replace the excavated material used at the contractors discretion with material meeting requirements at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not charge the contractor for the value of the material found on the project site .
do not excavate or remove material that is not within the grading limits unless approved in writing by the engineer .
num production of material in departmentcontrolled sources .
reject material that contains an excessive amount of sand or unacceptable material before starting secondary crushing .
use acceptable materials regardless of size for aggregate production .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num produce material as specified .
do not remove intermediate size aggregate for other contract pay items unless the procedure produces material that meets the specified requirements and is approved .
create material stockpiles in neat shapes using minimal surface area .
clear and grub the stockpile foundation and place a base of material to protect the stockpile from contamination .
build the stockpile in successive layers less than num feet thick .
do not enddump or conveyorstack material over the sides of a stockpile .
do not stack conveyor placed stockpiles over num feet deep before leveling to minimize coarse and fine aggregate segregation .
material produced but not used in the work will remain the departments property .
stockpile rejected materials at departmentcontrolled sources as directed within the source .
if the engineer directs the contractor to load and haul rejected material to a stockpile site outside the source no greater than num mile beyond the source boundaries the department will pay the contractor for loading hauling and stockpiling as specified in num.c.num .
if the engineer directs the contractor to haul material to stockpile sites over num mile beyond the source boundary the department will pay for hauling in excess of the num mile distance as extra work as specified in num.b .
if the bid schedule includes a contract pay item for providing sanding material in stockpile the pay provisions for reject material will apply after the contractor reaches the sanding material plan quantity .
the department will pay royalties to the source owner for material the contractor removes from the material source including reject material .
num depletion of designated sources .
if the contractor depletes designated sources the department will designate a new material source .
the department will pay the contractor as specified in num for the additional cost of developing and reclaiming a new material source including the cost of moving production plants .
the department will not allow a time extension for moving a plant between designated sources unless the contractor depletes the designated sources or the source is otherwise found to be unsatisfactory .
num departmentprovided material .
provide material required to complete the work .
the department will make the departmentprovided material available to the contractor at locations specified in the special provisions .
include the cost of handling and placing the departmentprovided material in the contract unit price for the contract pay item incorporating the material including source recover fees royalties and use tax .
the contractor is responsible for protecting the departmentprovided material after its delivery .
the department will deduct the cost of replacing material from shortages deficiencies and damage and the cost of demurrage charges from contractor payments .
num trade names and alternatives .
the contract may require certain materials under a trade name or manufacturer and catalog information .
the department will allow the contractor to use alternative materials of equal quality and specified characteristics .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num qpl and nonqpl products .
the department will classify products as qualified product list qpl products or nonqpl products .
qualified products are manufactured products available and classified under at least num category included in the qpl .
the department website lists categories of products covered by the qpl .
the department considers nonqpl products as manufactured products available on the market and not classified under a category covered in the qpl .
if testing required by the contract to determine product acceptability will take longer than num calendar days the engineer will notify the contractor of the additional time necessary to make a decision .
a. qpl products .
the contractor may use approved products on the qpl within the specified conditions .
the department also lists for information only products under review that have yet to be approved .
use of material from the qpl does not relieve the contractor of its responsibility to incorporate the material into the work as required by the contract .
if materials from the qpl do not meet the requirements the engineer will reject the material .
replace material rejected by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor may use products covered by but not listed in the qpl as follows num .
submit a written request to substitute an alternate product for a product in the qpl .
num .
submit a qpl application form that includes data showing the proposed product is equal or better than the qpl product .
num .
the engineer will review and respond to the request within num calendar days after the request receipt .
num .
the contractor must receive written approval before using an alternative product .
if requesting the use of an alternative product consider the following num .
intended purpose .
num .
compatibility with environmental conditions .
num .
aesthetics .
b. nonqpl products .
the contractor may use products in categories not covered in the qpl as specified in the contract .
the engineer will review the contractors written request to use a nonqpl product and respond within num calendar days or as otherwise specified .
the contractor must receive written approval before using a proposed product .
num disposal of materials .
disposal material will become the contractors property .
remove these materials from the project site or dispose of them as specified or approved .
submit to the engineer in writing the final hazardous materials disposal .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed .
comply with all applicable local state and federal laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees .
protect and indemnify the department its agents officials employees and the public owner known as local public agency and local sponsor against claims or liability that arise from or are based on the violation of laws ordinances regulations orders or decrees by the contractor the contractors employees or subcontractors .
a. federalaid contracts .
on federalaid contracts each contractor andor subcontractor will submit a certified copy of each weekly payroll .
include a statement verifying fringe benefits payment to the employee or to an authorized agent .
b. nonfederalaid contracts .
nonfederalaid contracts must adhere to num through num idaho code .
num permits and licenses .
the contractor is responsible for the following that are necessary to perform the work num .
obtaining and complying with permits and licenses .
num .
paying charges fees and taxes .
num .
providing the necessary notices .
the department will not issue contract time extensions for delays resulting from the contractors failure to obtain permits in a prompt manner .
the contractor agrees to the following num .
promptly pay taxes except on real property excises and license fees due to the state of idaho its subdivisions and municipal and quasimunicipal corporations accrued during the contract even if they are payable at the end of the contract term .
num .
secure to the engineers satisfaction the taxes excises and license fees with officers of the taxing unit if they accrue and create a liability constituting a lien on the contractors property during the contract term but are not payable at the end of the contract term .
num .
allow the department officer board or taxing unit to withhold from contract payments due the estimated amounts of accrued taxes excises and license fees if the contractor defaults on the payment or security of taxes excises and license fees .
num licensing of contractors .
the contractor and its subcontractors must possess the appropriate public works contractor license in accordance with num idaho code as amended .
the contractor and its subcontractors required to be listed in the bid proposal must possess the license as specified as follows num .
for contracts involving federalaid funding at the time the department executes the contract .
num .
for contracts without federalaid funding by the bid opening date and time .
public works contractor licensing does not apply to professional service providers .
the department requires professional service providers to have appropriate professional licenses or certifications in the state for the work performed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num patented devices materials and processes .
if the contractor uses a design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the contractor will submit proof of the legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety will protect and indemnify the department its agents officials employees and the public owner from the following num .
infringement claims for the contractors use of a patented design device material process trademark or copyright .
num .
costs expenses and damages resulting from infringement claims during or after work completion .
num restoring surfaces opened by permit .
allow individuals firms or corporations with authorized permits by the department to enter the project site and perform the permitted work .
if directed in writing repair the work damaged by the permit holders actions to the original standard .
the department will pay for the repair work as specified in num .
num traffic control devices .
establish traffic control devices in accordance with the mutcd adopted by the board .
obtain the engineers approval before placing or removing traffic control devices .
num use of explosives .
if the use of explosives is necessary for work performance exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property .
do not use explosives in departmentcontrolled sources without prior written approval .
transport use and store explosives in compliance with applicable federal state and local laws regulations and ordinances .
notify each public utility company having structures in proximity to the project site .
provide notice sufficiently in advance to enable the public utility companies to protect their property from damage .
submit blasting plan submittals as specified in num .
perform blasting operations as specified in num and in a safe and professional manner .
num preservation protection and restoration of property and landscape .
preserve and protect public and private property .
the contractor is responsible for damage or injury to property due to acts omissions neglect or misconduct during work performance or due to defective work or materials .
the department will release the contractor from this continuing responsibility for damage or injury to property when the work is deemed completed as specified in num .
if the contractor damages public or private property due to acts omissions or neglect in performing the work the contractor will restore the property to its original condition by repairing rebuilding or restoring as directed at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor will repair rebuild or restore damaged property in a manner to minimize loss and inconvenience to the property owner .
protect and indemnify the department its agents officials employees and the public owner from claims from property owners for property damage or injury caused by the contractors operations .
num forest protection .
if performing work within or adjacent to state or national forests comply with the regulations of the authority governing the protection and performance of work within forests .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num prevent and suppress forest wildfires and help forest officials in preventing and suppressing forest wildfires .
immediately notify forest officials of the location and extent of a wildfire .
comply with directives from forest officials or the engineer in forest wildfire prevention or suppression .
num responsibility for injury damage .
protect and indemnify the department its agents officials employees and the public owner from the expenses of claims by third parties for money damages including costs and attorney fees caused in whole or part by the following num .
operations of the contractor or its subcontractors .
num .
neglect in safeguarding the work .
num .
use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work .
num .
acts omissions or neglect by the contractor or its subcontractors .
num .
infringements of patent trademark or copyright .
num .
violations of the workers compensation act or other law ordinance order or decree .
the contractors duty includes claims caused in whole or part by the contractor its subcontractors anyone directly or indirectly employed by the contractor or its subcontractors or an entity or person whose actions the contractor or its subcontractors may be liable for regardless of whether the claim is caused in part by a party indemnified as specified in this subsection .
the contractor will carry public liability and property damage insurance that will protect the contractor the department its agents officials employees and the public owner from claims for bodily injury including accidental death and claims for property damages from operations under the contract whether by the contractor its subcontractors anyone directly or indirectly employed by the contractor or its subcontractors or an entity or person whose actions the contractor or its subcontractors may be liable .
submit a certificate or other proof of the insurance and do not start work before obtaining approval of the insurance coverage .
maintain the required insurance coverage until the engineer deems the work completed as specified in num .
the contractor will be responsible for third party injury or damage until the engineer deems the work completed as specified in num .
submit damage claims to the contractors insurer and if requested by the engineer submit proof of damage claim submissions within num calendar days .
ensure the certificates state that cancellations or changes of the required policies and coverage are not effective without num calendar days prior written notice to the department and affected railroads if any .
a .
comprehensive or commercial general liability insurance .
for comprehensive or commercial general liability insurance provide at least a combined single limit of num for each occurrence .
ensure the policy includes coverage for the following num .
bodily injury .
num .
broad form property damage including completed operations .
num .
personal injury including employee acts .
num .
blanket contractual .
num .
contractors protective .
num .
products .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
completed operations .
ensure the policy also includes coverage for the hazards commonly referred to as xcu explosion collapse and underground .
if a subcontractor is performing xcu operations the subcontractor may provide this protection naming the department and the contractor as additional insureds .
for comprehensive or commercial general liability insurance policy containing an aggregate limit ensure a limit of at least num .
the above limits may be met by policies having limits such as num per occurrence num aggregate plus an umbrella policy of num .
ensure the comprehensive or commercial general liability insurance is endorsed to include the department its agents officials employees and the public owner as additional insureds .
ensure the general liability insurance also stipulates the contractors insurance coverage is primary insurance and insurance carried by the department or public owner will not be applicable to a claim and will not be contributory insurance to that purchased by the contractor for the benefit of the named insureds .
the insurance will provide coverage for the named insureds for the contractors defense and indemnification duties under num .
ensure the insurance contains a separation of insureds provision .
the insurance provided will be first dollar coverage to the named insureds regardless of previous occurrence or aggregate deductible under the policy .
b .
comprehensive automobile liability insurance .
for comprehensive automobile liability insurance covering the owned hired or other vehicles used in the performance of the work provide a combined single limit policy for bodily injury and property damage of at least num each occurrence .
c. workers compensation insurance .
carry a minimum of num in workers compensation insurance and comply with title num idaho code to cover the contractors and its subcontractors workforce .
num contractors responsibility for work .
a .
general .
provide and be responsible for the work and material including change order work until the engineer deems the work completed as specified in num .
rebuild repair and restore damage to permanent or temporary work occurring before the engineer deems the work completed as specified in num at no additional cost to the department except for damages due to the following causes num .
acts of god a cataclysmic natural phenomenon e.g .
tornadoes earthquakes floods and officially declared natural disasters .
num .
acts of the public enemy or governmental authority .
these exceptions do not apply to damages resulting from the contractors failure to take reasonable precautions or to exercise sound engineering and construction practices in performing the work .
if damage by others delays the work the engineer will evaluate a contract time extension as specified in num .
b .
relief of responsibility for completed work .
the department may relieve the contractor of the duty of maintaining and protecting portions of the work the engineer has deemed completed as specified in num .
this relief applies to damages caused by public traffic the elements or other causes but not from damage caused by the contractors operations or negligence .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. relief of responsibility for damage by public traffic .
when it is necessary for public traffic to use a highway facility during construction the department will relieve the contractor of its responsibility for damages to the permanent work caused by public traffic under the following conditions num .
the work is as specified in the plans or approved construction plan stage or phase .
num .
the contract requires the contractor to open the roadway section to the traveling public .
num .
the contractor implements traffic controls in accordance with the approved traffic control plans .
num .
the contractor submits a written request for the work that is complete to a point where the engineer can grant relief as specified in num.b .
the contractor will resume responsibility for the work when public traffic is relocated to another roadway section .
d. repair of damage .
immediately repair damage to temporary or permanent work as directed .
for damage to permanent work qualifying for relief under this subsection the department may direct the contractor to perform the repair work as specified in num or direct others including the departments workforce to perform the repair work .
the department will pay the contractor for repair of damaged permanent work only .
the department will not pay for delay or disruption caused by damage to or repairs of the temporary or permanent work including extended home office overhead idle equipment or inefficiency .
num contractors responsibility for utility facilities and property .
prevent damage to utility facilities and property supporting utility facilities .
do not begin work adjacent to utility facilities if damage loss or inconvenience may result to the utility facility until arrangements necessary for damage prevention have been made .
contact a representative from each utility company with facilities on the project site to locate underground facilities the work may affect .
allow and accommodate utility companies and their representatives to enter the project site to make emergency connections or repairs to utility facilities .
promptly notify the utility company representatives of service interruptions resulting from the contractors operations that cause the following num .
accidental breakage .
num .
facility exposure .
num .
unsupported facilities .
num .
other damages or disruption .
cooperate with the utility company to restore interrupted utility service .
if construction operations interrupt utility service the contractor and the utility company will perform continuous repair work to restore the utility service .
do not perform work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority approves of temporary means to maintain continued service .
if constructing or reconstructing structures during the irrigation season provide temporary ditches siphons or other structures for conveying water without waste loss or delay .
temporary water conveyance costs are included in the contract unit prices for the respective contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num personal liability of public officials .
the board members administrator and authorized department representatives or public owner personally or in their official capacity will have no personal liability in executing the provisions of this contract or exercising the power or authority granted them .
the board members administrator and authorized department representatives or public owner act solely as agents and representatives of the state of idaho or public owner .
num no waiver of legal rights .
the department is not precluded or estopped by measurements estimates final pay quantities or certificates made before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment from establishing the following num .
the true amount and character of work performed and materials provided by the contractor .
num .
the measurements estimates final pay quantities or certificates are untrue or incorrect .
num .
the work or materials do not conform to the contract .
the department is not precluded or estopped despite measurements estimates final pay quantities or certificates and payments from recovering from the contractor and its surety damages the department may sustain due to the contractors failure to comply with the terms of the contract or an incorrect measurement of a contract pay item .
damages will include overpayment the department made due to an incorrect contract pay item measurement or calculation .
the department does not waive its rights under this subsection if there is num .
acceptance by the department .
num .
payment for or acceptance of the whole or part of the work .
num .
time extensions .
num .
possession taken by the department .
a breach of contract waiver will not occur .
num access to records .
the contractor and its subcontractors will keep the necessary books documents papers accounting records and other evidence pertaining to incurred costs .
the contractor and its subcontractors will make these records available to authorized agents of the state of idaho or federal government for inspection and copying at the contractors or its subcontractors offices during normal business hours for the following time periods num .
the contract time .
num .
five num years after the date on which the department makes final payment to the contractor .
failure of the contractor or its subcontractors to maintain the required records and provide access to these records may result in a waiver of a claim the contractor may have for additional pay or for breach of contract by the department .
num sanitary health and safety provisions .
federal state and local laws rules and regulations related to construction safety and health standards are essential terms of the contract .
the contractor will conduct its work in a safe and prudent manner at all times .
the department prohibits the contractor from allowing or requiring workers to work in conditions that are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to their health or safety .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide reasonable restroom facilities for personnel and adequate work time to use those facilities including provision of portable facilities for moving operations .
num environmental and cultural resource protection .
a. noncompliance .
comply with all federal state and local environmental and cultural resource laws regulations and ordinances .
comply with the project permits .
notify the engineer immediately of num .
work that is out of compliance with regulations or permits .
immediately cease noncompliant activities and take corrective action to bring the work into compliance .
num .
discharges of pollutants discharges exceeding water quality standards discharges which may endanger health or the environment or an upset exceptional incident because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee as defined in num cfr num .
perform actions to correct the discharge as soon as possible .
num .
a notice of inspection or noncompliance or from a state or federal resource agency .
cooperate with inspectors .
if a regulatory agency identifies a failure to comply with the permits and modifications thereto or other federal state or local requirements the contractor is responsible for num .
penalties including monetary fines and damages proposed or assessed to the department for the contractors failure to comply with environmental regulations or permits num .
costs to mitigate or remediate violations or environmental damage or for the department to resolve enforcement actions including payments made or costs incurred in settlement for alleged violations of applicable laws regulations or requirements .
the department may withhold money due to the contractor subject to the following the department will withhold money due to the contractor in an amount estimated by the department to include the full amount of penalties and mitigation costs proposed assessed or levied as a result of the contractors violation of the permits or federal or state law regulations or requirements .
funds will be withheld by the department until final disposition of these costs has been made .
the contractor will remain liable for the full amount until the potential liability is finally resolved with the entity seeking the penalties .
instead of the withhold the contractor may provide a suitable bond in favor of the department to cover the highest estimated liability for any disputed penalties proposed as a result of the contractors violation of the permits law regulations or requirements .
the department will give the contractor num calendar days notice of the departments intention to withhold funds from payments which may become due to the contractor before acceptance of the contract .
funds withheld after acceptance of the contract will be made without prior notice to the contractor .
no withholds of additional amounts out of payments will be made if the amount to be withheld does not exceed the amount being withheld from partial payments as specified in these standard specifications .
if the department has withheld funds and it is subsequently determined that it is not subject to the entire amount of the costs and liabilities assessed or proposed in connection with the matter for which the withhold was made the department will return the excess amount withheld to the contractor in the progress payment following the determination .
if the matter is resolved for less than the amount withheld the department will pay interest at a rate of num percent per year on the excess withhold .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction if the work results in noncompliance of a permit or regulatory requirement the work may be suspended and the permitting agency notified if required .
violation of a permit condition or provision may be a breach of contract as specified in num .
the contractor will not receive additional compensation or time extensions for any disruption of work or loss of time caused by any actions brought against the contractor for failure to comply with good engineering hydrologic and pollution control practices .
b .
contract revisions contractor requested .
the contractor requests to add delete or modify work activities work areas methods sequencing or work windows may require a new or modified permit or approval e.g .
section num clean water act endangered species act national historic preservation act section num nepa .
exception a project without federal funds a federal permit or federal approval does not require approval under national historic preservation act section num .
projects on federal lands require coordination with the appropriate federal lands management agency e.g .
blm forest service .
num .
submit a detailed description of new or modified work and the required environmental documentation prepared by a qualified professional .
num .
the department will transmit documents to the approving jurisdictions .
num .
cost and contract time delays are the contractors responsibility .
num .
obtain the engineers written approval before beginning any work not included in the original contract .
c. contractor support areas .
contractor support activities e.g .
material sources waste stockpile or staging areas access or haul roads will not num .
encroach on regulated wetlands as defined by the u.s. army corps of engineers .
num .
affect listed threatened or endangered species or critical habitat .
num .
adversely affect historic properties as specified in num .
materials sources active and open to the public before the projects bid advertisement are not considered a project related action and do not require department environmental approvals .
d. permits .
work affecting wetlands or waterbodies requires a permits issued by one or more of the following agencies num .
u.s. army corps of engineers clean water act section num .
num .
idaho department of water resources idapa num .
num .
idaho department of environmental quality water quality certification .
if a permits has been obtained by the department the permit and the permit application is attached to the contract bid package .
perform work in conformance with the description of work work area methods sequencing work windows conditions and mitigations .
e. endangered species act esa .
if the work affects listed species or designated critical habitat under the endangered species act a biological assessment ba is attached to the contract bid package .
projects with an adverse effect will also include a biological opinion bo prepared by the usfws or usnmfs .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num perform work in conformance with the description of work work area methods sequencing work windows conditions and mitigations .
notify the department of any issues identified as specified in num .
refer conflict or ambiguity with the contract documents to the engineer .
f. migratory bird treaty act and bats .
the migratory bird treaty act protects migratory and nongame birds their occupied nests and their eggs .
bats are a protected nongame species in idaho idapa num .
work that may impact migratory birds or bats includes removal of vegetation or bridge structures and rock cliff excavation or blasting .
see the contractors note for the approximate nesting and breeding window for species that may be anticipated .
during the nesting season monitor vegetation or structures for nesting birds or bats .
preemptive measures to avoid migratory bird species and bats include clearing outside the nesting season regular monitoring of bird or bat activity removal and disposal of unoccupied nests to prevent occupation and exclusion devices e.g .
bird repellant spray netting that does not result in death or injury to adult birds .
notify the engineer of a discovery of nesting birds or bats .
an active nest is defined as one with eggs or a bird living in it .
if active migratory bird nests are discovered on a project site immediately stop work within num feet of the nests or birds and notify the engineer .
if a nest has been abandoned or there are no eggs present it can be removed and destroyed as needed .
an active nest must be protected from harm .
if an active nest becomes established i.e .
there are eggs or young in the nest cease any work with potential to disturb the nesting bird until the young have fledged and the nest is unoccupied .
work with the engineer as needed to develop a plan to avoid impacts to birds nestlings or eggs .
when directed use exclusion devices nesting prevention measures or remove and dispose of partially constructed and unoccupied nests of migratory or nongame birds on a regular basis to prevent their occupation .
nest removal activities must not result in depositing into or allowing materials to enter waters of idaho .
unless otherwise provided directed work will be paid as extra work as specified in num .
adjustments may be made for delays the engineer determines are not due to the contractors failure to perform the provision of the contract .
g. hazardous material .
conditions e.g .
the presence of barrels buried or above ground storage tanks contamination indications odors excessively hot earth stained and discolored soils smoke unidentifiable powders sludges pellets debris can be possible hazardous material indicators .
if an abnormal condition is encountered or exposed that indicates the presence of a hazardous material immediately suspend work in the area treat the conditions with extreme caution and notify the engineer .
do not attempt to excavate open or remove without approval .
notify the engineer immediately after the discovery of either num .
a petroleumbased spill that meets the reportable release definition as defined in idapa num .
this includes spills greater than num gallons or any spill that results in a sheen on a waterbody surface .
num .
a hazardous waste spill that meets the disclosure definition as defined in idapa num and num .
notify statecomm at num .
in the event of a petroleum or hazardous waste spill implement measures if safe to do so to minimize contaminant spread using spill kits or other appropriate methods .
capture and dispose of the spilled materials under the engineers direction in accordance with deq and epa requirements .
document the spill and response action and submit a copy to the engineer .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction work related to the encounter of unidentified hazardous materials will be considered differing site conditions or extra work and managed as specified in num .
h. inadvertent discovery of cultural resources including human remains .
if cultural resources are discovered cease all work within num feet in all directions .
if human remains are discovered cease all work within num feet in all directions .
in both cases clear the area of all unnecessary personnel secure the area and immediately notify the engineer .
if human remains are discovered also notify the local police .
one or more individuals must stay with the human remains until law enforcement officials are on the project site .
num .
call the local police and provide all known information related to the discovery .
follow their instructions .
inform the engineer after the local authorities have been notified .
num .
photography of human remains is not allowed .
num .
if allowed by the police cover the human remains completely with a tarp or plain piece of cloth e.g .
rug towel blanket .
num .
do not disturb any additional ground .
num .
do not touch move or in any way cause the human remains to change position from the original position noted upon discovery .
num .
keep all information related to the discovery in the strictest confidence .
num .
follow all associated laws and policies .
the engineer will communicate the status of any restrictions implemented as a result of the inadvertent discovery num .
time necessary for the department to manage the inadvertent discovery process .
num .
project areas where the contractor may work during the inadvertent discovery process .
num .
written confirmation when the inadvertent discovery process is complete .
payment and contract time extension due to the inadvertent discovery and required cultural resource clearance not previously identified in the contract is specified in num and num .
i. stormwater pollution prevention .
all projects require one of the following num .
a stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp as required by a construction general permit cgp .
a swppp is required when ground disturbance equals or exceeds one or more acres and discharges to waters of the u.s.a. num .
pollution prevention plan ppp required by the department .
both plans are documents that address best management practices bmps e.g .
erosion and sediment control good housekeeping practices inspection procedures spill prevention response cleanup .
meet applicable requirements of num .
the plan sheets project clearance summary identifies if a ppp or a cgp is anticipated based on estimates of ground disturbance .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num ppp cgp swppp if the addition of construction support activities causes the project ground disturbance area to meet the requirements for a cgp follow cgp requirements .
prepare the entire ppp using the itdnum form as a template provided by the engineer .
revise the draft swppp developed by the department consisting of plans sheets and a template narrative using the itdnum form included with the bid package .
conduct inspections by a person who is knowledgeable in erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention practices .
this includes professional accreditation e.g .
the departments water pollution control manager wpcm training certified professional in erosion control cpesc certified erosion sediment and stormwater inspector cesswi or other applicable site management or project management experience which can be documented and provided to the engineer .
conduct inspections by a certified wpcm .
training requirements are posted on the departments website .
document the inspections using the itdnum form available online .
document the inspections using the itd num form available online .
submit the plan and plan revisions for approval before the preconstruction conference .
the engineer may also require submittal of an electronic editable version of the plan .
allow num calendar days for review unless otherwise specified .
revise to address comments and resubmit .
adjustments in cost or time are not allowed for swppp approval .
once approved all operators will sign the plan .
the plan must be approved before staging .
construction activities construction support activities or pollutantgenerating activities are not allowed beyond the project limits .
j. cgp requirements .
for projects that require coverage under the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes general permit for discharges from construction activities cgp comply with the permit and the following department requirements num .
designate a qualified wpcm to manage project site pollution prevention and cgp requirements .
ensure the wpcm meets the training qualification requirements posted on the departments website .
submit the wpcms contact information and training qualifications before the preconstruction meeting .
once approved insert the qualification information into the swppp .
num .
revise the draft swppp template provided by the department to include contractor designated construction support activities work areas work methods and phasing .
submit the revised swppp for review and approval before the preconstruction meeting .
num .
coordinate electronic noi filing with the engineer .
verify swppp certification requirements are met .
num .
do not begin construction activities until the epa has acknowledged receipt of required nois on the epas website and the num calendar day waiting period is over .
num .
post the npdes id permit tracking number associated with the project noi in addition to the other requirements of the cgp .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
inspect the project site and associated support areas per the cgp requirements .
use the current version of the itdnum form .
sign the inspection report and insert it into the swppp within num hours of completion of any inspection .
submit a copy to the engineer upon request .
joint inspections with the departments inspector may be allowed at the discretion of the engineer .
num .
field controls .
ensure installation operation and maintenance of effective erosion and sediment control measures and pollution prevention measures per the cgp requirements .
ensure completion and documentation of corrective actions .
num .
recordkeeping .
in accordance with the cgp amend the swppp to conform to the contractors current sequencing and operation throughout the work .
submit proposed modifications for approval .
obtain necessary signatures and certifications from operators for required swppp modifications and corrective actions .
maintain all swppp records .
retain completed copies of required documentation and recordkeeping in the swppp and at the project site or at an engineerapproved offsite location .
k. notice of termination not .
when conditions for terminating the cgp coverage have been met request written approval from the engineer to file an not using the itdnum form .
do not submit an not without the engineers written approval .
provide the most current version of the swppp at the time of work completion to the engineer .
l. turbidity monitoring if plume is visible .
num .
turbidity monitoring .
turbidity monitoring is required for projects with cgp coverage that directly discharge pollutants from an unstabilized portion of the project site causing a visible plume into the waters of the united states .
a .
if a visible plume is observed collect and record turbidity readings from within the plume and compare the results to background measurements upstream of plume num ntu over background unless otherwise directed in project specific requirements .
b .
if turbidity is less than num ntu instantaneously over the background turbidity continue monitoring as long as the plume is visible .
if over num ntu then immediately cease all earthdisturbing work .
c. take immediate action to address the cause of the exceedance per the cgp .
d. increase actions to address the cause of the exceedance and monitor frequency until state water standards are met .
e. work may continue once turbidity readings return to within num ntus instantaneously of background levels and num ntu for more than num consecutive days over the background turbidity .
f. provide a verbal report to the engineer within num hours of any exceedance of the idaho state water quality standards followed by a written report within num days using the itdnum form .
num .
turbidity logbook and diary .
a .
maintain a legible organized logbook and construction diary at the project site and make it available for inspection with the swppp .
b .
all logbook entries must include the following information .
num date .
num time .
num sample location .
num turbidity result ntus .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num cloud cover i.e .
cloudy partly cloudy or clear wind direction and speed precipitation inches in last num hours and ambient air temperature f at the time of sample collection .
num visual observations of any discharge per the cgp .
num if applicable corrective actions taken and their observed effectiveness .
num printed name and signature of the sample collector .
c. include photographic documentation of any visible variation in water quality .
d. include a map or sketch including gps coordinates of each sample location .
e. submit routine monitoring data to the engineer or to regulatory agencies upon request .
f. include documentation in the swppp that any personnel collecting samples and testing water quality are qualified to perform this task .
m. basis of payment .
ppp or swppp development revisions modifications inspections and costs associated with the permitting and compliance is incidental and included in the contract pay items unless otherwise specified .
num fencing .
if the contract requires fence removal replace the fence to the original or better condition .
ensure livestock confinement during the work .
if a temporary fencing pay item is not included temporary fencing will be paid by force account as specified in num.c.num .
submit advance written notice to adjacent landowners before removing fence .
contact and coordinate with adjacent landowners num hours before removing the fence and submit written evidence of coordination with adjacent landowners to the engineer before removing the fence .
num survey monument preservation .
retain an idaho licensed professional land surveyor pls to num .
locate verify and tie the position of the known survey monuments documented on the plans if any for each assigned project .
num .
perform historical research and field search for other survey monuments within the project site that are not documented on the plans .
for any additional monuments found locate tie reference and report them to the engineer and the contractor .
num .
provide written confirmation to the engineer and the contractor that the work under num and num have been completed before allowing the contactor to occupy the project site .
num .
furnish the necessary materials equipment and labor to a .
adjust existing monuments .
b .
replace substandard monuments .
c. install new vaults or adjust existing vaults around the monuments within the paved surfaces to the grade established or as directed .
d. reestablish monuments disturbed by the work .
num .
record positions of all survey monuments found within the work area e.g .
the median roadway shoulders roadway slopes and for contracts with work planned at the right of way along the right of way fences .
obtain and complete the multistate control point database mcpd master template in its num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction entirety for all monuments located referenced and tied .
copies of plans showing original right of way monument positions can be obtained from the department .
num .
material acceptance will be by visual inspection .
materials required for the installations and adjustment of vaults will be as specified in num and as in portland cement num aggregates num metals num concrete curing compounds and admixtures num num .
preliminary procedure .
before commencing work that will or may disturb survey monuments the contractor will retain an idaho licensed pls to locate reference and tie all survey monuments within the project site including but not limited to the following a .
public and private land corners and all accessories to those corners .
b .
control points set by agencies of the united states government the state of idaho counties cities or private surveyors .
c. benchmarks set by agencies of the united states government the state of idaho counties cities or private surveyors .
d. right of way monuments that may be disturbed by the work .
e. a list of known survey monuments will be provided in the contract .
num .
preserve existing survey monuments .
a .
the contractor will retain and protect the survey monuments within the project site that are not shown on the plans to be disturbed by the work .
b .
the contractor will not remove destroy bury or alter any survey monuments unless authorized by the pls and the engineer .
num .
survey monuments disturbed by the work .
a .
survey monuments disturbed during construction will be reestablished in kind or with a monument of superior quality as determined by the pls before project completion .
any survey monument set adjusted or replaced will be in accordance with num idaho code and will be surmounted with a cap of such material and size that it can be permanently and legibly marked with the date and pls license number in responsible charge of placing adjusting or replacing the monument .
b .
public and private land corner monuments disturbed during construction will be reestablished and remonumented in accordance with num idaho code .
a survey monument set or adjustment will be in accordance to num idaho code and for public land survey system plss corner monuments will be surmounted with a cap of such material and size that it can be permanently and legibly marked in accordance with the current manual of surveying .
instructions published by the united states department of the interior bureau of land management .
mark the cap as per the manual of surveying instructions .
c. federal state of idaho and local survey monuments disturbed by the work will be reestablished in the original position as determined before construction and in accordance with the standards rules and procedures of the original monumenting agency .
in the case of ngs survey monuments the ngs state advisor or idahos ngs geodetic coordinator on staff at idaho state university isu num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num will be consulted before the removal and reestablishment of any ngs or united states coast and geodetic survey monument .
d. unless the pls directs the contractor to proceed in a different manner survey monuments lying within the paved portions that will or may be disturbed during the work will be treated as follows num if an existing survey monument meets the minimum requirements of num idaho code it can be retained or adjusted vertically in place as determined by the pls .
num if an existing survey monument does not meet the minimum requirements of num idaho code a new survey monument which meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of num idaho code or the standards of the original monumenting agency whichever is a superior monument will be installed by or under the direct supervision of the pls .
num if an existing survey monument must be removed for the work a new survey monument which meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of num idaho code or the standards of the original monumenting agency whichever is a superior monument will be installed by or under the direct supervision of the pls .
num where a survey monument is within the paved portions of the roadway and more than num foot inside the edge of the asphalt shoulder edge of oil a vault casing will be installed over the monument as specified .
any new monument set in vaults casings will conform to the specifications for a street monument .
e. any survey monument discovered during the work and not identified in the plans will be located referenced tied and reported under the responsible charge of the pls .
if an unidentified monument is to be disturbed during construction it will be reestablished and remonumented .
f. any survey monument disturbed and not identified on the plans or referenced by the pls before it being disturbed will be reestablished and remonumented under the responsible charge of the pls from the best available evidence and information of record in accordance with accepted survey methods and procedures of the idaho code andor the original monumenting agency .
re monumentation will be in accordance to this section .
g. any survey monument willfully or carelessly disturbed or destroyed by the contractor will be re established and remonumented in accordance to this section at no additional cost to the department .
h. the pls will mark hisher license number the year the word reset and the original project stationing and offset on all centerline or right of way monuments reset replaced adjusted restored reestablished remonumented or reconstructed .
all newly installed centerline right of way and street monuments on the state highway system will be in accordance with the departments specifications .
num .
documentation .
following the completion of the work the pls will verify the monument positions stamp the survey monuments and verify the vaults casings have been installed if required .
if public land corner monuments were adjusted or replaced or if any accessories to the public land corner monuments have been established the pls will file the appropriate documentation in the county or counties where the project site is located in accordance with num idaho code .
if private land corner monuments center line monuments or right of way monuments were adjusted or replaced a record of survey will be filed in accordance with num idaho code .
if ngs survey monuments were disturbed andor reset the pls will submit copies of the monument reset information as provided to and approved by the ngs .
the pls will submit a copy of all documents recorded at the county offices .
the pls will submit a written report which num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction documents all actions taken by himher or the contractor to preserve or restore each survey monument within the project site .
the report will indicate the geodetic or state plane coordinate positions including coordinate system datum and project combination factor used of each survey monument within the project site before construction the geodetic or state plane coordinate positions of each survey monument after the work has been completed and the actions taken by the contractor and the pls to preserve adjust or replace each survey monument .
the report must be submitted before issuance of the final payment .
the pls will seal and sign this document .
num .
mcpd submittal .
the pls will obtain and complete the mcpd master template form with global positions e.g .
wgsnum latitude longitude and orthometric height of the monuments referenced during and checked after the work .
the pls will submit the completed mcpd template directly to the mcpd at isu and submit a copy to the engineer .
the mcpd template is available at httpgiscenter.isu.eduresearchtechpggczipmcpd_master_template.zip .
in the submittal of the mcpd to isu include a letter of transmittal signed and sealed by the pls .
survey monument preservation work to locate reference reestablish replace install adjust or reconstruct survey monuments and vaults and to obtain and complete the mcpd template for submittal will be paid by force account as specified in num.c.num .
num weed control .
avoid transporting or transferring noxious or invasive weed into or out of the project site .
control noxious or invasive weeds within the project site including stockpiles wash all vehicles and equipment before entering the project site or staging areas and remove any dirt mud plant parts or seed residue that remains after a visual inspection before beginning work .
additional washes may be required by the engineer if vehicles or equipment come in contact with a noxious weedinfested area or travels off the project site or staging areas .
ensure invasive including cheatgrass medusahead rye kochia tumble mustard prickly lettuce or russian thistle or noxious weed seed and plant parts and dirt are completely removed .
washing vehicles and earthmoving equipment is considered incidental to excavation and related items .
before beginning earthdisturbing operations have the engineer county weed superintendent andor equivalent survey the project site to identify noxious weed sites and concerns .
avoid or treat and remove soil and material containing noxious weed seeds andor plants before beginning disturbance or excavation .
begin work in nonnoxious weedinfested areas .
locate staging areas in nonnoxious weedinfested areas unless a washing station is installed on the project site .
avoid or minimize vehicle and equipment travel through known noxious weedinfested areas .
service vehicles traveling frequently in and out of the project site that remain on the roadway are exempt from this requirement .
herbicides are required to be approved before use and will be applied during the weeds growing cycle .
herbicides will be applied by an idaho licensed applicator .
comply with all applicable local state and federal requirements including limitations imposed by the secretary of the interior .
herbicides may need to be applied multiple times throughout the growing season for weed control .
do not apply herbicides to areas within num feet of a river water source or where there is standing or running water .
spraying herbicide on or adjacent to surface waters or wetlands is prohibited unless it is an aquatic herbicide and the contractor has an npdes pesticide general permit pgp from the epa .
the contractor is required to contact the epa or army corps of engineers to determine requirements .
in seasonal wetlands riparian and sensitive areas and after new plantings and seeding use mechanical or hand weeding methods where herbicides may adversely affect new plantings or seeding .
complete handweeding before beginning seeding applications .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the contractor is responsible for herbicide delivery handling storage application and left over herbicide and container disposal .
herbicide application is regulated by the epa under the federal insecticide fungicide rodenticide and algaecide act fifra and a num decision in the ninth circuit court of appeals .
for seeding applications including duration or timing follow the product label and manufacturers written instructions .
num seeding and vegetation special guaranty .
this subsection only applies if the area to be reseededrevegetated is greater than num acre .
the contractor will ensure vegetation establishment including watering cultivating plant or mulch replacement reseeding and any other work necessary to maintain planting and seeding in nonlawn areas in a healthy condition throughout the numyear establishment period .
the numyear establishment time period begins when all planting and seeding installation is completed .
seeding and vegetation establishment is successful when the desirable plant species cover at least num percent undesirable or weedy plant species cover less than num percent and state listed noxious and invasive weeds including cheatgrass medusahead rye kochia tumble mustard prickly lettuce or russian thistle cover less than num percent of the seeded area after num year .
the department will conduct an evaluation after num year and determine which areas if any do not meet the contract .
replace plants or reseed the areas that do not meet the contract at no additional cost .
the replacement plants and reseeding will be the same species and sizes as originally specified .
provide materials labor fertilizer and all other items as originally specified .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num prosecution progress and termination num subletting of contract .
do not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or portion of the contract or of the right title or interest in the contract without written consent .
if the engineer consents to subletting a portion of the work the contractor will use its own organization to perform work amounting to at least num percent of the original contract amount for contracts that involve federalaid funding and num percent for statefunded contracts .
the phrase its own organization includes only workers employed and paid directly inclusive of employees who are employed by a lease agreement acceptable to the department and equipment owned or rented with or without operators and does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor assignee or agent of the contractor .
calculate this percentage using the following equation num s o c x where x percentage of work performed by the contractors own organization .
c contract amount of work performed by the contractors own organization .
o original contract amount .
s contract amount of specialty items if included in the contract .
if the contract requires contract pay items to be performed at stipulated prices or invoice prices and these items are not on the bid schedule add the prices of these items to the original contract amount to determine the minimum percentage specified above .
submit written quotations as support for invoice prices .
do not allow a subcontractor to work until the subcontractors executed agreement the subcontract with the contractor including the required attachments and addenda is approved .
neither of the following relieves or releases the contractor or the surety of their responsibilities or liability under the contract or the contract bonds num .
the engineers consent to subcontract work .
num .
the subcontract .
subcontracting does not create a contract between the department and the subcontractor .
the subcontractor gains no rights and the department accepts no responsibilities by reason of the subcontractors contract with the contractor .
the contractor is responsible for the work performed .
num contract time .
a .
general .
contract time starts as stated in the special provisions .
do not begin work until the contract is fully executed as specified in num .
achieve substantial completion within the contract time .
the engineer will not charge contract time after substantial completion as determined and written by the engineer as long as the contractor diligently performs the remaining work .
b .
working day contracts .
beginning with the start of work specified in num.a the engineer will assess working days for all days except as specified in num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
the engineer will assess working days if the contractor is not performing work on the critical path and nonperformance is due to causes that the contractor could have foreseen controlled or prevented .
the engineer will prepare and provide to the contractor a monthly statement showing the number of working days charged for the preceding month and the number of working days remaining in the contract time .
if the contractor disagrees with the working days assessed the contractor may give notice on the monthly statement as specified in num .
c. calendar day contracts .
beginning with the start of work specified in num.a the engineer will assess contract time for all calendar days .
d. completion date contracts .
for completion date contracts the contract time concludes on the specified contract completion date .
num project schedule .
a .
general .
develop and maintain a project schedule that represents the scope of work required by the contract and the proposed sequence of operations .
include activities with reasonable durations for work that is the departments responsibility .
reasonable is defined as customary or normal for the type of work involved or as required by the contract .
the schedule will include the critical path .
the critical path will typically be the path with the least amount of total float .
the critical path may follow different activity paths at different times during work performance due to the work progress or revisions made to the schedule .
float before substantial completion is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either party but is a resource available to either party on a firstcome firstserved basis as needed .
float after substantial completion is owned by the contractor .
notify the engineer at least num business days before stopping work resuming work or changing the project schedule .
the cost of preparing updating and revising the schedules is incidental to other contract pay items .
the departments schedule acceptance does not relieve the contractor of its responsibilities to adjust labor equipment or work schedules and to provide sufficient materials to substantially complete the work within the contract time .
acceptance does not modify the contract or constitute endorsement or validation by the engineer of the contractors logic activity durations or assumptions in creating the schedule .
submit a critical path method cpm schedule including the following minimum requirements num .
created in a software format that is compatible with the most current version of microsoft project .
num .
includes activities required to complete the work including but not limited to engineering surveying permitting submittals resubmittals approvals procurement fabrication deliveries crushing utility work and thirdparty work .
num .
includes milestones interim completion dates substantial completion date and contract completion date .
num .
describes activities that make the work readily identifiable .
num .
identifies the scheduled early and late start and finish dates for each activity .
num .
limits activity durations to num working days .
num .
limits activity relationships to finishtostart starttostart and finishtofinish relationships .
do not use dummies leads or lags .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
uses only contractual date constraints .
num .
defines the work calendar for each activity .
submit with the cpm schedule num .
a narrative that describes the major equipment and assumed production rates for the major work activities .
num .
a description on how the number of anticipated weather days as specified in table num have been incorporated into the schedule only required for calendar and completion date contracts .
ensure each cpm schedule submittal includes num electronic cpm schedule copy and num paper copies including num .
time scaled logic diagram .
submit the timescaled logic diagram with the following a .
plot the logic diagram on plotted sheets with a horizontal time scale that is the project calendar .
ensure each activitys duration and dates are plotted on the horizontal time scale .
b .
submit the logic diagram using an approved sheet size .
c. ensure the activity information includes activity numbers activity descriptions durations total float and scheduled or actual start and finish dates .
the timescaled logic diagram must clearly show sequence activities and interdependence for the required work performance and show the critical path .
num .
predecessor and successor report .
the predecessor and successor report will define the schedule logic .
it will clearly show logical relationships and constraints .
num .
bar chart printout .
ensure the bar chart printout includes the following for each activity a .
activity number or id .
b .
activity description .
b .
activity calendar .
c. original duration .
d. remaining duration .
e. percent complete .
f. early or actual start and finish dates .
g. late start and finish dates .
h. total float .
b .
initial schedule .
submit the initial schedule for review at or before the preconstruction conference .
the initial schedule must meet the requirements and show that substantial completion can be achieved within the contract time .
when approved the contractor may submit a preliminary schedule defining the contractors planned operation for the first num calendar days after the award date and indicating the contractors general approach for the remaining work .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num meet with the engineer to jointly review correct and adjust the initial schedule within num calendar days after submitting the initial schedule .
resubmit the initial schedule for acceptance within num calendar days after the meeting .
if the engineer does not accept the resubmitted schedule repeat this process .
do not begin work until the initial schedule has been approved .
c. monthly update schedules .
attend monthly onsite project progress meetings to update the schedule .
the engineer and the contractor will review progress to verify actual start and finish dates remaining duration percent complete of uncompleted work activities and proposed schedule revisions .
it is the contractors responsibility to provide the engineer with work activities status at this progress meeting and prepare schedule updates based on this information once it has been verified and agreed upon .
each month submit the updated schedule reflecting progress .
submit a written narrative describing the project schedule status the critical path and schedule revisions with the schedule update .
resubmit the schedule update if it does not contain the agreedon asbuilt information .
at the engineers written request and within num calendar days after written request receipt submit a revised schedule as specified in num.a if the actual work is as determined by the engineer significantly different than that represented on the current schedule .
the department will provide the contractor with one of the following responses within num calendar days after the departments receipt of the revised schedule num .
accept the revised schedule .
num .
reject the schedule and identify the reasons for rejection .
num .
request more information .
address the reasons for rejection or submit the information requested within num calendar days after the departments request .
d. final schedule .
submit a final schedule with the written notice of completion once the engineer deems the work completed as specified in num that reflects actual start and finish dates for each work activity .
the department will not grant final acceptance as specified in num until the engineer receives and accepts the final schedule .
num preconstruction and preoperational conferences meet with the engineer for a preconstruction conference at a mutually agreed time .
at or before the preconstruction conference submit the following to the engineer num .
initial schedule as specified in num.b .
num .
list of material suppliers and subcontractors .
num .
whnum public works contract report .
num .
other requested information .
meet with the engineer for preoperational conferences before beginning a new phase of work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num limitation of operations .
do not start an operation impacting traffic until traffic control devices are approved and completely installed .
perform the work in a manner and sequence that will ensure the least interference with traffic .
the contractor is responsible for the location of detours and provisions for handling traffic .
access the project site only at existing interchange ramps public road connections or approaches .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a project section before starting on additional project sections if the section opening is essential for public convenience .
do not work on a roadway open to the traveling public except for normal maintenance operations during a numday holiday weekend or on july num num and num .
num methods equipment and character of workers .
provide sufficient labor and equipment for completing the work in a satisfactory manner and within the contract time .
employ workers with sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the work assigned to them .
if as determined by the engineer a person employed by the contractor or its subcontractor does not perform the work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly the engineer will issue a written direction for removal of the person .
do not employ the removed person in any future work portions without approval .
if the contractor does not do the following the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until the contractor complies with the contract num .
remove person or persons as required in this subsection .
num .
provide suitable and sufficient labor and equipment for the work .
ensure the equipment used on a portion of the project does not damage the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
park unattended equipment at least num feet off the traveled way .
if the posted speed limit for the traveled way is num mph or less the engineer may approve parked equipment at least num feet off the traveled way .
use the methods and equipment required by the contract .
if the contractor desires to use a method or equipment type other than those specified in the contract submit a written request that includes a full description of the proposed method equipment and the reasons for making the change .
if the engineer approves the change the contractor is fully responsible for performing the work as required by the contract .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer determines the work produced does not meet the requirements discontinue the substituted method or equipment use and complete the remaining work with the method and equipment required by the contract .
remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as directed .
changed methods or equipment approvals do not modify the contract amount or the contract time .
if the methods and equipment required to complete a specific work portion are not specified in the contract the contractor may use any methods or equipment that will satisfactorily complete the work .
num extension of contract time .
a .
general .
the engineer will extend the contract time by issuing a change order if an excusable delay as specified in num.b num.d or num.f extends the scheduled substantial completion date .
the engineer will only consider a request to revise contract time if the following conditions are met num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
notice as specified in num .
num .
documentation from the project schedule including updates justifies the time extension .
the engineer will evaluate the information submitted and determine the time extension if any .
the contractors request that insufficient contract time was specified is not a valid reason for a time extension .
time is of the essence in the contractors performance of the contract .
delays inconvenience the traveling public obstruct traffic interfere with and delay commerce and increase highway user risk .
delays also increase the departments costs adding time needed for administration engineering inspection and supervision .
it is essential and in the publics interest the contractor work vigorously to contract completion .
time extensions will not be granted for delays incurred during the months of december january and february unless the contractors accepted project schedule shows the delayed work was scheduled to be performed during this time period and was critical at the time of the delay .
if contract time is extended the department will relieve the contractor from associated liquidated damages as specified in num .
b. excusable noncompensable delays .
excusable noncompensable delays are delays that are not the contractors or the departments fault or responsibility and could not have been reasonably foreseen or anticipated by the contractor before bid .
a time extension will be granted if justified as specified in num.a but the contractor will not be paid for costs incurred due to the delays .
the following are examples of excusable noncompensable delays num .
delays due to floods tornadoes lightning strikes earthquakes or other cataclysmic natural phenomena .
num .
weather delay as specified in num.c .
num .
unavoidable material delivery delays resulting from freight embargoes government acts or areawide material shortages .
this applies to the contractor and its subcontractors or suppliers .
delays due to the contractors and its subcontractors or suppliers insolvency or mismanagement are not excusable .
num .
delays due to civil disturbances .
num .
delays from fires or epidemics .
num .
delays from labor strikes that are beyond the contractors its subcontractors or suppliers power to settle and are not caused by the contractors its subcontractors or suppliers improper acts or omissions .
num .
added quantities that delay work on the critical path .
num .
delays due to acts of the government or a political subdivision other than the department .
num .
delays from damage to temporary or permanent work .
c. extension to the contract time for weather .
for calendar day and completion date contracts the contract time will be extended num day for each lost critical path work day caused by weather that exceeds the reasonably anticipated weather days per month as listed in table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num anticipated weather days per month number of working days lost due to weather by district month dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum january num num num num num num february num num num num num num march num num num num num num april num num num num num num may num num num num num num june num num num num num num july num num num num num num august num num num num num num september num num num num num num october num num num num num num november num num num num num num december num num num num num num weather experienced on weekends or holidays will not be considered as lost working days unless the contractor normally works on those days or if directed to work on those days .
d. excusable compensable delays .
excusable compensable delays are delays that are caused only by the department .
the contract time will be extended for the following excusable compensable delays if the conditions specified in num.a are met num .
delays due to contract revisions as defined in num.b num.c num.e or num.f .
num .
delays due to utility interference within the project site as defined in num .
num .
delays due to an engineerordered suspension as defined in num.d .
num .
delays due to the actions or neglect of the department or its failure to act .
pay will be determined for excusable compensable delays as specified in num.d .
e. nonexcusable delays .
nonexcusable delays are noncompensable .
time extensions will not be granted for nonexcusable delays .
f. concurrent delays .
when a nonexcusable delay is concurrent with an excusable compensable or noncompensable delay the contractor is not entitled to a time extension or additional pay for the period the nonexcusable delay is concurrent with the excusable delay .
when an excusable noncompensable delay is concurrent with an excusable compensable delay the contractor is entitled to a time extension but no additional pay for the period the noncompensable delay is concurrent with the compensable delay .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num failure to complete on time .
if the contract time expires liquidated damages will be assessed for each working day the work remains substantially incomplete after the contract time or its most recent extension has expired .
liquidated damages are not a penalty .
the engineer will determine working days for the assessment of liquidated damages as specified in num.b .
for calendar day and completion date contracts the engineer will not exclude days during december january and february .
liquidated damages will be deducted from monies due to the contractor or will be billed to the contractor .
liquidated damages will not be assessed after substantial completion of the work as evidenced in writing as long as the contractor performs the remaining work .
allowing the contractor to continue and finish the work after the contract time expires in no way operates as a waiver on the part of the department of its rights under the contract .
num default and termination of contract .
if the contractor is responsible for any of the following the engineer may provide written notice to the contractor and surety of the delay neglect or default num .
failing to begin the work by the date specified in the notification of award .
num .
failing to perform the work with sufficient labor and equipment or with sufficient materials to ensure work completion within the contract time .
num .
performing the work unsuitably and neglecting or refusing to remove materials or to replace unacceptable or unsuitable work .
num .
discontinuing the work .
num .
failing to resume previously discontinued work within a reasonable time after notice to do so .
num .
becoming insolvent being declared bankrupt or committing an act of bankruptcy or insolvency .
num .
making an assignment for the benefit of creditors .
num .
failing to carry on the work in an acceptable manner .
if within num calendar days after written notice receipt the contractor or surety does not respond as specified by the notice the department will have full power and authority without violating the contract to remove the work from the contractor .
the department may appropriate or use suitable and acceptable materials and equipment within the project site may enter into an agreement for contract completion in accordance with the terms and provisions of the contract or use other methods that in the engineers opinion are necessary for work completion as required by the contract .
the department will deduct the costs and charges incurred for work completion under the contract from amounts due or which may become due to the contractor .
if the amount exceeds the sum that would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the surety will be liable and will pay to the department the excess amount .
if after termination of the contract it is determined the contractor was not in default the rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the termination had been issued for the convenience of the department as specified in num .
num termination for convenience of the department .
a .
general .
the department may terminate the contract in whole or in part for num .
executive orders of the president of the united states or the governor of idaho .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
court restraining orders based on acts or omissions of persons or agencies other than the contractor .
num .
conditions determined to be in the departments best interest .
the department will detail the specifics on the termination and the effective date in a notice of termination .
b. submittals and procedures .
on receipt of a notice of termination num .
stop work as specified .
num .
enter into no new subcontracts nor order materials services or facilities except as approved to complete any remaining contract portion .
num .
terminate all subcontracts to the extent they relate to terminated work .
num .
settle outstanding liabilities and termination settlement proposals .
num .
transfer title and deliver to the department a. unfabricated or partially fabricated parts work in process completed work supplies and other material produced or acquired for the terminated work .
b .
completed or partially completed plans drawings information and other property required to be submitted to the department if the contract had been completed .
num .
complete work not terminated .
num .
coordinate a time and date with the engineer to inventory materials obtained but not yet used .
num .
take necessary or directed action to protect contract related property that is in the contractors possession and in which the department has or may have an interest .
c. settlement provisions .
accept final payment for num .
completed work items at the contract bid price .
num .
eliminated work as specified in num.f .
num .
partially completed work at agreed prices or as follows a .
submit a claim for additional damages or costs not covered above or elsewhere in the contract within num calendar days of the termination date .
b .
submit cost documentation .
exclude anticipated profits on work not completed .
ensure the claim is less than the total contract price reduced by the amount of previous payments and the contract price of nonterminated work .
on reaching agreement on the claimed costs the department will amend the contract and make payment .
d. disputed settlement .
if the department does not agree with the contractors claimed costs the department will make payment as follows but without duplicating amounts agreed on under num.c num .
for contract work performed before the termination date the total of a .
the cost of work completed .
b .
the cost of settling and paying termination settlement proposals under terminated subcontracts properly chargeable to the termination portion of the contract if not included in num.d.num.a .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. profit on num.d.num.a .
determined by the department to be reasonable .
the department will exclude profit under this subsection if the contractors costs for work performed exceed the bid item payments made .
num .
reasonable terminated work settlement costs including a .
accounting legal clerical and other expenses reasonably necessary to prepare termination settlement proposals and support data .
b. subcontract termination and settlement excluding the settlement amounts .
c. storage transportation and other costs incurred that are reasonably necessary to preserve protect or dispose of the termination inventory .
num .
except for normal spoilage and to the extent the department accepts the risk of loss the department will exclude the fair value of destroyed stolen or damaged material .
num .
the following will be deducted to arrive at the amount due to the contractor a. unliquidated advances or other payments under the terminated portion of the contract .
b .
department claims against the contractor under the contract .
c. the agreed on price or the proceeds from the sale of materials supplies or other items acquired and sold by the contractor but not covered by or credited to the department .
e. partial termination .
submit a proposal for an adjustment of the prices of the continued portion of the contract within num calendar days of the effective termination date .
submit supporting information .
the department will make agreed upon adjustments .
the department may establish terms and conditions for making partial payments against costs incurred by the contractor for the terminated portion of the contract .
provide access to contract cost records for department audit .
request approval to maintain photographs microphotographs or other accurate reproductions rather than original records and documents .
termination does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for work completed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
the department will measure the contract pay item quantities using the units of measure specified in the contract and the methods of measurement and calculation as specified in this subsection .
u.s. customary system of weights and measures units are defined in num cfr .
for standard manufactured materials identified by gauge thickness unit weight or section dimensions the department will consider these as nominal weights and dimensions and accept industry established manufacturing tolerances .
the engineer will measure contract pay item quantities by the actual quantity or by the plan quantity as required by the contract .
a .
actual quantities .
where the contract specifies actual quantity as the basis of payment for a contract pay item the engineer will measure and calculate the actual work quantity performed using quantities from measurements taken from the completed work in place or from measurements taken from delivery vehicles .
this excludes work outside the project site as specified in the method of measurement section for the relevant contract pay item .
the engineer will measure the actual contract pay item quantities using the following methods num .
area .
the engineer will calculate area measurements from linear distances measured horizontally or vertically .
the measurement will be the neat lines as specified or ordered in writing .
the engineer will not deduct for individual fixtures occupying areas less than or equal to num square feet .
num .
structures .
the engineer will measure structures using the neat lines as specified or ordered in writing .
num .
linear .
the engineer will measure linear measurements as follows a .
by the foot will be measured parallel to the surface on which the work is installed .
b .
by the mile will be measured using project stationing .
for materials manufactured in standard lengths the engineer will calculate the length measurement by multiplying the number of pieces by the nominal length .
num .
lump sum or each .
consider lump sum or each payment as full payment for labor equipment material and incidentals including fittings and accessories necessary to complete the work on a contract pay item or other work element .
num .
volumes of excavation embankment and similar contract pay items .
the engineer will measure volume quantities using specific volumetric measurements as specified in the method of measurement section for the relevant contract pay item .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
volumes and weights in hauling vehicles .
the engineer will measure material delivered in trucks by the cubic yard or by weight .
haul material in approved trucks .
display a unique identification mark on each truck .
ensure loads in the truck box are empty before leaving the drop site .
a. cubic yard .
if the contract does not require otherwise the engineer will measure contract pay items with cubic yard pay units using trucks with calculated struck volumes as the method of measurement .
the engineer will measure volume at the point of delivery .
hauling units may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided the units body is shaped to enable an expeditious and accurate determination of the volume .
the engineer will calculate the struck volume of each truck to the nearest num cubic yard .
this volume will not change without approval .
the engineer will not make allowances for the material settlement in transit .
for material delivered in trucks the engineer will not pay for material above the struck volume of the truck box and will reduce the calculated truck box struck volume by num cubic yard increments when the truck is not filled to its struck volume .
b .
weight .
comply with num idaho code and idapa num .
for material measurement based on scale tickets ensure that scales used to weigh materials include a controller capable of printing a weight ticket that indicates the project name project number contract pay item number current date current time load number truck number load gross weight load tare weight and load net weight .
ensure the scale controller can automatically print the date time and weights without modification of the weight ticket .
assign sequential load numbers for each load weighed for delivery .
if paying for granular borrow or aggregate by weight the engineer will not pay for water over num percent of the materials dry weight .
the engineer will correct material weight for excess moisture content in accordance with aashto t num .
weigh empty trucks at least once a day if used to haul material paid by weight .
ensure the scales accuracy to within num percent .
weigh materials proportioned or measured by weight on beam or springless dial scales as follows num ensure the scale springs do not carry any part of the load .
num provide a commercial certificate of compliance for weighing equipment before hauling operations begin .
the certificate cost is incidental to the weighed material contract pay item .
num provide clearance between the scale parts and the structure to prevent scale part displacement .
num protect scale working parts to prevent material from falling on or against the parts .
num the department will allow the weighing of separate units of combination vehicles if the scale platform and approaches are at the same elevation and can maintain units of the combination vehicles at the same elevation during the weighing operation .
num when weighing each vehicle take the tractor unit out of gear and release the brakes .
ensure plants used to proportion or batch materials by weight operate as follows num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction a the operator can fully view the graduated scale when operating the gate that delivers material to the weighing hopper .
b locations of hoppers and bins allow access for calibration .
c inspect and calibrate platform scales as directed .
instead of platform scales the department will allow the use of conveyor weighing equipment that meets the requirements of the idaho state department of agriculture bureau of weights and measures .
the contractor will inspect conveyor weighing equipment for calibration at least every num calendar days in accordance with the manufacturers written requirements .
obtain written approval to use automatic weighing equipment .
ensure the material weighing accuracy is within num percent of actual .
the engineer will not pay for wasted or rejected material material not delivered material placed outside of the specified or directed project locations and material left on hand after work completion .
num .
converting between weights and volumes .
the engineer may convert minor quantities specified for measurement by volume or weight from one measurement to the other if the engineer and the contractor agree to the conversions .
the engineer will determine the factors to be used for these conversions and the engineer and the contractor will agree on these conversions before proceeding with the relevant work .
num .
asphalt material .
the engineer will measure asphalt and antistripping additive at num f or converted to num f by the gallon or ton .
the engineer will use certified net weights or weights based on certified volumes as the measurement basis when measuring asphalt shipped by rail truck or transport corrected for material lost foamed wasted or not incorporated in the work .
the engineer will measure antistripping additives by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt .
num .
commercial additives .
the engineer will measure bulk additives by the ton and additives in sacks by the net weight on the manufacturers label .
num .
timber .
the engineer will measure timber incorporated in the structure by the thousand feet board measure mfbm based on nominal widths and thicknesses and the longest dimension of each piece .
num .
equipment time .
the engineer will measure equipment time by the actual number of hours the equipment is operated to perform the work including necessary travel time .
num .
water .
if specified as a separate contract pay item in the contract the engineer will measure water separately using calibrated tanks distributors or water meters .
num .
stockpiled material .
the engineer will determine stockpiled material volume using the crosssection averageendarea method .
for quantities less than num cubic yards the engineer may use trucks with calculated struck volumes as the method of measurement .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
plan quantities .
if the contract requires plan quantity as the basis of payment for a contract pay item the engineer will base payment for the work on the quantity shown on the plans .
the engineer will not make measurements for contract pay items paid by plan quantity except if the engineer changes the plan quantity as specified in num .
if the engineer believes the actual contract pay item quantity to be paid by plan quantity differs significantly from the plan quantity the engineer will measure and pay for the actual work quantity performed at the contract unit price .
if the contractor believes the actual contract pay item quantity differs significantly from the plan quantity submit a written request for actual quantity measurement .
if the actual measured quantity value does not exceed the plan quantity value by num reimburse the department for the measurement cost .
num scope of payment .
a .
general .
the department will pay the contractor for accepted contract pay item quantities at the contract unit prices except as otherwise specified in num num num and num .
accept this payment as full payment for providing the necessary materials labor tools equipment and incidentals to perform and complete the work as required by the contract .
assume liability for risk loss damage or expense resulting from the work subject to num .
b .
price adjustment .
the department will consider progress estimate adjustments to applicable contract item costs as a payment to the contractor or a credit to the department when the indexes change as defined for asphalt and fuel .
on the first monday for each month the department will publish a current asphalt index cai based on the previous numweek average as reported by poten partners inc. for the boise area and a current fuel index cfi based on the price of ultralow sulfur clear diesel num fuel as reported by oil price information services .
the contract base asphalt index bai and base fuel index bfi will be the last posted index amount preceding the bid opening date .
a payment to the contractor may be applied or a credit to the department may be deducted from monies due the contractor for each affected progress estimate .
work performed at no expense to the department will not be eligible for an adjustment .
num .
computing the asphalt price adjustment .
a price adjustment will be made only when the cai varies by more than num percent from the bai and only for that portion of the variance in excess of num percent .
credits and payments are computed as follows a .
the tons of asphalt used during each progress estimate period will be computed for applicable contract items .
the plant mix asphalt quantity used when the item includes asphalt and additives will be calculated at the approved contractor job mix formula cjmf percentage .
asphalt binder contained in rap is not eligible for an asphalt price adjustment apa .
only virgin asphalt binder in the mix will be eligible for an apa .
the apa for emulsified asphalt products will be calculated based on the percentage of asphalt in the emulsion which is estimated at num percent and num percent for diluted emulsion .
b .
the total asphalt tons used for each progress estimate period will be summed for the applicable contract items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction c. the apa credit or payment is computed from the following formula contractor payment if cai is greater than num of bai apa cai num bai q department credit if cai is less than num of bai apa cai num bai q where apa asphalt price adjustment in dollars .
bai base asphalt index .
cai current asphalt index .
q total asphalt tons used for the progress estimate .
if the cai increases by num percent or more over the bai the department will determine the feasibility of continuing project construction .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing if the contract will be terminated as specified in num .
this adjustment will be applied only for material that is accepted and allowed to be left in place .
num .
computing the fuel price adjustment .
a price adjustment will be made only when the cfi varies by more than num percent from the bfi and only for that portion of the variance in excess of num percent .
credits and payments are computed as follows a .
the engineer will obtain the work quantity performed from the progress estimate for the applicable contract items based on the categories in table num. b. compute the fuel usage for each applicable contract item by multiplying the fuel usage rate by the work quantity performed for each item .
c. sum the total fuel usage in gallons q for the applicable contract items .
d. compute the fuel price adjustment fpa credit or payment using the following formulas contractor payment if cfi is greater than num of bfi fpa cfi num bfi q department credit if cfi is less than num of bfi fpa cfi num bfi q where fpa fuel price adjustment in dollars .
bfi base fuel index .
cfi current fuel index .
q total fuel gallons used for the progress estimate .
when the work under the contract is completed the engineer will determine the difference between estimated quantities and final quantities for each applicable work item .
calculate an average cfi of the cfis from individual pay estimates to which a fpa was applied .
calculate the fpa for the fuel usage obtained from the difference between the estimated and final applicable contract item quantities based on the average cfi .
the final fpa will be paid or deducted on the final estimate .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num fuel usage rates item category description rate galunit excavation including topsoil num cy excavation rock must be specifically identified in the contract num cy borrow num cy base num ton surface treatments including seal coats num sy num ton concrete pavements num sy inch of depth concrete paid by the cubic yard num cy plant mix pavement num ton piling driving num ft rotomilling num sy pulverizing mixing num sy plus num sy ft of depth pilot pace car pipe guardrail num num mse retaining wall num num num payment for quantity variations contract revisions and delays .
a .
general .
the department will pay for quantity variations contract revisions and delays as specified in num num num num.b num.c and num.d .
the markups specified in num.c.num pay the contractor for field office overhead home office overhead and profit .
the contractor is not entitled to additional payment in excess of these markups unless the contractor incurs additional costs resulting from an excusable compensable delay as specified in num.d and num.d .
the department will not pay for changes to bonding costs property damage and bodily injury insurance costs or tribal employment rights ordinance tero taxes until project completion .
after project completion and contractors submission of satisfactory evidence the department will calculate an adjustment to reconcile bonding insurance and tero tax issues and execute a contract change order .
b .
payment for quantity variations .
if the measured contract pay item quantity varies from the quantity specified the engineer will only modify the contract unit price as specified in num and num .
if the total pay quantity of a work item varies from the bid quantity by more than num percent the department will make an adjustment in the contract unit price on written request of the engineer or the contractor .
the engineer and the contractor will agree to the adjustment before the performance of the work .
the departments contract unit price adjustment will be the difference between the contract unit price and the actual unit cost to perform the work plus num percent profit .
if the engineer and the contractor can not agree on a price adjustment the engineer will establish a price considered to be fair or have the work done on a force account basis as specified in num.c.num .
if the actual unit cost includes fixed costs these costs are recovered by the contractor through department payments made for num percent of the bid schedule quantity .
the engineer will exclude these costs in computing num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the actual unit cost .
the engineer may include fixed costs when computing the actual unit cost for contract pay items that decrease by more than num percent of the bid schedule quantity .
when the total pay quantity of a work item is less than num percent of the contract bid quantity the department payment for the work will not exceed the payment which would have been made for performance of num percent of the bid schedule quantity at the contract unit price .
the engineer will not make an allowance for anticipated profit when computing the adjusted price .
c. payment for contract revisions .
num .
general .
if the engineer modifies the contract under num or num the engineer will pay the contractor using the methods specified in this subsection .
this pay will include payment to the contractor for performing the revised work delay costs and other associated costs approved and not expressly precluded by the contract .
the engineer will pay the contractor in order of preference beginning with the use of contract unit prices negotiated prices or if a price can not be agreed upon by force account or by a fair price as determined by the engineer .
num .
unrecoverable costs .
the department will not pay the contractor for costs not specifically allowed or provided in num.c and num.d including the following a .
home office overhead in excess of the allowable markups specified in num including unabsorbed home office overhead extended home office overhead or home office overhead calculated using the eichleay formula or another method .
b .
profit in excess of the allowable markups specified in num. c. loss of anticipated profit resulting from work not performed due to contract revisions .
d. consequential damages including loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities insolvency and the effects of force account work on other projects contracts or business interruption .
e. other costs not specified in num.c.num .
f. attorneys fees claim preparation expenses and litigation costs .
num .
contract unit prices .
the engineer will use the contract unit prices if they are representative of the work associated with the change .
contract pay items with a price per unit in the original contract are not eligible for additional overhead and profit .
num .
negotiated prices .
the engineer will request the contractor to submit an estimate of the proposed contract revision unit prices or lump sum price including the cost of performing the revised work delay costs other associated costs plus a reasonable allowance for profit and applicable overhead .
the engineer may request the contractor justify the estimate by providing one or more of the following a .
labor requirements by trade in hours for each task .
b .
equipment costs and time requirements .
c. material costs .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num d. compensable delay costs analysis as specified in num.d .
if the engineer and the contractor can not agree on a negotiated price adjustment the engineer may direct the contractor to perform revised work by force account or will use a fair price as determined by the engineer .
overhead and profit for the subcontractor is included in the agreed price and additional pay above that provided for the contractors overhead and profit will not be allowed .
when work is performed by an approved first or lowertier subcontractor pay to the contractor for overhead and profit will be as follows dollars the contractors pay up to num num over num num num of excess over num num .
force account .
a .
general .
perform work on a force account basis if required by the contract or as directed .
record force account work on departmentprovided forms and submit at the end of each work day to allow immediate field verification .
the engineer will revise as appropriate the daily force account records and provide duplicate report sheets to the contractor for signature .
duplicate report sheets signed by the engineer and the contractor are the true record of force account work .
b .
satisfactory evidencedocumentation .
the engineer will not approve force account work payment before the contractor submits an itemized cost statement for that work .
the engineer will review the itemized statement and approve payment for the cost the engineer deems reasonable based on experience and prevailing market rates .
the engineer may request the contractor to submit additional evidence to support the cost .
submit the following information in duplicate itemized statements for force account work num for labor name classification dates worked daily hours total hours labor rate and extended amount for each laborer and foreman .
num for equipment designation dates used daily hours total hours of actual operation and standby rental rate and extended amount for each equipment unit .
include the manufacturers name or trademark model number and manufacture year with the designation .
num for material quantities cost and extensions including source recover fees royalties and use tax .
num transportation cost for material free on board fob to the project site .
num cost of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax .
num cost bondings .
num estimated tero taxes the department will modify for final payment .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num documentation showing payment for invoiced items including work material and transportation .
if providing material from the contractors stock for force account work submit a signed verification of the following num material was provided from the contractors stock .
num material quantity was used for the force account work .
num material and transportation costs represent the contractors actual cost excluding overhead .
the department will pay for force account work based on the reviewed and approved contractor itemized cost statement .
this payment is full payment for performing the force account work .
c. labor .
the department will pay for labor and foremen performing approved force account work .
the department will pay the wage rate or scale approved in writing before beginning work .
the department will pay for the actual cost of fringe benefits paid to or on behalf of laborers and foremen performing the force account work .
fringe benefits include health benefits retirement benefits and vacation benefits but exclude payroll burdens as described below .
the department will pay an amount equal to num percent of the sum of the direct labor cost and fringe benefits .
this payment is pay for field office overhead num percent home office overhead num percent and profit num percent .
the department will pay for the actual cost paid to or on behalf of laborers and foremen performing force account work for travel and subsistence incurred while performing force account work and as approved .
if performing other work prorate travel and subsistence cost proportionally between force account work and nonforce account work .
do not exceed the current federal per diem rates as published by the u.s. general services administration .
the department will pay for payroll burdens for workers compensation insurance unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes at the actual documented cost plus num percent of the total documented cost as pay for field office overhead home office overhead and profit .
the department will pay wages fringes payroll burdens and subsistence expenses at the normal customary and legal rates unless otherwise approved in writing before the work begins .
the department will not pay for costs deemed unreasonable .
d. material .
for materials approved and used in the work the department will pay for material costs including transportation costs source recovery feeds royalties and use or sales tax but excluding equipment rentals as specified in num.c.num.e.num .
the department will pay the contractor an additional num percent of this sum as pay for field office overhead home office overhead and profit .
e. equipment .
the department will pay the contractor for machinery or special equipment other than small tools on force account work as specified in this subsection plus those transportation costs directly attributable to this work .
obtain written approval of the rental rates established in this subsection before beginning the force account work .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num general .
the department will establish rental rates for the contractorowned or the subcontractor owned equipment used on force account work .
the engineer will determine the rental rates by using and modifying equipmentwatch cost recovery published by equipmentwatch commonly known as the rental rates blue booktm to establish rental rates .
the rental rates will be set before the start of force account work .
num operated rate .
the department will pay for contractorowned or leased equipment on an hourly basis for each hour the equipment is operated .
operated means the equipment is running has an operator and is being used to effectively accomplish the force account work .
the department will pay for nonoperated hours at the standby rate .
the operated rate will be calculated as specified in num.c.num.e.num using the following formula hr mr at ra rfmh oc where hr hourly rate .
mr blue book monthly base rate .
at blue book monthly attachment rate .
ra blue book rate adjustment factor .
rf blue book regional adjustment factor .
oc blue book operating costs .
mh num hours per month .
the department will pay the contractor an additional num percent of the hourly operated rate calculated above as pay for field office overhead home office overhead and profit .
the department will include the attachment rate in the operated rate calculation only if applicable and essential to the force account work as directed .
if multiple attachments are approved for use and the attachments are used interchangeably for the work the engineer will only approve payment for the attachment with the highest rate .
num standby rate .
the department will pay for standby time using the following formula hr mr at ra rfmh num the department will pay up to num hours of standby time during a numhour period and up to num hours of standby time during a numweek period .
the department will pay the contractor an additional num percent of the hourly standby rate calculated above as pay for field office overhead home office overhead and profit .
num rental invoices .
if contractorowned or leased equipment is not available and the contractor rents equipment from other sources e.g .
an equipment rental company the department will pay the contractor for the actual invoiced rental cost plus num percent .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction submit evidence the rental rates paid by the contractor are the standard rates established published and used commercially by the rental company .
if the invoice rental rate does not include fuel lubricants repair and servicing costs the department will pay the blue book published hourly cost from the estimated operating costs column for the hours operated .
for equipment not found in the blue book and when the invoice rental rate does not include fuel lubricants repair and servicing costs the department will pay an additional num percent of the invoice rental rate .
num leased equipment with operator or owner operated equipment .
the department will pay on the basis of actual invoice cost plus num percent .
do not separate the labor and equipment cost .
submit evidence the rates paid by the contractor are the standard rates established published and used commercially by the company or owner operator .
num transportation costs .
the equipment rates established in this subsection are based on the contractor having the equipment available to perform the directed force account work .
the department will pay the cost of transporting the equipment to and from the project site as approved .
the department will pay for transporting by common carrier at invoice cost plus num percent as pay for field and home office overhead and profit .
the department will pay for transporting selfpropelled equipment other than trucks at a rate equal to num percent of the rental rates established in this subsection .
num equipment condition and job conditions .
the rental rates established in this subsection are for equipment of modern design in good working condition .
for equipment that does not meet this requirement or does not provide reasonable production rates the engineer will direct removal of the equipment or negotiate its use at a reduced rental rate as proposed by the contractor and approved .
if the contractor encounters conditions in performing force account work that would result in an increase in normal wear and tear on the equipment the contractor may request an adjustment to rates established for the work .
the engineer will review and approve if appropriate the rental rate adjustment request .
num unlisted equipment .
if the equipment available for force account work is unlisted the engineer will negotiate or establish a fair rental rate with the contractor .
num shop tools .
the department will not pay for equipment listed in the blue book section num shop tools if the daily rate is less than num. f. professional services .
if the force account work requires professional services the engineer will approve the scope of work and cost estimate including travel and per diem before the work begins .
the engineer will allow the contractor a markup for field and home office overhead and profit as specified in num.c.num.h but will not allow other markups in this payment calculation .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num g. miscellaneous .
the engineer will not pay for the use of small tools or for other costs not specified .
h. contractors overhead and profit on subcontractor work .
approved subcontractors may perform work on a force account basis and are entitled to department payment as specified in num.c.num.a num.c.num.b num.c.num.c num.c.num.d num.c.num.e num.c.num.f and num.c.num.g .
if an approved subcontractor performs work on a force account basis the department will pay the contractor for field office overhead home office overhead and profit as follows dollars the contractors pay up to num num over num num num of excess over num the engineer will calculate the contractors overhead and profit based on the total amount of force account work performed including allowable markups .
submit receipts and invoices .
the department will approve and pay the additional amount after receipt of the invoices .
d. payment for delays .
num .
general .
the department will not pay for profit on delay costs unrecoverable costs as specified in num.c.num or costs that duplicate payments made as specified in num.c .
the department will not allow markups on delay costs except as specified in this subsection .
the contractor is obligated to mitigate delay costs as specified in num.a and will coordinate mitigation efforts with the engineer as specified in num .
submit an itemized delay cost statement .
after itemized statement receipt the department will pay the justified delay cost .
provide applicable items in this statement as specified in num.c.num.b .
num .
allowable delay cost .
a .
extended field overhead .
the department will pay the contractor for extended field overhead costs including the cost for general field supervision field office facilities and supplies and field operations maintenance .
general field supervision costs include field supervisors assistants security guards clerks and other field support staff .
calculate labor cost as specified in num.c.num.c except for salaried personnel calculate the daily wage rate actually paid by dividing the weekly salary by num days per week .
do not include markups as specified in num.c.num.c for field overhead home office overhead and profit when calculating general field supervision costs .
field office facility and supply cost include field office trailers tool trailers office equipment rental temporary toilets and other incidental facilities and supplies .
calculate this cost on a calendar day basis using the actual cost incurred during the delay .
field operations maintenance cost includes telephone electric water and other similar expenses .
calculate this cost on a calendar day basis using the actual cost incurred during the delay .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction in addition the department will add a markup of num percent to the extended field overhead costs to pay the contractor for home office overhead .
b .
escalated labor .
the department will pay for escalated labor costs excluding markups for field office overhead home office overhead and profit if the contractor can show the compensable delay caused the work to be performed with labor at higher wage rates than planned at the time of the bid opening .
submit documents supporting the cost labor rates and benefits as specified in num.c.num.c .
the department will add a num percent markup for home office overhead .
c. equipment standby or equipment demobilization .
the department will pay the standby rate for equipment other than small tools that must remain on the project during the delay .
calculate this rate as specified in num.c.num.e.num .
do not include the specified num.c.num.e markups for field overhead home office overhead and profit .
if approved the department will pay the contractors actual transportation cost to remove and return equipment not required during the delay .
to the standby cost or transportation costs the department will add a num percent markup for home office overhead .
d. standby labor .
if approved the department will pay for standby labor as specified in num.c.num.c excluding markups for field office overhead home office overhead and profit and for nonsalaried personnel remaining on the project .
to these costs the department will add a num percent markup for home office overhead .
e. material escalation or material storage .
if approved the department will pay for actual increased material cost or material storage cost due to the delay and will add a num percent markup for home office overhead .
num increases or decreases due to taxes .
the total contract amount includes applicable federal state and local taxes and duties .
the department will not adjust the contract amount for increases or decreases due to taxes unless the amount of an increase or decrease is greater than num from the contract amount .
notify the engineer promptly of a statute court decision written ruling or regulation that will result in an increase or decrease in the contract amount .
a .
increases due to taxes .
the department will increase the contract amount if the following conditions exist num .
a statute court decision written ruling or regulation increases federal state or local excise tax or duty on the transactions or property covered by the contract and takes effect after the contract date .
num .
the statute court decision written ruling or regulation was unanticipated by the department and the contractor before the contract date .
num .
the contractor pays or bears the burden of the federal state local excise tax or duty or rate increase .
the department will increase the contract amount by the amount of the tax duty or rate increase paid by the contractor .
if requested by the engineer verify in writing the new federal state local excise tax or duty or rate increase was not included in the contract amount .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b. decreases due to taxes .
the department will decrease the contract amount if the following conditions exist num .
a statute court decision written ruling or regulation decreases federal state or local excise tax or duty on the transactions or property covered by the contract and takes effect after the contract date .
num .
the statute court decision written ruling or regulation was unanticipated by the department and the contractor before the contract date .
num .
the contractor pays or bears a lesser burden for federal state local excise tax or duty or rate decrease .
the department will decrease the contract amount by the amount of the relief refund or drawback .
pay this amount to the department as directed .
the department will also decrease the contract amount if the contractor through fault or negligence or failure to follow the engineers instructions is required to pay or bear the burden of a federal state or local excise tax or duty or does not obtain a refund or drawback .
num partial payments .
partial payments are only approximate and are subject to correction in any payment following the discovery of an error .
partial payments will be made at least once each month as the work progresses and only if the contractor performs work in accordance with the contract or as directed .
semimonthly payments will be made upon the contractors written request .
the engineer will prepare estimates and partial payments will be made based on the value of the work performed and for material delivered and on hand as specified in num .
the engineer may withhold part of a pay estimate until the contractor complies with the contract including num .
submitting schedules as specified in num .
num .
correcting defective deficient or incomplete work .
num .
maintaining completed work or correcting deficiencies resulting from the contractors failure to provide proper maintenance .
num .
submitting materials certifications .
num .
submitting certified payrolls .
num .
complying with stormwater management practices .
num .
making prompt payment to subcontractors or suppliers as specified in num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
num .
num .
participating in the online diversity tracking system and verifying subcontractor and supplier prompt payments by the online audit process .
num .
meeting the training special provisions if required .
num .
submitting record drawings .
if the engineer or the contractor discovers defective work or material or an overpayment based on quantity or unit price or if the engineer reasonably doubts the integrity of the completed work before the final acceptance and payment the engineer will deduct an amount equal to the value of the defective work or overpayment .
the engineer will not include this amount in subsequent estimates until the contractor corrects the defect or addresses the engineers doubt .
the engineer will determine the suspect or defective work value or overpayment using the quantities or unit prices in the contract .
pay each subcontractor or supplier by the numth day after receiving payment from the department provided work performed by the subcontractor or supplier complies with the contract .
return retainage to each subcontractor or supplier by the numth day after the subcontractor or supplier satisfactorily completes work .
the subcontractor may request the engineer to make partial acceptance of the completed work to allow release of subcontractor retainage from the contractor .
for purposes of this section a subcontractors work is satisfactorily completed when all the work in the subcontract has been accomplished and documented as required by the department and as specified in num .
when the department has made a partial acceptance of the subcontractors work the partial acceptance indicates this work satisfactorily completed and requires the contractor to release any retainage .
the contractor will verify payment or retainage has been released to its subcontractors or suppliers within the specified time for each partial payment or partial acceptance by the department through entries in the departments online diversity tracking system during the corresponding monthly audits .
prompt payment will be monitored and enforced through the contractors reporting of monthly payments to its subcontractors and suppliers in the online diversity tracking system .
subcontractors including lowertier subcontractors andor suppliers will confirm the timeliness and the payment amounts received utilizing the online diversity tracking system .
discrepancies will be investigated by the contract compliance officer and the engineer .
payments to the subcontractors including lowertier subcontractors and including retainage release after the subcontractor or lowertier subcontractors work has been accepted will be reported monthly by the contactor or the subcontractor .
the contractor will ensure its subcontractors including lowertier subcontractors and its suppliers meet these requirements .
num payment for material on hand .
the engineer may make partial payments for material that will be incorporated into the work if the material is delivered to or stockpiled in approved storage sites .
ensure the stockpiled material quantity eligible for partial payment does not exceed the total estimated quantity required to complete the work .
the stockpiled material partial payment will not exceed the value of the portion of the contract pay item in which the material will be incorporated .
the engineer will not make partial payments on living or perishable plant materials until planted .
num allowance for material left on hand .
if materials are not incorporated into the work because of contract pay item elimination contract revisions as specified in num termination of the contract for the departments convenience as specified in num and it is not commercially feasible for the contractor to return the material for credit or otherwise dispose of the material the department will purchase the materials provided the contractor num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
requests the department purchase the unused materials .
num .
shows acquisition of the applicable materials as specified in num .
num .
shows the materials meet specifications .
num .
submits receipts bills and other records of the cost of materials delivered to the designated delivery points .
the department will pay the contractor the verified materials cost plus num percent unless the payment would exceed the contract unit price .
if the payment would exceed the contract unit price the department will pay the contract unit price .
the department may purchase surplus aggregates from the contractor if the following conditions exist num .
the material is stockpiled as directed .
num .
the material meets specification requirements when stockpiled .
the department will pay the contractor for accepted material at an agreed price based on the material production cost .
the department will pay the contractor to haul the material to the stockpile site as specified in num .
num acceptance and final payment .
after accepting the work as specified in num the engineer will prepare a final estimate including the following num .
all accepted contract pay item quantities and unit prices .
num .
all previous partial payment amounts .
num .
release of remaining retainage .
num .
deductions made as specified in the contract .
when the contractor accepts the final estimate and submits consent of surety the engineer will process the final estimate and the department will provide the contractor with final payment .
submit a consent of surety letter signed by the attorneyinfact for the surety with the wording as surety for the above referenced project issued a performance bond and in accordance with num idaho code and the departments standard specifications the surety agrees and guarantees under the performance bond to promptly repay the department for overpayments made to the suretys principal and tax claims made pursuant to num idaho code signed by the attorneyinfact for surety to the engineer .
if the contractor has not accepted the final estimate and submitted the consent of surety within num calendar days the engineer may process the final estimate and the department will provide the contractor with final payment .
the contractors final payment acceptance will not prejudice pending claims filed as specified in num .
on final adjudication of outstanding claims the department will process additional contractor payments as required .
the department may correct prior partial estimates and payments in the final estimate and payment .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num civil rights num general requirements .
for federalaid contracts the contractor will comply with num per special equal employment opportunity responsibilities under num cfr num and num cfr num subpart a and d also refer to united states department of transportation usdot form fhwanum attached to each contract .
num equal employment opportunity .
the contractor will establish and administer wages working conditions employee benefits and personnel actions of every type including hiring upgrading promotion transfer demotion layoff and termination without regard to race color religion sex national origin age or disability .
when advertising to hire employees the contractor will include in all advertisements for employees the notation an equal opportunity employer .
all advertisements will be published in newspapers or other publications having a large circulation among women and minority groups in the project area where the work force would normally be sourced .
the contractors will submit for a pay period in july an electronic report indicating the number of minority women and nonminority group employees currently engaged in each work classification required by the contract .
the contractor will submit workforce diversity data indicating the number of minority women and nonminority employees for each project worked during the calendar year .
the department will use this data to assign training goals on contracts for the following construction season .
contractors may only use the departments online num tool which takes the place of the federal form fhwanum .
contractors will receive a link to the online tool when the submission cycle begins and will report on any last pay period in the month of july .
all information must be submitted by august num .
to view the departments online num database httpapps.itd.idaho.govappseeonumform .
num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe program requirements .
failure to comply with the dbe program requirement percentage as specified in the special provisions or the percentage determined on the departments approved itdnum dbe commitments form required in num is a breach of contract .
whenever the engineer determines after investigating and obtaining evidence the contractor has not complied with the dbe program requirement the engineer will take corrective action .
the contractor or subcontractor will not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
the contractor will carry out applicable requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the department deems appropriate e.g .
withholding monthly progress payments assessing sanctions liquidated damages disqualifying the contractor from future bidding as nonresponsible .
for additional dbe program information see the departments dbe program requirements located at httpapps.itd.idaho.govappsocrcivilpdfdbeplan.pdf .
a .
disadvantaged business enterprise for racegender neutral contracts .
in an effort to achieve the departments current dbe annual participation goal the department respectfully requests and encourages responders to consider utilizing subcontractors and suppliers listed on its dbe directory located at httpsitd.dbesystem.com .
regulations and statutes require and authorize the dbe program under titles i other than part b and v of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of num istea pub .
l. num num stat .
num and titles i iii and v of the transportation equity act for the numst century teanum pub .
l. num num stat .
num titles i iii and v of the safe accountable flexible efficient transportation equity act a legacy for users safetealu num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num pub .
l. num num stat .
num and divisions a and b of the moving ahead for progress in the numst century act mapnum pub .
l. num num stat .
num fixing americas surface transportation act fast act pub .
l. num num .
num .
it is the departments policy to ensure dbes as defined in num cfr part num have an equal opportunity to receive and participate in the united states department of transportation usdotassisted contracts .
the contractor will include these requirements in every subcontract and modify language as necessary to make the program binding on all subcontracts .
the contractor agrees to ensure dbe firms have the opportunity to participate in the performance of the contract .
the contractor or its subcontractors will not discriminate based on race color national origin sex age or disability in the performance of the contract .
the contractor will carry out applicable requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of usdotassisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or result in the implementation of other remedy as the department deems appropriate .
it is required that a contractor verify a dbe firms certification with the idaho unified certification program ucp .
the ucp directory is located at httpsitd.dbesystem.com .
the contractor must use the itdnum form with all supporting documentation to the departments office of civil rights within num calendar days of bid opening or the contractors bid will be deemed irregular as specified in num .
the consultants must use the itdnum form for consultant agreements when making dbe goal commitments for contract goals .
if the department declares a dbe firm ineligible to perform work after the execution of a signed contract then the dbe firm may complete the work the department will count the dbe firms participation toward the contract goal although the dbe participation will not count toward the overall annual department dbe goal .
if a federal agency andor the department decertify a dbe before the dbe firm signs a contract then the contractor must replace the ineligible dbe firm with another dbe firm or demonstrate that it made a gfe to do so .
num .
the department determines the level of dbe participation on a contractbycontract basis determined by the departments contract goal methodology the contract bid documentation will state the contract goal percentage .
the department will credit dollar volumes of participation toward the contract goal .
the department will base the goal attainment on actual expenditures made to dbe firms providing a commercially useful function cuf as adjusted as specified in num.b.num .
this includes only work actually performed by and paid to the dbe firm and the cost of equipment supplies and materials except when the dbe purchases or leases the equipment supplies and materials from the contractor .
the bidder hereby certifies that it made gfes to seek out and consider dbe firms for work on the contract .
num .
the department will credit fees and expenditures toward to dbe goal as follows a .
num percent of the dollar value equal to the clearly defined portion of the work of the contract that the dbe performs with its own forces in a joint venture between a dbe and a nondbe firm .
b .
num percent of expenditures to a dbe manufacturer a dbe subcontractor or dbe professional consultant .
c. num percent of expenditures to a trucking firm that uses trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs or leases from another dbe firm including an owneroperator who is also certified as a dbe .
a dbe firm may lease trucks from a nondbe firm including an owneroperator .
as a result the dbe will receive credit for the total value of the services provided by the nondbe firm not to exceed the value of the services provided by the dbeowned trucks .
any additional participation by nondbe firms will receive credit only for fees or commission received .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction example dbe firm x uses num of its own trucks on a contract .
it leases num trucks from dbe firm y and num trucks from nondbe firm z. dbe credit would be awarded for the total value of transportation services provided by firm x and firm y and may be awarded for the total value of transportation services provided by num of the num trucks provided by firm z .
in all full credit would be allowed for the participation of num trucks .
in respect to the other num trucks provided by firm z dbe credit could be awarded only for the fees or commissions pertaining to those trucks firm x receives because of the lease with firm z .
a lease must indicate that the dbe has exclusive use and control over the leased truck .
this does not preclude the leased truck from working for others during the term of the lease if the dbe consents so long as the lease gives the dbe absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
a leased truck must conspicuously display the name and identification number of the dbe .
d. num percent of the fees for equipment leased from a dbe towards the contract goal when the contractor leases the equipment from a dbe provided the dbe owns or has the equipment registered in its name .
if the dbe obtains the equipment from other sources the engineer will only credit the net fee .
e. num percent of expenditures paid out to a dbe dealer for supplies provided and the dbe is not a manufacturer .
a regular dealer is a firm that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other facility that supplies materials articles or equipment for purchase or lease and regularly stocks sells and leases to the public during the usual course of business .
f. num percent of the net fee if deemed reasonable for dbe brokers packagers and manufacturers representatives .
num .
regarding dbe participation on contracts the contractor must provide the following also refer to required itdnum form to obtain subcontractor approval a .
the contractor will document and maintain the identity of the solicited dbe firms and nondbe firms or volunteer quotations .
information will be documented and made available upon request on the work and associated dollar amounts of each dbe firm and nondbe firm .
b .
the contractor will provide upon request the identification of the dbe firms and nondbe firms the contractor uses in the execution of the contract .
c. the contractor will maintain a description of the work and associated dollar amounts for each dbe firm and nondbe firm used in the execution of the contract .
d. the contractor will maintain and make available upon request the dollar amount of the participation of each dbe firm and nondbe firm utilized .
e. the contractor will provide upon request the name of the contractors designated official responsible for administering the contractors dbe program .
num .
the contractor will make a documented gfe showing actions and support for reaching the departments overall annual dbe goal .
num .
following is a list of efforts the department will evaluate to determine if the contractor utilized a gfe to obtain dbe participation .
in addition to the efforts made the department will consider when the contractor made the efforts and how intense the efforts were .
a .
has the contractor provided written notice to a reasonable number of specific dbes that their interest in the contract was being solicited in sufficient time to allow the dbes to participate effectively the contractor must describe efforts and submit a copy of all correspondence including emails soliciting bids from dbes .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
has the contractor followedup initial solicitation of interest by contacting dbes to determine with certainty whether the dbes were interested submit followup activity documentation e.g .
telephone logs letters emails .
c. has the contractor selected portions of the work to be performed by dbes in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the dbe goal including where appropriate breaking down contracts into economically feasible units to facilitate dbe participation the contractor must describe efforts in detail .
d. has the contractor provided interested dbes with adequate information about the plans specifications and requirements of the contract describe what action was taken .
e. has the contractor negotiated in good faith with interested dbes not rejecting dbes as unqualified without sound reasons based on a thorough investigation of their capabilities describe efforts .
f. describe any other efforts not covered by items a through e above that may demonstrate the contractors good faith efforts to obtain dbe participation .
num .
the dbe firm must perform a cuf on the contract in order for the engineer to count expenditures toward the contract goal and annual goal .
the department defines a cuf using general industry practices and the provisions of num cfr part num .
a dbe performs a cuf when a .
a dbe firm executes a distinct element of the work by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved in accordance with industry standard practices except where such practices are not consistent with dbe regulations and requirements and b .
the dbe firm receives due compensation as agreed upon for the work performed .
if a dbe does not perform or exercise responsibility for at least num percent of the total cost of its contract with its own workforce or the dbe subcontracts a greater portion of the work of a contract than would be expected on the basis of normal industry practice for the type of work involved the department must presume the dbe is not performing a cuf .
as with all noncuf determinations the dbe may present evidence to rebut this presumption .
num .
reporting and confirmation of dbe participation will be performed on the departments diversity tracking system at httpsitd.dbesystem.com as specified in num .
num .
breach of contractdamages .
whenever the engineer determines after investigating and obtaining evidence the contractor has not complied with num.a the engineer will take the following actions a .
inform the contractor in writing that the department staff observed specific listed infractions the dbe must correct within num or fewer business days and that failure to take corrective action will result in withholding all or part of the progress payments .
b .
the engineer will withhold progress payments when the contractor does not correct deficiencies .
c. if violations persist the engineer will contact the departments office of civil rights for direction on imposing one or more of the following actions num withhold all or part of any progress payments until the department determines the contractor is back in compliance .
num suspend the contract completely or in part until the contractor complies with no progress payments delivered during the period with no time extension made .
num cancel or terminate the contract for cause as specified in num .
num deduct from the contractors final payment on this contract or any progress payments on num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction current or future idaho federalaid contracts of an amount equal in value of the dbe committed work items not performed by the committed dbe firm .
if the department determines the contractor caused the failure or the failure was an unintentional error or oversight then the amount to be deducted may be reduced to num percent of the value of the unattained dbe participation based on the committed work items .
in addition to sanctions willful failure by a contractor or a dbe firm to comply with this contract or with the federal dbe regulations may result in disqualification from further or future contracting subcontracting or other participation in federally funded contracts andor department contracts .
the contractor has the right to appeal as specified in num .
num .
record keeping .
a .
a contractor must maintain all records relating to the dbe program and each subcontractor during the course of the work .
the contractor must preserve the documents for a period of num years from the date of final payment of the contract .
b .
the contractor or its subcontractor will make all records pertaining to the dbe program available for inspection copying or transcribing by authorized representatives of the department or the fhwa and must permit the representatives to interview employees as necessary .
c. failure to submit the required records upon request or to make these records available can be grounds for sanctions as specified in num.a.num .
num .
joint ventures .
a .
to increase the opportunity for dbe firms to participate in contracts dbe firms may enter into joint ventures with nondbe firms .
dbe joint venture applicants must complete the itdnumb schedule b form and submit it with the required documentation with their bid .
b .
the dbe partner of the joint venture must have a separate agreement showing the dbe partners bid items .
the agreement must be able to define the dbe partners distinct elements of it will perform with its own forces .
c. the contractor and the dbe firm must jointly submit a joint venture agreement and the department will evaluate it on a contractbycontract basis .
the contractor and dbe firm must submit the application with the bid documentation .
b .
disadvantaged business enterprise for racegender conscious contracts .
each contract will have a specific dbe availability percentage determined jointly by the departments design and construction staff and the office of civil rights .
the percentage determined will be included in the federalaid contract bid documentation .
the dbe directory is located at httpsitd.dbesystem.com .
regulations and statutes require and authorize the disadvantaged business enterprise program under titles i other than part b and v of the istea pub .
l. num num stat .
num and titles i iii and v of the teanum pub .
l. num num stat .
num titles i iii and v of the safetealu pub .
l. num num stat .
num and divisions a and b of the mapnum pub .
l. num num stat .
num fast act pub .
l. num .
num .
it is the departments policy to ensure dbes as defined in num cfr part num have an equal opportunity to receive and participate in the usdotassisted contracts .
the contractor will include these requirements in every subcontract and modify language as necessary to make the program binding on all subcontracts .
the contractor agrees to ensure dbe firms have the opportunity to participate in the performance of the contract .
the contractor or its subcontractors will not discriminate based on race color national origin sex age or disability in the performance of the contract .
the contractor will carry out applicable num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of usdotassisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or result in the implementation of other remedy as the department deems appropriate .
it is required that a contractor verify a dbe firms certification with the idaho ucp .
the ucp directory is located at httpsitd.dbesystem.com .
the contractor must use the itdnum form with all supporting documentation to the departments office of civil rights within num calendar days of bid opening or the contractors bid will be deemed irregular as specified in num .
the consultants must use the itdnum form for consultant agreements when making dbe goal commitments for contract goals .
if the department declares a dbe firm ineligible to perform work after the execution of a signed contract then the dbe firm may complete the work the department will count the dbe firms participation toward the contract goal although the dbe participation will not count toward the overall annual department dbe goal .
if a federal agency andor the department decertify a dbe before the dbe firm signs a contract then the contractor must replace the ineligible dbe firm with another dbe firm or demonstrate that it made a gfe to do so .
num .
the department determines the level of dbe participation on a contractbycontract basis determined by the departments contract goal methodology the contract bid documentation will state the contract goal percentage .
the department will credit dollar volumes of participation toward the contract goal .
the department will base the goal attainment on actual expenditures made to dbe firms providing a cuf as adjusted as specified in num.b.num .
this includes only work actually performed by and paid to the dbe firm and the cost of equipment supplies and materials except when the dbe purchases or leases the equipment supplies and materials from the contractor .
the bidder hereby certifies that it made gfes to seek out and consider dbe firms for work on the contract .
num .
the department will credit fees and expenditures toward to dbe goal as follows a .
num percent of the dollar value equal to the clearly defined portion of the work of the contract that the dbe performs with its own forces in a joint venture between a dbe and a nondbe firm .
b .
num percent of expenditures to a dbe manufacturer a dbe subcontractor or dbe professional consultant .
c. num percent of expenditures to a trucking firm that uses trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs or leases from another dbe firm including an owneroperator who is also certified as a dbe .
a dbe firm may lease trucks from a nondbe firm including an owneroperator .
as a result the dbe will receive credit for the total value of the services provided by the nondbe firm not to exceed the value of the services provided by the dbeowned trucks .
any additional participation by nondbe firms will receive credit only for fees or commission received .
example dbe firm x uses num of its own trucks on a contract .
it leases num trucks from dbe firm y and num trucks from nondbe firm z. dbe credit would be awarded for the total value of transportation services provided by firm x and firm y and may be awarded for the total value of transportation services provided by num of the num trucks provided by firm z .
in all full credit would be allowed for the participation of num trucks .
in respect to the other num trucks provided by firm z dbe credit could be awarded only for the fees or commissions pertaining to those trucks firm x receives because of the lease with firm z .
a lease must indicate that the dbe has exclusive use and control over the leased truck .
this does not preclude the leased truck from working for others during the term of the lease if the dbe num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction consents so long as the lease gives the dbe absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
a leased truck must conspicuously display the name and identification number of the dbe .
d. num percent of the fees for equipment leased from a dbe towards the contract goal when the contractor leases the equipment from a dbe provided the dbe owns or has the equipment registered in its name .
if the dbe obtains the equipment from other sources the engineer will only credit the net fee .
e. num percent of expenditures paid out to a dbe dealer for supplies provided and the dbe is not a manufacturer .
a regular dealer is a firm that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other facility that supplies materials articles or equipment for purchase or lease and regularly stocks sells and leases to the public during the usual course of business .
f. num percent of the net fee if deemed reasonable for dbe brokers packagers and manufacturers representatives .
num .
the department requires all bidders to furnish dbe commitments on the itdnum form and all supporting documentation for a construction contract within num calendar days of bid opening .
failure to comply will result in the contractors bid being deemed irregular as specified in num and will not be considered further .
the forms must contain a .
the identity of the dbe firms the contractor intends to use in the execution of the contract .
b .
description of the work and associated dollar amounts each dbe firm offered to perform .
c. statements of confirmation form signed by the committed dbes on the dbes company letterhead or on an email with a signature and contact information block stating the dbe plans to participate in the contract as specified in the contractors commitment .
d. the name of the contractors designated equal employment opportunity officer responsible for administering the contractors dbe program .
e. the contractor must use the abovementioned forms unless the committed dbe firms is unable or unwilling to perform because of default decertification or other relevant factors .
num .
the department considers the contractors commitment to meet the specified goal as clear prima facie evidence it made a gfe to obtain dbe participation on the contract .
num .
if the dbe commitment is below the contract goal amount the department will condition the award of contract to a determination made by the contractors dbe program coordinator on the gfes made to attain dbe participation .
following is a list of efforts the department evaluates when determining the contractors gfes to obtain dbe participation .
in addition to gfes the department will consider the timing and intensity of the undertaking .
a .
what efforts has the contractor made to conduct outreachadvertise to departmentcertified dbes the contractor must describe efforts and attach copies of screenshots published advertisements or proofs of publication if applicable .
b .
has the contractor provided written notice to a reasonable number of specific dbes that their interest in the contract was being solicited in sufficient time to allow the dbes to participate effectively the contractor must describe efforts and submit a copy of all correspondence including emails soliciting bids from dbes .
c. has the contractor followed up initial solicitation of interest by contacting dbes to determine with certainty whether the dbes were interested submit followup documentation e.g .
telephone logs letters emails .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num d. has the contractor selected portions of the work to be performed by dbes in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the dbe goal including where appropriate breaking down contracts into economically feasible units to facilitate dbe participation the contractor must describe efforts in detail .
e. has the contractor provided interested dbes with adequate information about the plans specifications and requirements of the contract describe what action was taken .
f. has the contractor negotiated in good faith with interested dbes not rejecting dbes as unqualified without sound reasons based on a thorough investigation of their capabilities describe efforts .
g. describe any other efforts not covered by items a through f above that may demonstrate the contractors good faith efforts to obtain dbe participation on this contract .
num .
a contract award is contingent on the department approving the contractors itdnum dbe commitment form .
the commitment requires the contractor to make continuing efforts throughout the contract to ensure that dbe participation remains at a level satisfying the following requirements a .
continuing dbe participation equals or exceeds contract goals .
b .
continuing dbe participation equals or exceeds the approved level that is less than the contract goal as allowed under num.b.num .
the contractor can not terminate a dbe subcontractor for convenience without the engineers written consent .
if situations or conditions arise preventing a dbe firm from completing the originally agreed upon work the contractor will take affirmative action steps to reestablish dbe participation at a level needed to meet the original contract goal or demonstrate a gfe demonstrating the contractor afforded other dbes the opportunity to assume the original work .
afterward the contractor must revise the dbe participation percentages on the itdnum dbe commitment form and the engineer must approve the revised plan with concurrence from the departments office of civil rights .
failure of the contractor to meet num.b will be a violation of the contract .
the engineer will count the value of work actually performed by and paid to the dbe firms toward the contractors dbe goal once the engineer verifies payment through the contractors reporting of monthly payments to its subcontractors and suppliers using the departments online tracking system .
num .
the dbe firm must perform a cuf on the contract in order for the engineer to count expenditures toward the contract goal and annual goal .
the department defines cuf by using general industry practices and the provisions of num cfr part num .
a dbe performs a cuf when a .
a dbe firm executes a distinct element of the work by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved in accordance with industry standard practices except where such practices are not consistent with dbe regulations and requirements and b .
the dbe firm receives due compensation as agreed upon for the work performed .
if a dbe does not perform or exercise responsibility for at least num percent of the total cost of its contract with its own workforce or the dbe subcontracts a greater portion of the work of a contract than would be expected on the basis of normal industry practice for the type of work involved the department must presume the dbe is not performing a cuf .
as with all noncuf determinations the dbe may present evidence to rebut this presumption .
num .
breach of contractdamages .
whenever the engineer determines after investigating and obtaining evidence the contractor has not complied with num.b the engineer will take the following actions num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction a .
inform the contractor in writing that the department staff observed specific listed infractions the dbe must correct within num or fewer business days and that failure to take corrective action will result in withholding all or part of the progress payments .
b .
the engineer will withhold progress payments when the contractor does not correct deficiencies .
c. if violations persist the engineer will contact the departments office of civil rights for direction on imposing one or more of the following actions num withhold all or part of progress payments until the contractor complies .
num suspend the contract completely or in part until the contractor complies with no progress payments delivered during the period with no time extension made .
num cancel or terminate the contract for cause as authorized in num .
num deduct from the contractors final payment on the contract or any progress payments on current or future idaho federalaid contracts of an amount in equal value of the dbe committed work items not performed by the committed dbe firm .
if the department determines the contractor caused the failure or the failure was an unintentional error or oversight then the amount to be deducted may be reduced to num percent of the value of the unattained dbe participation based on the committed work items .
in addition to sanctions willful failure by the contractor or a dbe firm to comply with this contract or with the federal dbe regulations may result in disqualification from further or future contracting subcontracting or other participation in federally funded contracts andor department contracts .
the contractor has the right to appeal as specified in num .
num .
record keeping .
a .
a contractor must maintain all records relating to the dbe program and each subcontractor during the course of the work .
the contractor must preserve the documents for a period of num years from the date of final payment of the contract .
b .
the contractor or its subcontractor will make all records pertaining to the dbe program available for inspection copying or transcribing by authorized representatives of the department or the fhwa and must permit the representatives to interview employees as necessary .
c. failure to submit the required records upon request or to make these records available can be grounds for sanctions as specified in num.a.num .
num .
joint ventures .
a .
to increase the opportunity for dbe firms to participate in contracts dbe firms may enter into joint ventures with nondbe firms .
dbe joint venture applicants must complete the itdnumb schedule b form and submit it with the required documentation with their bid .
b .
the dbe partner of the joint venture must have a separate agreement showing the dbe partners bid items .
the agreement must be able to define the dbe partners distinct elements of it will perform with its own forces .
c. the contractor and the dbe firm must jointly submit a joint venture agreement and the department will evaluate it on a contractbycontract basis .
the contractor and dbe firm must submit the application with the bid documentation .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num training .
a .
general .
the contractor will assist in locating qualifying and increasing the skills of minorities women and disadvantaged employees and applicants for employment .
consistent with the contractors workforce requirements and as permissible under federal and state regulations the contractor will make full use of training programs e.g .
apprenticeship onthejob training programs for the geographical area of contract performance in accordance with num cfr num appendix b to subpart a of part num when required .
the contractor as part of its equal employment opportunity eeo affirmative action program aap will provide onthejob training ojt aimed at developing full journeymen in the type of trade craft or job classification involved .
the number of trainees trained and hoursunits will be in the contract bid schedule .
in the event the contractor subcontracts a portion of the work the contractor will determine how many training hoursunits the subcontractor must assume and provide .
the contractor will retain the principal responsibility for meeting the training requirements and must complete num percent of the assigned training requirements .
the contractor will ensure the training requirement is included in the subcontracts when required .
where feasible num percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation will be in their first year of their apprenticeship or training programs .
the minimum acceptable ratio for journeymen to trainees on department contracts is num .
the ratio will not be greater than permitted under the plan approved by the u.s. department of labor usdol employment and training administration .
the contractor will distribute the number of trainees among the work classifications underutilized by minorities and women based on the contractors requirements and the availability of journeymen in the various underutilized classifications within a reasonable area of recruitment .
the department considers a reasonable area of recruitment as being num miles from the project site within the state of idaho and depending on weather conditions .
the departments office of civil rights must approve the contractors training program before the contractor may commence work .
the contractor will specify the starting time for training in each of the classifications .
the department will credit the contractor for each approved trainee or future trainee approved on the contract and will reimburse the contractor for each trainees .
training and upgrading of minorities and women toward journeyman status is the primary objective of the training specification .
the contractor must make every attempt to enroll minorities women and disadvantaged individuals i.e .
by conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority women and disadvantaged individuals on the project to the extent available and within the reasonable area of recruitment .
before determining compliance with the training specification the department will hold the contractor accountable for demonstrating all steps taken to meet the training specification .
additionally the department does not intend for the training commitment to be used to discriminate against any applicant for training whether or not the applicant is a minority woman or disadvantaged individual .
the contractor can not employ and train an employee as a trainee in any classification where heshe has previously completed a training course leading to journeyman status or where heshe previously earned journeyman wage in that crafttrade .
in addition the contractor must satisfy this requirement by including the appropriate questions in the employee application hiring process or by utilizing some other means to determine if a potential trainee received previous training or if a trainee previously attained journeyman status in the proposed craft .
regardless of the method used the contractors records must document the findings in each case .
the contractor must establish the minimum length and type of training for each classification for each training program selected by the department and the contractor and the fhwa must approve the program before commencing work .
in addition the department and the fhwa will approve any program reasonably calculated to meet the eeo obligations of the contractor and to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction classification concerned by the end of the training period .
the department will accept any apprenticeship program registered with the us dol bureau of apprenticeship training .
the department will additionally accept any training program registered with any other state apprenticeship agency recognized by the bureau approved by the us dol manpower administration andor bureau of apprenticeship and training provided the contractor administers the program consistently with the eeo obligation required by the federalaid contract .
the department intends for any training provided under the training specification to be for construction crafts and trades rather than clerktypists or secretarialtype positions however training is permitted in lower level management positions e.g .
project engineers estimators timekeepers where the contractor orients the training for construction project applications .
the department will permit a limited amount of training in the laborer class provided the contractor provide significant and meaningful training and the fhwa approves the training in advance .
the department will permit some offsite training as long as the training is an integral part of an approved training program and it does not comprise a significant part of the overall training .
trainees may earn apprenticeship credit on nonfederal construction contracts however the department will not reimburse the contractor for training on any nonfederal aid contracts .
except as otherwise noted below the department will reimburse the contractor num cents per hour of training given to an employee on this contract in accordance with an approved training .
once the engineer approves the training the department will also reimburse the contractor for training hours in excess of the number specified .
in spite of the source of training funds the department will reimburse the contractor the num cents per hour provided the other sources do not specifically prohibit the contractor from receiving other reimbursements .
the department will only reimburse the contractor for offsite training where heshe does one or more of the following num .
concurrently employs the trainees on a federalaid contract .
num .
contributes to the cost of the training .
num .
provides the instruction to the trainee .
num .
pays the trainees wages during the offsite training period .
the contractor must exhaust every attempt to provide the training according to the prescribed training program and to promote the trainee to journeyman status upon completion .
during the training the contractor must document all gfes made to deliver the training the results of the training and all efforts made to bring the trainee to journeyman standing otherwise the department will not reimburse the contractor for the required training .
it is not required that all trainees be onboard for the entire length of the contract .
the contractor will dispatch hisher responsibilities under the training specification once the contractor delivers acceptable training and the hoursunits specified in the contract .
while working on a usdot federally funded contract regardless of an existing collective bargaining agreement the contractor will follow us dot regulations requiring the contractor to pay the appropriate trainee wage rates num cfr num appendix b to subpart atraining special provisions as follows trainees will be paid at least num percent of the appropriate minimum journeymans rate specified in the contract for the first half of the training period num percent for the third quarter of the training period and num percent for the last quarter of the training period unless apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are enrolled as trainees on this project .
in that case the appropriate rates approved by the departments of labor or transportation in connection with the existing program shall apply to all trainees being trained for the same classification who are covered by this training special provision .
if a trainee enrolls in a usdol training program the proper approved rates apply .
if a trainees wage exceeds the prevailing wage rate then the training hours do not apply to the hoursunits specified in the contract unless approved first by the engineer .
trainee wages and apprenticeship ratios will be clearly notated by the contractor in the certified payroll .
failure to meet the ratio will result in the contractor paying full davisbacon wage in all associated trainee classifications .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the contractor will follow the prescribed training program and must furnish the trainee with a copy before commencing training .
upon completion of the training program the contractor will furnish each trainee with a certification indicating the type and length of training satisfactorily completed .
when requesting approval a completed training submittal will include num .
completed itdnum form including names of trainees .
num .
a copy of the training program for each trainee work classification .
num .
if usdol approved a copy of all associated usdol documents .
num .
schedule of work for the trainee on this project .
b .
reporting .
the contractor will maintain all training records and furnish periodic reports to the department including the itd num form in order to document the contractors gfes made to meet the training specification .
the contractor must provide the number of individuals to be trained in each classification and the training programs heshe plans to use .
the contractor must notify the engineer before making any payment to a trainee .
the payment information must include the trainees name address employee number and any previous training completed running tally of total training hours .
the contractor must certify the trainee has never attained journeyman status in the craft specified .
the engineer will review the information submitted and approve or disapprove the trainee .
the department will not provide training credit without the engineers prior approval .
the contractor must identify the trainees on the contractors certified payrolls .
num tribaltribal employment rights ordinances tero .
to comply with the cfr tribal employment rights ordinances tero applies to federalaid highway construction contracts on a tribal reservation covered by tero .
for stateaid contracts the contractor and its subcontractors will comply with applicable tribal regulations when working on a tribal reservation .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num earthwork num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num clearing and grubbing num description .
cut and dispose of trees with diameters of less than num inches brush shrubs logs and windfalls and remove and dispose of stumps including roots and debris from the designated areas .
areas to be cleared and grubbed are described by a line drawn num feet outside the perimeter of the grading area .
other areas to be cleared and grubbed will be as specified or as directed .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
preserve and protect trees within the construction area not requiring removal .
paint retained trees or shrubs which have been cut or scarred with an asphaltum base paint prepared especially for tree surgery .
merchantable timber in the clearing area not removed from the right of way before the start of construction is the contractors property .
do not dispose of materials by open burning .
the department will allow materials and debris to be disposed of at locations off the project site and out of view from the project site .
obtain the property owners written permission before placing the materials and debris .
submit copies of the agreements with property owners and comply with the requirements of num .
protect and preserve damaged trees shrubbery grass and other vegetative ground cover outside the construction area including median areas not to be graded that are within the construction area .
the contractor is responsible for damage resulting from the work .
take reasonable care to avoid damage by construction operations to streams and lakes adjacent to the project site .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the acre or by lump sum .
when the quantity is measured by the acre the engineer will measure the area cleared and grubbed in accordance with the stakes set by the contractor .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit clearing and grubbing acre or ls if a contract pay item for clearing and grubbing does not exist the work is incidental and the cost included in other earthwork contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num selective removal of trees or stumps num description .
remove and dispose of separate trees including their stumps and stumps designated for removal .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
a .
selective removal of trees .
remove designated trees including their stumps and dispose of the material as specified in num .
b .
selective removal of stumps .
excavate and remove stumps and dispose of the material as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each and as follows num .
for trees the engineer will measure the tree diameter at a point num feet above the ground line .
num .
for stumps the engineer will measure the stump diameter num feet above the ground line or at the top of the stump if it is less than num feet in height .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit selective removal of trees including stumps each selective removal of stumps each the removal of trees or stumps with diameters of less than num inches is incidental to other earthwork contract pay items .
if a contract pay item does not exist for selective removal of trees and stumps the work is incidental and the cost included in other earthwork contract pay items .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num miscellaneous removals num description .
remove wholly or in part and dispose of buildings fences structures old pavements pavement markings abandoned pipelines signs and other items that are not designated to remain except for the items to be removed and disposed of under other contract pay items .
salvage designated materials and backfill the resulting trenches holes and pits .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in fog coat num num construction requirements .
a .
general .
raze remove and dispose of buildings and foundations structures fences and other obstructions within the right of way as specified except utilities and those obstructions for which other provisions have been made .
remove salvageable material without unnecessary damage salvage material in sections or pieces that may be readily transported and stored at specified places within the project site .
unusable material may be disposed of out of view from the project site with written permission from the property owner before placing the material .
dispose of unusable material so no unsightly appearance will result .
submit copies of property owner agreements .
fill basements or cavities left by structure removal to the level of the natural ground surface and compact as specified in num.e if within the prism of the construction .
where new work abuts existing materials saw the edges of the existing materials to a vertical line .
remove and dispose of asbestos .
comply with the requirements of num .
b .
removal of bridges culverts and other drainage structures .
do not remove bridges culverts and other drainage structures in use by traffic until satisfactory arrangements have been made to accommodate traffic .
remove the substructures of existing structures to the natural stream bottom .
remove those parts outside of the stream to num inches below natural ground surface .
if portions of existing structures lie wholly or in part within the limits for a new structure remove only those portions as necessary to accommodate the construction .
salvageable materials are the contractors property .
remove structural steel identified as having a leadbased paint and deliver to an approved scrap metal recycler .
submit in writing the final disposition of structural steel with leadbased paint .
c. remove pavement markings .
remove pavement markings when they no longer apply by grinding abrasive blasting or hydroblasting .
apply fog coat to areas where pavement markings have been removed .
d. remove signs .
remove signs sign posts and sign post foundations .
if the sign is to be reinstalled protect signs during transportation and storage to prevent damage .
e. removal and disposal of asbestos .
num .
before commencing work a .
file the appropriate notification with the epas boise office at least num calendar days before beginning the removal operation .
see the departments design manual figure num for more information .
b .
submit the manufacturers certification for conformance to ansi znum when any of the following equipment is used in asbestos removal num hepa vacuum .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num negative pressure ventilation units .
num local exhaust ventilation equipment .
c. show compliance with occupational safety and health administration osha protective clothing and personal protective equipment requirements i.e .
num cfr num paragraphs g and h can be met throughout the work e.g .
adequate numbers and quantities of replacements to provide worker coverage for clothing respirators filters .
respirator selection will depend on initial and routine air samples to determine airborne asbestos levels .
see table num num cfr num paragraph g. d. show the capability to perform employee monitoring i.e .
personal air samples as required by osha for initial periodic and additional samples if required due to airborne concentration of asbestos fibers during the removal process .
see num cfr num paragraph d. e. comply with osha requirements with respect to employee health and safety during the project including record keeping .
see num cfr num paragraphs i k and l. f. train employees in asbestos work and health risk as required by num cfr numjnum .
num .
during abatement activities a .
provide at least num neshap certified person onsite during asbestos removal or renovation to monitor the stripping and removal of asbestos containing materials .
b .
institute engineering and work practice controls which would limit the exposure of workers to or below the exposure limits established in num cfr numc numfnumi .
c. provide clean hygiene facilities for workers who are exposed to asbestos in accordance with num cfr num paragraph i. d. perform required epa and osha asbestos air sampling .
the analytical laboratory will use national institute of occupational safety and health niosh analytical method pcam num or num or epas interim transmission electron microscopy analytical method whichever is appropriate .
e. notify the engineer if sampling shows airborne concentrations above allowable limits .
f. use a surfactant wetting agent when appropriate on the asbestos containing material to maintain a wet condition before and during removal operation until the material is containerized and sealed .
containers must be sealable impermeable bags or containers in accordance with num cfr numknum .
g. filter e.g .
sand filtration asbestos containing watersurfactant liquid waste before dumping into the sanitary sewer system .
the filter used for the watersurfactant waste must also be treated as asbestos waste .
h. ensure all containerized waste is marked and identified as asbestos waste in the following manner danger contains asbestos fiber avoid creating dust cancer and lung disease hazard i .
be responsible for ensuring site security of the areas where asbestos abatement is being done .
warning signs will be posted at all approaches to the location and entrances to all regulated areas in accordance with num cfr nume .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num j .
provide powered hand tools with local exhaust ventilation in accordance with num cfr numflv .
k. implement a compliance program when the permissible exposure limit pel for asbestos is exceeded in accordance with num cfr numfnum .
l. institute a respirator program in accordance with num cfr numfnum where respirator protection is required .
m. wetclean or hepa vacuum all surfaces which were exposed to the asbestos containing materials after all removal is accomplished and in accordance with num cfr numk .
n. perform clearance testing for airborne asbestos by sampling the air inside and outside each homogenous abatement area .
these samples will be analyzed using transmission electron microscopy tem .
clearance criteria will be met after num samples from inside and outside the abatement area have met the ttest criteria as specified by the epa .
num .
disposal .
a .
dispose of all containerized asbestos waste in accordance with num cfr part num. b .
provide a statement signed by the contractor that all asbestos waste materials were packagedcontained labeled properly for transport and disposed of in an approved landfill in accordance with num cfr part num .
this statement will include the location of the landfill and the quantity of material disposed .
num .
final report of removal activity .
prepare a report containing all the chronological information gathered throughout the removal operation e.g .
sample results contractor disposal statement copy of the notification form .
submit this report to the engineer within num calendar days after asbestos removalcleanup completion .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum by the foot by the square foot by the square yard or per each .
for asbestos related work acceptably completed work will be measured as specified in num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit removal of miscellaneous items ls removal of ___________ each ft sf sy asbestos removal and disposal ca the cost of the fog coat is incidental to the removal of pavement markings .
removed signs that are to be reinstalled are paid under num .
if a contract pay item for removal of miscellaneous items does not exist the work is incidental and the cost included in other earthwork contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num obliteration of old road num description .
shape and blend abandoned roads into the surrounding area after the pavement is removed as specified in num or as directed .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
when the old road requiring obliteration is no longer needed for traffic fill ditches .
rough grade scarify harrow and blade the entire road to present a pleasing appearance with slopes rounded and flattened to blend naturally with the adjacent topography .
break down bury or remove structures as specified where a contract pay item is not included in the contract .
when specified remove pavement as specified in num.a including removal of asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement down to unbound base or subbase material .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit obliteration of old road ls if a contract pay item does not exist for pavement removal in num the work is incidental and the cost included in other earthwork contract pay items .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num excavation and embankment num description .
excavate haul dispose of place and compact specified materials necessary to construct the work .
a. excavation .
this work includes excavation performed under this contract pay item regardless of the material encountered .
the department may divide excavation into schedules .
b. blasting .
use explosives to excavate rock .
perform the blasting operations per the engineerapproved blasting plan .
c. embankment .
construct embankments with soil aggregates rock or other materials .
num .
soil embankment .
embankments with materials that can be tested for inplace dry density in accordance with the waqtc fop for aashto t num method b .
num .
rock embankment .
embankments with materials that are too granular to test as specified in table num num .
num .
embankment with other materials .
embankments constructed with other materials instead of soil or rock if specified .
these materials include wood fibers lightweight concrete recycled glass and geofoam .
use recycled glass that meets the requirements of num .
d. shoulder grading .
blade process and finish material on the roadway shoulders to match the typical plan section .
e. soft spot repair .
excavate and repair soft spots as directed .
the engineer will identify soft spot repair locations on the project site .
additional areas beyond plan quantity may be identified .
complete all soft spot repairs before beginning any smoothness milling .
num materials .
a .
borrow .
obtain borrow from designated or approved sources .
b. granular borrow .
provide sand sand and gravel or sand and rock mixtures obtained from designated or approved sources .
select material with a sand equivalent greater than num .
the department will not require the sand equivalent if the material has less than num percent passing the no .
num sieve in accordance with aashto t num t num .
the contractor may use rap as granular borrow when approved .
mix rap in approximately equal proportions with material meeting the granular borrow requirements .
c. dust abatement .
use water for dust control .
d. shoulder materials .
existing shoulder materials and shoulder aggregate as specified in num .
e. soft spot repair .
provide materials for soft spot repair as follows num .
provide granular subbase backfill that meets num .
num .
provide ¾ inch aggregate for untreated base type a or b that meets num .
the department will sample the ¾ inch aggregate for untreated base from the stockpile .
num .
provide approved superpave hma pavement .
num .
provide cssnum tack that meets num .
num .
provide type iii subgrade separation geotextile that meets num .
num .
provide type ii biaxial geogrid that meets num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
provide coarse aggregate for concrete that meets num .
f. acceptance .
num .
granular subbase untreated aggregate for base and coarse aggregate for concrete .
the department will perform a single aggregate gradation for each item per source for acceptance .
document this gradation on an itdnum form .
num .
the department will accept type iii subgrade separation geotextile and type ii biaxial geogrid by certification .
num .
the department will accept granular subbase untreated aggregate for base coarse aggregate for concrete and hma including compaction by itdnum itdnum andor itdnum forms as applicable documented once per soft spot .
g. other materials .
use materials other than soils or rock in constructing embankments as specified .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
do not work beyond the dimensions and elevations specified .
stake and crosssection areas to be worked before removing material .
maintain a welldrained roadway .
maintain the subgrade during construction as specified in num and num .
dispose of surplus or unsuitable excavated material at approved locations .
comply with num .
obtain written permission to access project sites required by a stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp until final acceptance .
the property owner must acknowledge in writing they have been made aware the contract requirements may remain active and access to the project site may be required after the contract is complete .
alternatively the property owner by written agreement may take responsibility for complying with requirements e.g .
the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes permit by becoming a third party to the notice of intent noi .
do not waste material .
schedule excavation and borrow operations to avoid unauthorized waste of excavation .
protect erodible surfaces of cut and embankment slopes as specified in num .
remove and dispose of material originating outside the staked lines of any cut slope that fails due to causes beyond the contractors control .
remove and dispose of the material and refinish the cut slopes as directed .
b. slope finishing .
finish slopes as specified .
remove loosened or shattered rocks that will not remain in their natural position as determined by the engineer from the slopes .
remove and dispose of any safety hazards caused by overbreak from the contractors operation e.g .
rocks shattered or loosened outside the staked lines of cut slopes .
c. shoulder grading .
place shoulder aggregate in sufficient quantities to match the plans .
blade the shoulder aggregate back to the pavement edge to form a smooth slope with the paved roadway edge as specified or as directed .
compact the shoulder to meet class d requirements or as directed .
do not damage the new overlay .
use appropriate traffic control to accomplish this work .
replace any delineators mile posts or signs damaged during this operation with new departmentapproved materials at no additional cost to the department .
shoulder grading is not required in guardrail areas .
broom the pavement to remove aggregate and shoulder material remaining on the overlay surface .
grade shoulder material and vegetation to the paved surface .
remove and waste shoulder material and vegetation in an approved manner .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num d. process old road .
scarify the old road to full depth of the road ballast and spread to form a uniform foundation where the old road surfacing is within num feet of the roadbed of the new road .
e. excavation and repair of soft spot .
excavate the material from the soft spots using equipment that does not aggravate the soft spot condition or disturb the underlying soils .
waste excavated material at an approved contractorfurnished waste site .
excavate to the lines and grades as directed .
line the excavated area bottom with subgrade separation geotextile followed by biaxial geogrid or as directed .
verify the correct geogrid orientation roll direction if the geogrid axial strengths are unequal and place the weaker axis in the traffic longitudinal direction .
stretch out and temporarily secure the geotextile and geogrid in place with staples pins sand bags or as directed .
keep the geotextile and geogrid taut and free from wrinkles during the first backfill lift placement .
dump and spread the backfill in uniform lifts to maintain the required thickness at all times .
place backfill over the geogrid with low ground pressure num psi track equipment e.g .
small dozers designed for low ground pressure to avoid overstressing or disturbing the soft foundation soils .
place the first backfill lift over the geogrid at least num foot thick and not more than num feet thick loose .
compact the first backfill lift as directed .
construct subsequent lifts in accordance with num .
do not operate tracked construction equipment on the geogrid until it is covered by the first backfill lift .
do not turn tracked equipment on the first backfill lift .
operate rubbertired equipment on the geogrid at speeds of less than num mph and only if the underlying material is capable of supporting the load .
overlap adjacent geotextile and geogrid edges and roll ends at least num feet and lap in the same direction that the backfill will be spread .
cut the geotextile and geogrid and diagonally overlap around corners so that all locations will have at least a num foot overlap and buckling or wrinkling does not occur .
ensure that the geotextile and geogrid sections do not become separated at overlaps during backfill placement .
repair damaged geotextile and geogrid sections by placing a new piece of geotextile or geogrid over the damaged area with a minimum numfoot overlap on all edges at no additional cost to the department .
backfill areas that are excavated beyond the directed lines and grades at no additional cost to the department .
provide positive drainage away from soft spot excavations to the fore slope by trench excavation or as directed .
construct trenches a minimum of num foot wide line with subgrade separation geotextile and backfill with coarse aggregate for concrete .
construct trenches to drain by gravity to the ditch line .
cap the soft spot repair areas with num foot compacted thickness of untreated aggregate for base .
finish the base top surface to allow the hma pavement to match the existing pavement thickness .
tack the existing pavement vertical edges before paving .
match the existing pavement thickness .
compact the backfill and the base per class a .
compact the hma with num roller passes or as directed .
f. embankment construction .
prepare the natural ground surface as foundation for embankment by removing vegetation topsoil and other unsuitable materials and scarifying to provide a bond with the new embankment .
do not place embankment material until the foundation has been approved .
do not construct embankments with frozen materials or on snow covered or frozen foundations .
key new embankments constructed on existing slopes steeper than numhnumv with horizontal benches having a vertical face approximately num foot in height .
slope each bench to drain .
incorporate material excavated from the benches in the embankment or waste the material if directed .
drain seepage encountered from the embankment .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction construct the first lift of an embankment across swampy ground or saturated soils by enddumping with an adequate thickness to provide a stable surface .
construct the rest of the embankment in layers as specified .
allow embankment material containing excessive moisture to dry to the appropriate moisture content to meet compaction requirements .
provide sufficient water to facilitate compaction and to meet the required density .
this water is incidental .
num .
soil embankments .
place soil embankments in horizontal layers num inches thick or less before compaction .
uniformly compact each layer at the required moisture content and to the specified compaction class .
num .
rock embankments .
place rock embankments in horizontal layers num inches thick or less before compaction .
the engineer will allow the placement of isolated individual competent rock fragments having dimensions greater than the specified layer thickness if a .
the clearance between adjacent rocks provides adequate space for placement and compaction equipment to compact the materials in horizontal layers as specified .
b .
the rocks are placed more than num inches below the roadbed .
when a majority of the embankment materials are rocks or rock fragments distribute the material in a manner that avoids nesting and provides spacing between the rocks to allow for filling with smaller rocks and soils .
compact rock embankments as follows num compaction within num inches of roadbed and rock backfill of overexcavated areas in rock cuts place rock embankment in layers of numinches thick or less .
uniformly compact each layer with at least num full coverages of a vibratory roller meeting the minimum requirements specified in this subsection .
the contractor may reduce vibratory rolling by num full coverage for each increase of num pounds per impact above the specified minimum .
ensure at least num full coverages per numinch lift or fraction portion .
num compaction at a depth greater than num inches below roadbed place rock embankment in layers of num inches thick or less .
uniformly compact the material with at least num full coverages for each num inches of lift thickness or fraction portion with rollers of the following minimum requirements a vibratory rollers having a rated centrifugal force of num pounds per impact and at least num vibrations per minute .
limit the speed of vibratory rollers to less than num feet per minute .
b grid rollers having a static weight of at least num pounds and num pounds per foot of drum width .
limit the speed of grid rollers to less than num feet per minute .
the contractor may reduce rolling requirements num coverage per num inches or fraction thereof for each increase of num pounds per impact for vibratory rollers or num pounds per foot of drum width for grid rollers .
ensure at least num complete coverage for each num inches of lift thickness or fractional portion .
num .
density determination .
determine the maximum dry density in accordance with the following applicable test methods moisturedensity relations of soils aashto t num method c a block of concrete weighing at least num pounds and well seated on a compacted base may be substituted for the compaction base specified in aashto t num .
correction for coarse particles in the soil compaction test aashto t num family of curves one point method aashto t num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num compaction standard for coarse granular materials by use of the vibratory springload compactor idaho it num instead of idaho it num and when approved determine the maximum dry density of coarse granular material using the following test method moisture density relations of soils aashto t num method d determine inplace density and percent compaction by the following test methods inplace density and moisture content of soil and soil aggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth waqtc fop for aashto t num method b g. classes of compaction and density requirements .
if the class of compaction is not specified the department will require class a compaction .
before placement moisten or dry embankment material to a moisture content ranging from num percent under optimum moisture content to num percent over optimum moisture content as determined by aashto t num or aashto t num .
scarify existing materials below embankments to a depth of num inches moisture condition as specified and compact to class a compaction .
num .
class a compaction .
compact to class a compaction embankment and backfill material placed within an approximately numhnumv slope .
perform the work as specified in table num .
table num class a compaction material property required compactive effort classification more than num percent retained on the num inch sieve or more than num percent retained on the ¾ inch sieve as specified in num.e.num too granular to test less than num percent retained on the num inch sieve and less than or equal to num percent retained on the ¾ inch sieve minimum of num percent of maximum dry density by aashto t num method c testable material num .
class b compaction .
compact embankment and backfill material for the top num inches of subgrade to the density requirements for class a compaction .
compact other soil embankment more than num inches below the top of subgrade by routing construction equipment uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
the engineer may require additional compaction if routing of equipment does not provide satisfactory results .
num .
class c compaction .
compact designated areas under embankments to the density requirements for class a compaction to a depth of num inches .
the station limits of class c compaction will be as specified or as directed .
the width of compaction is between the top of subgrade shoulders .
num .
class d compaction .
compact the embankment and backfill material placed within median areas and on slopes that are outside the roadway prism on an approximate numhnumv slope with at least num coverage using approved tracktype or rubbertired earthmoving equipment .
ensure the fill material is moist before compaction .
the roadway prism is shown on the plans .
place the uncompacted embankment material in lifts num inches thick or less .
num .
construction of embankment with other materials .
compact materials in embankments constructed with materials other than soil or rock as specified .
h. blasting .
plan and execute the blasting operations in a safe and professional manner .
the engineer will review the blasting plan submittals solely for compliance with the contract plans and specifications .
the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction engineers blasting plan reviews do not relieve the contractor of responsibility for blasting plan accuracy adequacy and safety when implemented in the field .
the engineer has the authority to prohibit or halt the contractors test or production blasting operations if it is apparent through the methods being employed the excavated slopes are not being obtained in a stable condition or public safety could be jeopardized .
perform blasting operations including the transport storage handling and loading of explosives and blasting agents including primers and initiators under the blasterincharges direct supervision and as specified .
comply with all federal state and local laws regulations and conditional use permits .
num .
blasting plan submittals .
a .
general blasting plan .
submit a general blasting plan for review at least num calendar days before starting test or production drilling and blasting operations or as directed .
submit proposed drilling and blasting pattern details and the controlled and the production blasting controls .
include the following in the general blasting plan num station limits .
proposed shot station limits including blasting limits left and right of centerline number of holes to be drilled and holes per blast .
num scaled plan and section views .
proposed drill pattern on a scaled plan with section views including free face burden spacing blasthole diameter blasthole angles lift height and subdrill depth .
base the plan on project stationing or specific area in a materials source .
num loading diagram .
proposed loading diagram showing the type and amount of explosives primers and initiators as well as stemming location and depth including the stemming material description .
show explosive quantity to be used per delay and per blast .
num initiation sequence .
a proposed blastholeinitiation sequence diagram and explanation including delay times for each blasthole .
identify the delay system type and associated delay periods .
num information and bulletins .
manufacturers product information sheets or technical bulletins for explosives primers delays and initiators to be used .
num angle or fandrilled holes .
indicate if angledrilled holes or fandrilled holes are expected to be used during the initial pioneering operations .
num safety plan .
include the following information a the blasterincharge name and telephone number .
the department will require the blasterincharge to be responsible for i directing the daytoday drilling and blasting operations .
ii clearing the blast site before blasting .
iii preparing required reports e.g .
daily blast logs daily explosive material consumption loss reports .
iv checking for misfires and determining the blast site is safe to enter after each blast .
b proposed flyrock or blast debris prevention methods .
include an acceptable method to control flyrock before firing in areas where flying rock may result in personal injury or unacceptable damage to property or the work .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c methods proposed to clear the blast area and to control blasting site access by unauthorized personnel during loading and blasting operations .
establish a method of warning for personnel of an impending blast consisting of a numminute warning signal to notify anyone in the area that a blast will be fired within a numminute period and a num minute warning signal to notify anyone in the area that a blast is imminent .
once the postblast inspection is completed satisfactorily by the blasterincharge sound an all clear signal so anyone in the area understands that blasting operations are finished .
c a notification plan for blasting operations .
the contractor is responsible for notifying the necessary persons e.g .
local residents construction workers of an impending blast .
d methods proposed to document assess and correct misfires or undetonated explosives including a recovery and disposal plan in the event that misfires can not be refired .
e methods proposed and planned to control ground vibration and air overpressure as well as calculated scaled distances to each affected structure .
f a detailed vibration and blast monitoring plan .
g a fire prevention and protection plan .
h a plan to identify potential blast site electrical hazards including a lightning detection and protection plan .
i an emergency plan to address injuries .
at least num blast crew member will be trained in first aid procedures .
j include a disposal plan for explosive packing materials .
k include a time of day for blasting operations to be conducted .
do not blast before sunrise or after sunset .
num temporary traffic control plan .
submit a temporary traffic control plan for review and approval whenever blasting is planned within num feet of a roadway .
cover or remove signs when there are no explosives in the area or the area is otherwise secure .
the blasterin charge is required to determine whether road users in the blasting zone will be endangered by the blasting operation .
if there is danger do not permit road users to pass through the blasting zone during blasting operations .
b .
detailed blasting plan .
after the general blasting plan has been reviewed and deemed complete submit for each blast site a sitespecific detailed blasting plan for review .
include the information specified in the general blasting plan supplemented by sitespecific information as necessary for successful and safe blasting .
include test blasting procedure details design and expected results .
show the adequacy of the detailed blasting plan by drilling blasting and excavating short test sections .
ensure the test blast sections are large enough to properly evaluate the detailed blasting plans ability to achieve the expected results .
for production blasting contain test blast areas within production blast areas .
the department will not allow test blast areas within the final excavated slope area for control blasting except in cases where the contractor can justify to the engineer there is not a reasonable alternative due to space availability or other constraints .
perform test sections for variations of the detailed blasting plan and backslopes unless space is limited and due to necessity the first shot is the test shot .
include final backslopes excavated with or without controlled blasting .
perform the test section to show the blast will not damage the final slope the acceptable rock fragmentation is provided and flyrock ground vibration num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction and air overpressure are properly controlled .
do not start fullscale drilling and blasting operations until the test blasting is completed and approved .
c. final blasting plan and supplemental revisions .
after satisfactorily completing the test blast sections revise the detailed blasting plan to include test blast results and submit as the final blasting plan .
include supplemental revisions as necessary to document when the blasting operation differs from the parameters provided in the general blasting plan revised detailed blasting plan or as directed due to poor blasting results backslope damage or unsafe conditions .
do not begin production drilling and blasting until the final blasting plan has been reviewed and deemed complete .
if changes occur after the final blasting plan has been deemed complete submit supplemental revisions for review .
do not resume production drilling and blasting until the supplemental revisions have been reviewed .
num .
blasting operations .
a .
all blasting operations .
num general .
follow the final blasting plan and supplementals .
before each blast properly dispose of explosive packing materials and remove them from the project site .
drill production blastholes on the patterns shown in the final blasting plan and within num blasthole diameters of the marked hole location .
if more than num percent of the holes are drilled outside of this tolerance except as approved fill these holes with crushed stone or approved material and then redrill them at the proper locations at no additional cost to the department .
if the redrilling is due to changes in geology ground conditions or other constraints not identified in the contract these redrilled holes will not be calculated in the num percent tolerance .
check the blastholes before explosives are loaded .
if the blastholes are not drilled to the correct depth are plugged or are unable to be fully loaded clean out or redrill those holes .
if more than num percent of the blastholes are shallower than in the final blast plan redrill the shallow holes to the proper depth at no additional cost to the department .
prove the proposed stemming material performs as required by a test blast .
fit blastholes with a temporary plug to keep overburden drill cuttings or other foreign material from falling into the holes after drilling .
fill unused drill holes with crushed stone or approved materials .
where controlled blasting is required to form the final backslope drilling ahead is not allowed until the test section results have been completely evaluated and if necessary the contractor has made revisions to achieve the required results .
unsatisfactory test blast results include unstable slopes fragmentation beyond the indicated lines and grade flyrock excessive ground vibration air overpressure or violation of other requirements .
the department will not pay for revised blasting methods adopted to produce an acceptable test blast .
other requirements for controlled and production blasting operations specified elsewhere in num also apply to the blasting carried out in conjunction with the test blast .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num flyrock .
if flyrock occurs during the blasting operations to the extent of endangering workers equipment or is propelled outside the project site cease blasting operations until the contractor reviews the final blast plan modifications and determines the cause and solution to the flyrock problem to the engineers satisfaction .
num scaling and stabilization .
remove or stabilize rock on the postblast cut face that is loose hanging or otherwise creating a potentially dangerous situation as determined by the engineer .
do not drill the next lift until this work has been completed .
scale postblast cut slopes at the engineers direction and at such frequency as required to remove loose rocks overhangs or hazards .
the scaling extent will be determined by the engineer .
use rock bolting rock dowelling or other approved stabilization techniques when inplace stabilization is required as determined by the engineer .
num blasting logs .
blasting records will be kept for each blast and submitted weekly .
include the time blast date blasting locations patterns blasthole number and depth and the following information a blast station limits including limits left and right of centerline .
b plan and section views of drill pattern including free face burden blasthole spacing blasthole diameters blasthole angles lift height and sub drill depth .
c loading diagram showing type and amount of explosive primers initiators and stemming location and depth .
d blastholeinitiation sequence including delay times and delay system in each blasthole .
e trade names and sizes of explosives primers and initiators used .
f ground vibration and air overpressure noise records .
g blasterincharge signature .
the blasting logs are for quality control record keeping and future blast plan revisions .
the engineers blast log review does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the blasting log .
num daily explosive material consumption and report of loss report e.g .
batf daily summary of magazine transactions .
include the blasterincharge signature on all reports .
num preblast survey .
before blasting the contractor will provide a thirdparty preblast survey of the interior and exterior of nearby buildings utilities and other structures that may be subject to damage from blastinduced ground vibration or air overpressure effects .
contact the property owner or resident to setup a preblast survey inspection appointment .
document the preblast survey in sufficient detail to allow the engineer to determine if the contractors blasting operation has caused damage .
submit a survey copy to the engineer and to the structures owner no less than num calendar days before blasting begins .
if the property owner or resident does not respond after num documented attempts by at least num different contact methods e.g .
certified mail knock on the door within num calendar days of the last attempt the contractor will notify the engineer .
the engineer will determine how to proceed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num postblast survey .
within num weeks after blasting operations have concluded or as directed reexamine the items inspected during the preblast survey .
the same thirdparty that provided the preblast survey will provide the postblast survey .
for each structure contact the property owner or resident to setup a postblast inspection appointment .
reexamine each item using the preblast survey photos audio recording or video to confirm whether or not changes have occurred .
notify the structures owner if changes have occurred .
obtain a signature or acknowledgement e.g .
email certified letter return receipt of the property owners receipt of the postblast survey .
within num calendar days after blasting operations have concluded or as directed submit to the engineer and the property owner a final written postblast survey report addressing the items inspected in the preblast survey as performed by the third party .
specifically note in the report damage observed or measured in the postblast survey .
repair damage to the public or private property caused by the use of explosives as a first order of work .
the department will not pay for damage repairs .
num vibrations .
the contractor will determine the maximum allowable peak particle velocity ppv and airblast to ensure structures and utilities within the blast area are undamaged .
num explosive charge weight .
the contractor will determine the maximum charge weight per num millisecond delay in accordance to industry standards and professional experience to ensure the structures and utilities within the blast area are undamaged .
num blast monitoring .
monitor blasting operations with seismographs andor video cameras .
b .
production blasting .
production blasting is rock fragmentation blasts resulting from more widely spaced production holes drilled throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast line or from the production holes in a rock quarry .
take necessary precautions in the production blasting to minimize blast damage to the final cut slope .
c. controlled blasting .
controlled blasting refers to the controlled use of explosives and blasting accessories in carefully spaced and aligned drill holes to produce a smooth surface or shear plane in the rock along the specified final excavation backslope .
controlled blasting techniques allowed are presplitting and cushion blasting .
other controlled blasting techniques may be used if approved .
use controlled blasting in the excavation of rock or hard cemented materials where cut slopes are equal to or steeper than ¾hnumv even if the rock or hard materials can be ripped except at the engineers discretion based on the contractors demonstration the finished slope meets the slope design .
controlled blasting is typically not required for rock quarry operations .
remove potentially dangerous boulders or other material located beyond the excavation limits before drilling controlled blastholes .
removal of material located beyond the excavation limits is extra work .
num presplitting .
presplitting is the detonation of a single line of lightlyloaded closelyspaced drill holes before the detonation of adjacent production holes .
perform presplitting in accordance with the following requirements a control drilling operations by using proper equipment and techniques to ensure that no hole deviates from the plane of the planned slope by more than num inches in num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num either parallel to or normal direction to the final excavation slope .
the engineer will allow offset benches up to num feet wide for multilift blasts .
if shown on the plans specified or directed the offset benches will be removed during excavation of the next lift to a slope of at least num below horizontal .
the department will not pay for presplit holes exceeding these tolerances .
b extend presplit holes at least num feet beyond the production hole limits or to the end of the cut as applicable .
c limit presplit blastholes to num feet in length for each lift of blasting .
do not exceed the specified lift height after a test blast is performed .
d begin the controlled blasthole drilling at a point that will allow for necessary offsets and adjust at the start of lower lifts to account for drift that may have occurred in the upper lifts .
the department will ensure the offsets are within the project site .
e determine if the hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth before placing charges .
if drillhole conditions vary from dry to wet use appropriate explosives types andor blasting accessories to accomplish the specified results .
f do not use bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil anfo as explosive for controlled blasting .
g use only standard explosives specifically manufactured for presplitting in presplit holes .
h as long as satisfactory presplit slopes are obtained the contractor may either detonate the presplit blasting holes forming the slope face before drilling for production blasting or detonate the presplit blasting holes forming the slope face and the production blastholes within the same blast event provided the presplitting drill holes are detonated at least num milliseconds ahead of the adjacent production blastholes .
num cushion blasting .
cushion or trim blasting is similar to presplitting except the detonation along the cut face is performed after the detonation of the production holes .
where the horizontal distance from the cut face to the existing rock face is less than num feet the contractor may cushion blast instead of presplitting .
with the exception of these criteria the requirements specified for presplitting also apply to cushion blasting .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
excavation borrow and granular borrow will be by the cubic yard in its original position from field survey or photogrammetric crosssections using the averageendarea method with no correction for curvature or by the ton .
num .
where it is impractical to measure material by the averageendarea method or in its original position alternate practical methods with appropriate adjustments may be used .
the total will not include the volume of material used for purposes other than as directed .
a measurement will not be made for rock excavation made below the roadbed unless the excavation is required or directed .
a measurement will not be made for borrow replaced by unauthorized rock or soil excavation below roadbed .
num .
channel change excavation will be measured only for excavation necessary to construct the channel or ditch from established bank elevation to flowline grade .
earthwork necessary to construct the cut or fill to bank elevation will be included in the roadway quantities .
overbreak will not be included in the measurement of excavation .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
water ordered for dust abatement will be measured by the thousands of gallons mg where num mg equals num gallons by means of calibrated tanks distributors or accurate water meters .
num .
controlled blasting will be measured by the foot of drilled hole as shown on the blasting or driller logs .
the department will measure only those holes drilled and detonated for creating a final excavation face as controlled blasting .
num .
when granular borrow is measured on the weight basis the water in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the material will not be measured .
the department will correct the measured quantity for moisture content in accordance with aashto t num .
num .
quantities of granular borrow replaced by other approved materials e.g .
rap is considered as a portion of granular borrow .
num .
acceptable shoulder grading work will be measured by the mile for each direction of travel .
num .
the engineer will measure acceptable soft spot repair by contingency amount .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit excavation cy excavation schedule no.____ cy controlled blasting linear ft channel change excavation cy borrow cy or ton granular borrow cy or ton water for dust abatement mg excavation and repair of soft spots cy shoulder aggregate cy or ton shoulder grading per mile soft spot repair ca embankment and backfill are incidental and the work included in other contract pay items .
the department will pay for removal and disposal of unsuitable material from below the roadbed under excavation and repair of soft spots .
excavation and repair of soft spots includes excavation drying and compaction of inplace material .
if approved the department will pay for replacement material under the applicable contract pay item or as extra work .
the department will not pay for replacement material if used for the contractors convenience .
the department will pay for removal of slides slumps settlements and associated work not caused directly by the contractors operations at the contract unit price for excavation where the slide occurred or as extra work .
the department will pay for water the engineer orders for controlling dust for safety of the traveling public for the safety of people residing near the project site to protect crops from possible dust damage or that is applied in the public interest at the dust abatement contract unit price .
the department will pay for excavation that must be stockpiled or stored before final placement including topsoil at the contract unit price for each handling approved unless paid for as another item of work for the second handling .
the department will pay for rap if used as granular borrow at the granular borrow contract unit .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department will not pay for rock overbreak .
production blasting is incidental and included in other roadway contract pay items .
blasthole locating and depth control is incidental to the blasting work .
the department will pay for postblast cut slope stabilization or scaling necessitated by the rock structural geology as extra work .
the department will not pay for postblast cut slope stabilization or scaling made necessary because of the contractors blasting operations .
the department will pay for the overdrill limits made necessary for offset benches in multilift cuts as described in num.g.num.c.num.a .
material removal and sweeping of the roadway surface is considered incidental to this item .
granular subbase ¾ inch aggregate for untreated base hma pavement tack subgrade separation geotextile and biaxial geogrid will be paid under their respective pay items .
otherwise pay by force account if these pay items are not in the contract .
coarse aggregate for concrete will be paid by force account .
the department will accept granular subbase untreated aggregate for base coarse aggregate for concrete and hma including compaction by itdnum itdnum andor itdnum forms as applicable documented once per soft spot .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num stripping designated source material deposits num description .
strip earth overburden and other unsuitable material from designated source material deposits .
keep topsoil in separate stockpiles from other stripped materials .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
clear and grub the portion of the source necessary for the removal of the material and remove earth overburden vegetation or other deleterious materials .
dispose of wasted material and debris .
the department will not pay for stripping of overburden from the contractorprovided material sources .
the department will not pay for the development of alternate material deposits .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard in its original position or in approved stockpiles using the averageendarea method .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit stripping designated source material deposits cy if the contract does not include a stripping designated source material deposits contract pay item this work is incidental and the cost included in other contract pay items when a material source is designated in the contract .
clearing and grubbing is incidental and included in the contract unit price for stripping designated source material deposits .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num interceptor ditches num description .
construct interceptor ditches .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
construct interceptor ditches as specified or as directed .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot along the centerline and profile of the completed ditch .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit interceptor ditches ft num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num small ditches num description .
construct small ditches which the department defines as having an average volume of less than num cubic yard per foot of ditch .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
construct small ditches as specified .
if a typical small ditch section is not specified construct small ditches by sidecasting the excavated material .
conduct the work in a manner to minimize interruption to irrigation water flows and make suitable arrangements with irrigation users to minimize claims for damage to crops or interruption to farming operations .
construct dikes first when they are needed to construct ditches across low ground or as directed .
use approved impervious material for the dikes .
place material in horizontal layers and compact each layer to num percent of maximum dry density as specified in num.e.num and then construct a small ditch in the top of the dike .
direct irrigation water if available into dike ditches for testing and approval before acceptance by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot along the centerline and profile of the completed ditch .
the engineer will measure dikes and cuts constructed to carry small ditches as specified in num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit small ditches ft num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num structure excavation and compacting backfill num description .
excavate and dispose of materials required for the construction of structures unless otherwise specified as structural excavation .
include necessary drainage pumping bailing sheeting shoring and the construction and removal of cribs and cofferdams .
remove old structures or parts as required .
place and compact backfill material as compacting backfill .
include sloping and cleaning up the sites .
the contract pay item structure excavation schedule no .
num includes excavation for bridges boxes and stiffleg culverts .
the contract pay item structure excavation schedule no .
num includes excavation for pipe andor other structures .
num materials .
the engineer will test material for backfill in accordance with aashto t num method b excluding materials too granular to test .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
remove and dispose of unsuitable foundation material below the designed elevation as directed .
use suitable surplus excavated material in the construction of embankments .
replace material removed below the elevation as specified with approved material .
sheet and brace trenches if necessary .
do not remove sheeting or bracing until backfill has progressed enough to prevent damage to pipelines or structures .
remove sheeting and bracing used in supporting structure excavation .
where rock hardpan or other unyielding material is encountered and a yielding material is required remove the unyielding material below the grade specified and backfill as directed .
do not begin structure construction until the foundation has been approved .
place backfill consisting of suitable material in layers of num inches or less and compact to class a compaction as specified in num.f .
for backfill material placed within num feet of a concrete structure or retaining wall uniformly distribute the backfill material in layers of no more than num inches and compact with lightweight compacting equipment having an impact force of num to num pounds .
compact the backfill to the density requirements for class a compaction as specified in num.f before successive layers are placed .
for backfill material determined by the engineer as too granular to test apply at least num compacting equipment passes per numinch lift or less .
compact backfill in areas not within a roadway prism or special backfill around pipe underdrains not requiring a higher degree of compaction for some other purpose to approximately the same density as the adjacent undisturbed soil or gravel .
perform compaction by any effective means .
b. conduit and structural plate arch .
backfill pipe culverts and other conduits with approved material first .
carefully hand tamp under the lower ¼ of the overall pipe diameter then compact for the balance of the pipe height and for the specified amount of cover to be placed over the pipe .
c. structures .
level excavated rock surfaces below the structure footing elevation with class num concrete before constructing bridge and box culvert foundations .
use appropriate equipment and take precautions to ensure that the foundation soils are not distributed during excavation that may affect their bearing capacity .
remove disturbed material from the excavation and backfill to the plan elevation with approved material at no additional cost to the department .
take precaution when pumping water from foundation enclosure interiors to prevent the possibility of concrete materials being carried away .
do not pump during the placing of concrete or for at least num hours after unless it is done from a suitable sump or well point separated from the concrete work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction place suitable backfill material in layers through water around abutments wing walls and piers .
compaction is not required for this placement .
do not place backfill against newly constructed masonry or concrete structures before meeting the requirements in table num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard based on planned quantity .
the engineer will measure structure excavation as the volume of material within prismlimiting planes as follows num .
conduit and structural plate pipe as specified .
num .
other structures a .
the bottom of the foundation .
b .
the vertical planes num feet outside of and parallel to the outside lines of the structure in the case of bents with individual column footings the entire bent are considered as num structure .
c. with upper limits as follows num in embankment sections the existing ground surface as crosssectioned .
num in roadway cut sections or channel changes the planes of the roadway cut or channel change as excavated .
the engineer will measure compacting backfill by the cubic yard of backfill material placed and as follows num .
conduit as specified .
num .
other structures a .
below the original ground surface .
a volume equal to the volume of structure excavation less than the volume of the permanent structure including the opening contained within the limits of measurement for structure excavation .
b .
above the original ground surface .
the volume contained between the outside walls of the structure and vertical planes num feet outside the original ground surface or the horizontal plane num foot above the top of the structure or of the subgrade whichever is less .
c. volumes of backfill placed through water around abutments wing walls and piers will not be included in the measurement of quantities for compacting backfill .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit structure excavation schedule no .
num cy structure excavation schedule no .
num cy compacting backfill cy when the contract does not include a contract pay item for structure excavation or compacting backfill this work is incidental and included in other contract pay items .
the department will pay for required backfill or bedding material whose source is other than structure excavation at the contract unit price for the material being used or as extra work if no unit price was established .
if the contractor is directed to remove material below the elevation specified the department will pay for the excavation work at the contract unit price or as extra work .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department will pay for class num concrete used to backfill rock excavation below the bottom of the design footing grade based on the actual quantity used but not to exceed a prism num foot outside the footing neat lines with an average depth of num foot below the bottom of footing .
a payment will not be made by the department to excavate backfill and compact material removed for safety purposes .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num source reclamation num description .
reclaim land used for borrowing material or mining for aggregates in departmentcontrolled sources .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in topsoil num seed num fertilizer num mulch num num construction requirements .
do the following where usable material has been removed from the source num .
salvage and replace the top num foot of topsoil .
num .
grade and contour the slopes and floor to a pleasing natural appearance .
num .
replace topsoil seed fertilize and mulch .
num .
perform other work required by the reclamation plan and contract .
num .
seed the area as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum for each source involved .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit source reclamation lump sum when the contract does not include an item for source reclamation the department will consider the work incidental and the cost included in other contract pay items .
if the contractor receives approval to use an alternate source of material the department will not pay for source reclamation .
the department will provide seed to the contractor at no cost for designated sources only .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num erosion and sediment control num description .
this work consists of constructing installing maintaining and removing when required best bmps during the contract to prevent or minimize erosion sedimentation and pollution of waters of the u.s. as covered in num including wetlands .
the contractor will coordinate the construction of temporary bmps with the construction of permanent bmps to ensure economical effective and continuous erosion and sediment control throughout the work .
control erosion and sediment using berms dikes dams sediment basins erosion blankets netting fiber wattles compost socks inlet protection gravel mulches grasses slope drains and other approved erosion control devices or methods .
install erosion control bmps before sediment control bmps .
items not included in the contract in the approved swppp or in the ppp will be installed and maintained on a contingency basis and as approved .
provide a qualified wpcm as a construction stormwater manager throughout the work .
see num for wpcm qualification requirements .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in seeding num aggregate for untreated base treated base and road mix num or less passing the num num metal apron num pipe num riprap num commercial fertilizer num mulch num rolled erosion control product recp num turf reinforced mat trm num fiber wattle num compost sock num inlet protection num gabion and revet mattress num geotextile num and num provide other approved materials that meet commercial grade standards .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
submit for approval a plan and schedule as specified in num for installing temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures at the preconstruction conference or before the start of the applicable construction .
incorporate ground disturbing activities including haul roads material sources staging areas and excess material sites .
do not start work until the plan including the erosion and sediment control schedule and methods of operations have been approved .
refer to the departments bmp manual and the standard drawings for appropriate selection and installation guidance .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction cease earthwork operations when erosion or sediment control bmps are determined by the engineer to be inadequate .
resume only after demonstrating effectiveness of erosion and sediment control bmps .
provide temporary erosion control measures immediately when seasonal limits prohibit permanent measures .
do not construct slopes more than num feet vertically regardless of slope angle before installing perimeter sediment control measures .
for projects num acres or less or located in an arid semiarid areas during the seasonally dry period initiate installation of stabilization measures immediately in any areas of exposed soil where construction activities have ceased .
complete installation within num calendar days after initiated .
for projects more than num acres initiate installation of stabilization measures immediately in any areas of exposed soil where construction activities have ceased .
complete installation within num calendar days after initiated .
incorporate erosion and sediment control measure to prevent sediment transport from cut or embankment slopes control measures may require the removal of sediments during maintenance operations .
the engineer may allow sediments removed to be used e.g .
topsoil .
preserve the function of control measures and prevent water pollution when disposing of sediments .
install all bmps in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions details or as directed by the engineer .
size and place bmps to adequately handle the runoff water from a numyear numhour storm event .
b .
temporary erosion and sediment control measures .
refer to the departments bmp manual for guidance on temporary erosion and sediment control measures .
c. permanent control measures .
num .
seeding rolled erosion control products recp turf reinforced mats trm and mulching .
seed slopes and other ground disturbed areas .
it is not necessary for slopes to be completely constructed before seeding a finished portion of the slope .
seed as specified in num .
num .
install recps trms mulch and hecps as specified num.e and num.f .
num .
gabion and revet mattress .
provide and construct as specified in num .
num .
stone filter bermsdams .
use rock in constructing stone filter bermdam that is graded with a minimum size of num inch to a maximum of num inches measured along the longest dimension .
num .
sediment basins .
construct sediment basins as specified or as directed .
stabilize the inlet outlet and emergency spillway of the basin as approved .
num .
inlet and outlet protection .
protect the ground at the inlet and outlet of pipes and other water discharges .
d. water pollution control manager .
prepare maintain revise and amend the stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp .
ensure project compliance with the erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention installation and maintenance requirements water quality monitoring and discharge reporting requirements .
manage all pollution control measures at the project site including field controls inspections records and cgp requirements specified in num and the cgp through the life of the contract .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
slope drain and opentop culvert by the foot along the length of plastic liner or pipe .
num .
inlet protection waterbar stabilized construction entrance sediment trap and sediment basin by the each .
num .
silt fence fiber wattle and compost sock by the foot along the ground .
num .
diversion channel diversion ditch dike berm and siltation berm by the foot along the centerline of constructed item .
this measure includes the excavation and embankment required to construct the item including the materials used to construct outlet and overflow structures .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
soil binder by the acre of surface treated .
num .
gabion and revet mattress by the cubic yard based on the nominal size of the units .
num .
stone filter berm and dam by the cubic yard using the averageendarea method .
num .
wpcm by the lump sum .
the lump sum includes full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantity at contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit slope drain ft sediment trap each silt fence ft diversion channel ft diversion ditch ft dike ft berm ft opentop culvert ft waterbar each siltation berm ft stabilized construction entrance each soil binder acre gabion cy revet mattress cy stone filter berm type____ cy stone filter dam type____ cy sediment basin each inlet protection each fiber wattle ft compost sock ft water and pollution ca water pollution control manager ls the department will not pay to install or repair temporary erosion and sediment control measures required due to the contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent measures as part of the work .
erosion and sediment control measures required for areas outside the project site e.g .
borrow pits materials sources haul roads plant sites and storage and disposal areas is incidental to the work .
the department will pay for seeding recps trms mulching hecps and other seeding items under the appropriate contract pay items in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the following work is incidental and included in other contract pay items num .
berm ditch pipe apron rock and excavation used to direct drainage to a slope drain or to construct a stabilized discharge area .
num .
geotextile rock sandbags and plastic liner used in construction of sediment trap diversion channel or diversion ditch .
num .
reinforced wire fence geotextile and posts for silt fence .
num .
diversion channels diversion ditches swales berms and dikes constructed as a standard part of the contractors normal operation within the slope limits .
num .
ditches built in conjunction with dikes and berms .
num .
swale and rolling dip .
num .
geotextile and graded aggregate for stabilized construction entrance .
num .
inspection of erosion and sediment control measures .
num .
maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures .
num .
removal of compost sock .
the department will pay for structure excavation and compacting backfill for gabion and revet mattress under num .
the department will pay for geotextile for gabion and revet mattress under num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num topsoil num description .
excavate suitable topsoil from stockpiles sources outside the roadway or from its natural position within the right of way that will be occupied by the roadway .
place and key in the topsoil on designated constructed cut and fill slopes and other designated areas after grading operations are complete .
num materials .
obtain topsoil from approved sources from the soil profile a horizon layer that has a friable loamy character and contains an organic matter amount normal to the region .
obtain topsoil from welldrained arable land that does not contain subsoil from the soil profile b horizon layer refuse roots heavy or stiff clay stones larger than num inch coarse sand sticks brush litter pesticides contaminated soil noxious weeds or other material detrimental to vegetative growth and establishment .
ensure the county weed authority has visually inspected approved sources for presence of noxious weeds before delivery or placement .
test sources if noxious weeds are located within or adjacent to the source site and obtain approval from the county weed superintendent or authorized personnel from the department or idaho state department of agriculture that the source is acceptable to use on the project site .
incorporate vegetative matter into topsoil except brush trees or noxious weeds .
other deleterious material e.g .
plastic glass metal rocks will not exceed num percent by weight or volume .
provide microorganism inoculants that contain a diverse mix of regional specific mycorrhizal species for specific condition provide macronutrients and micronutrients that are tolerant of chemical imbalances in the soil produce humic compounds and binding compounds and improve soil structure .
soil amendments num remove and dispose of vegetation at topsoil sources before taking materials from the source .
provide topsoil as specified below in table num and table num .
table num topsoil gradation sieve size percentage by weight required to pass a square mesh sieve num in num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num table num topsoil chemistry property minimum maximum ph a num num esp b num ec c num organic material num num a ph negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration b esp exchangeable sodium percentage c ec electrical conductivity milliohms per cm at num f num construction requirements .
remove treat and process all areas containing noxious weed seeds andor plants with herbicide applications or by specific heat treatments and material rotation for composted material .
process composted material heat and rotation for at least num calendar days to kill all viable weed seed and plant material .
test topsoil to verify the topsoil is free of viable noxious weed seed or plant parts herbicides fungicides or other chemical residues harmful to plant or animal life .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction obtain a representative composite topsoil sample num months in advance of final placement and seeding applications to determine soil ph nutrients and organic materials present .
provide a soil analysis by an north american proficiency testingperformance assessment program naptpap accredited laboratory to determine if extra nutrients fertilizer ingredients and organic materials mulch or compost are needed to amend the soil and verify the soil does not contain noxious weeds .
the following labs are accredited to perform the required tests stukenholtz laboratory twin falls id .
western laboratory parma id .
northwest agriculture consultants kennewick wa .
collect num random soil samples from a minimum of num different locations and thoroughly mix and homogenize the samples into a single composite sample .
sample all changes in soil e.g .
color and texture changes .
submit num composite sample to an accredited soil laboratory for soil testing and analysis .
obtain a soil analysis report with original soil ph fertilizer and organic material content as well as recommended soil amendments to be incorporated into the topsoil before beginning subsequent revegetation activities .
excavate to a depth of at least num inches unless otherwise directed .
place topsoil excavated from the roadway directly on cut and fill slopes without use of stockpiles whenever conditions and work progress permits .
where this procedure is not possible excavate topsoil and stockpile within the project site .
stockpile topsoil so natural drainage is not disturbed or causes offsite sediment transport .
surround topsoil stockpile with bmp sediment controls .
treat topsoil stockpiles with temporary soil stabilization measures immediately upon stockpile completion .
for topsoil stockpiles exceeding a height of num feet that are undisturbed for longer than num months mix the top num foot with the rest of the stockpile to ensure that living organisms are distributed throughout the stockpile at the time of final placement or add microorganism inoculants after final placement in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
apply microorganism inoculants as dry granular mixes tablets or injectable soluble .
do not place topsoil until the areas to be covered have been properly prepared .
after final slope grading and before topsoil placement all slopes will be roughened or crossripped in a horizontal direction to the slope to assist in anchoring the topsoil .
rip shank spacing will be num inches and a maximum num inch penetration depth or as directed .
topsoil placement on smooth slopes is not allowed .
following slope preparation distribute topsoil to all disturbed areas to be reseeded or revegetated during the specified seeding window .
place topsoil spread and key into the underlying material by the use of harrows rollers or other suitable equipment or methods .
incorporate approximately ½ pound of the total seed mix per acre into the topsoil before placement begins .
apply the remaining seed mix over the topsoil after placement .
ensure the minimum topsoil placement thickness is num inches unless otherwise specified .
a .
soil improvements .
soil improvements consisting of fertilizer and soil amendments e.g .
soil nutrients organic materials or combinations or soil conditioner will be approved by the department including the type and quantity for each improvement as determined by a laboratory soil analysis and recommendation .
add and lightly incorporate soil improvements by spreading on the topsoil surface and raking into or incorporating into the top num to num inches of the topsoil before subsequent seedbed preparation activities as specified in num.b .
for numhnumv slopes or steeper or where hydroseeding is specified soil improvements may be added to the mulch mixture and applied during the hydroseeding application if approved .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num for drill seeding applications apply soil conditioner before seeding and lightly incorporate into the soil wherever possible .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
topsoil obtained from the roadway and placed directly on designated slopes or placed in stockpiles will be by the cubic yard in its original position .
num .
topsoil obtained from the roadway and construction areas and placed directly upon cut and fill slopes ditch bottoms and other designated areas will be measured by the square yard in its final location .
num .
topsoil measured by the square yard will be parallel to the slope .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit topsoil cy or sy the department will pay for topsoil excavated from the roadway at the excavation contract unit price as specified in num .
the department will pay for topsoil in its final position which includes the cost to stockpile if necessary and to haul to the project site where it is to be placed and finished on the slope .
the cost to provide and incorporate soil amendments including fertilizer andor organic materials is incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num roadside cleanup num description .
remove and dispose of stumps foundations debris and boulders and perform minor leveling and drifting of material between the limits of clearing and right of way only as specified or as directed .
the department will not pay for necessary cleanup resulting from the contractors operations .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
not specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as specified in num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit roadside cleanup contingency item ca num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num migratory bird treaty act mbta compliance num description .
manage the avoidance of migratory birds to comply with the migratory bird treaty act of num mbta and num idaho code .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
comply with the mbta requirements num idaho code and num .
num .
provide an approved qualified wildlife biologist .
num .
survey and monitor for migratory bird activity num .
develop an avoidance plan submit num sets of the plans for review and approval num calendar days in advance of performing any work .
show migratory bird nest location avoidance plan and visual markers for nest location in the plan .
num .
implement exclusion devices bird repellent liquid nesting prevention measures or remove and dispose of partially constructed and unoccupied nests of migratory or nongame birds on a regular basis to prevent their occupation .
num method of measurement .
mbta compliance will be measured as specified in num.c.num or by invoice as agreed and approved before performing the work .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit migratory bird treaty act compliance ca num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num bases num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num granular subbase num description .
provide place and construct num or more courses of granular subbase on a prepared subgrade .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
the engineer will accept granular subbase for quality requirements at the point of delivery .
use the following standard methods for tests compaction standard for coarse granular materials by use of the vibratory springload compactor idaho it num inplace density and moisture content of soil and soil aggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth aashto t num method b prepare and submit an idaho it num density curve for the subbase material to be incorporated into the work before placing granular subbase on the roadway .
this testing is incidental and a separate payment will not be made .
rap may be used in granular subbase when approved .
do not exceed a rap size of num inches .
the engineer will visually verify the rap daily in place to confirm the size requirement has been met .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
do not exceed a maximum compacted thickness of num foot for each layer .
construct the subbase in num or more layers of approximate equal thickness if the required compacted thickness of the granular subbase layer exceeds num foot .
the compacted thickness of a single layer of the subbase may be increased to num foot when vibrating or other approved types of special compacting equipment are used .
the minimum compacted thickness of any course is num times the maximum particle size .
mix the subbase as specified in num.a .
after each layer has been spread compact the layer for its full width .
continue compaction until at least num percent of the maximum dry density is attained as specified in num .
determine the inplace density of granular subbase in accordance with aashto t num method b .
maintain the surface of each layer during the compaction operations so a uniform texture is produced and the subbase is firmly keyed .
apply enough water uniformly over the base materials during compaction to ensure proper compaction is achieved .
b. granular subbase material in stockpile .
provide granular subbase material in stockpiles at designated locations .
stockpile as specified in num.b .
c. granular subbase material load haul and place .
load haul and place designated stockpiled granular subbase material on the roadbed .
spread process distribute shape and compact the granular material as specified in this subsection .
the department will specify location and cost of the stockpiled subbase material .
d. recycled asphalt pavement rap .
mix rap in approximately equal proportions with material meeting the requirements for granular subbase .
ensure the final mix of materials is of uniform consistency .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction perform inplace density testing for rapsubbase mixtures at the frequency specified in this subsection using the following procedure num .
establish the roller pattern by using inplace density from an uncorrected nuclear gauge .
the required compaction is achieved and final process rolling is defined as when the final roller pass adds no more than num pounds per cubic foot to the previous inplace density .
num .
make sufficient additional roller passes to determine that a false break or levelingoff point is not used for compaction density .
num .
reestablish the roller pattern when mixture properties in the processed material change and at least every num square yards of finished surface for each lift .
num .
perform additional tests where soil conditions have changed or as determined by the engineer to ensure the required compaction is achieved .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
granular subbase by the ton or cubic yard .
moisture in the material in excess of num percent will not be paid for .
num .
granular subbase in stockpile by the ton or cubic yard .
num .
granular subbase load haul and place by the ton or cubic yard .
moisture in the material in excess of num percent will not be paid for .
rap if used in granular subbase will not reduce the quantity of granular subbase but will be measured as a portion of granular subbase without additional pay .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit granular subbase ton or cy granular subbase in stockpile ton or cy granular subbase load haul and place ton or cy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num emulsion treated base num description .
construct num or more courses of emulsion treated base .
num materials .
provide aggregate as specified in num .
the engineer will accept aggregate for quality requirements at the point of delivery .
provide emulsified asphalt of the type and grade as specified in num .
the engineer will accept the material at the point of delivery .
use the following standard test methods compaction standard for coarse granular materials by use of the vibratory springload compactor idaho it num inplace density and moisture content of soil and soil aggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth aashto t num method b instead of idaho it num if approved the maximum dry density of aggregate base may be tested with moisture density relations of soils aashto t num method d prepare an idaho it num density curve or an aashto t num method d moisturedensity curve for the aggregate base and submit before placement .
this testing is incidental .
num construction requirements .
mix the aggregate emulsified asphalt and water in an approved stationary plant .
mix the emulsified asphalt with water at a ratio of num and uniformly mix with the aggregate base until approximately num percent diluted emulsified asphalt by weight of dry aggregate has been added .
additional water may be required to complete the mixing of the aggregate base and to facilitate compaction .
place the base material on the roadbed by means of an approved aggregate spreader .
do not exceed a maximum compacted thickness of num foot for each layer .
construct the base in num or more layers of approximate equal thickness if the required compacted depth of the base exceeds num foot .
the compacted depth of a single layer of the base may be increased to num foot when vibrating or other approved types of special compacting equipment are used .
shaping and spreading may be performed with motor graders or approved methods in areas where it is not practical to operate the spreader .
compact for its full width after each layer has been spread and continue compaction until num percent of the applicable maximum density is attained .
produce a surface for each layer with uniform texture and aggregate that is firmly keyed .
maintain the surface during the compaction operations .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for emulsion treated base and emulsified asphalt by the ton .
the engineer will not use batch weights as a method of measurement .
the engineer will use the weight of the emulsion treated base quantity in the accepted base and will include the weight of aggregate and emulsified asphalt .
the engineer will deduct the weight of water and emulsified asphalt in excess of num percent of the weight of dry aggregate from the weight of the emulsion treated base .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit emulsion treated base ton emulsified asphalt for emulsion treated base ton num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num aggregate base num description .
provide place and construct num or more courses of aggregate on a prepared surface .
num materials .
provide aggregate as specified in num .
the department will accept the aggregate from the windrow or roadway .
if purchased and stockpiled acceptance will be at the crushing plant .
the contractor may use crushed glass in base .
uniformly blend the crushed glass with the aggregate .
ensure the glassaggregate blend meets the aggregate gradation specified .
the contractor may use glass crushed to ¾ inch minus up to approximately num percent by weight of aggregate base .
place the glassaggregate base material at least num foot below unpaved surfaces .
the contractor may use glass crushed to num inch minus up to approximately num percent by weight in aggregate base with no restriction on location .
use the following standard methods for tests compaction standard for coarse granular materials by use of the vibratory springload compactor idaho it num inplace density and moisture content of soil and soil aggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth aashto t num method b instead of idaho it num if approved the maximum dry density of aggregate base may be determined as follows moisture density relations of soils aashto t num method d prepare and submit an idaho it num density curve or an aashto t num method d moisture density curve for the aggregate base before placing .
this testing is incidental .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
do not exceed a maximum compacted thickness of num foot for each layer .
construct the base in num or more layers of approximate equal thickness if the required compacted thickness of the base exceeds num foot .
the compacted thickness of a single layer of the base may be increased to num foot when vibrating or other types of special compacting equipment are used with approval .
mix the base by num or a combination of the following num methods num .
stationary plant method .
mix the aggregate and water in an approved mixer .
add enough water during the mixing operation to facilitate compaction .
after mixing place the base material with an approved aggregate spreader .
num .
travel plant method .
after the material for each layer of base has been placed through an aggregate spreader or windrow sizing device uniformly mix the base by a traveling mixing plant .
during the mixing add enough water to facilitate compaction .
num .
road mix method .
after material for each layer of base has been placed mix the material by motor graders or other approved equipment until the mixture is uniform .
during the mixing add enough water to facilitate compaction .
num .
premixed method .
mix the aggregate and water as approved before placement .
add enough water during the mixing operation to facilitate compaction .
after mixing place the base material with an approved aggregate spreader .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction after each layer has been spread compact the layer for its full width .
continue compaction until at least num percent of the maximum dry density is attained .
determine the density of aggregate base in place in accordance with aashto t num method b .
maintain the surface of each layer during the compaction operations so a uniform texture is produced and the aggregate firmly keyed .
apply enough water uniformly over the base materials during compaction to ensure proper compaction is achieved .
b .
aggregate base material in stockpile .
provide aggregate base material in stockpiles at designated locations .
before stockpiling material clear and smooth the stockpile site and obtain the engineers approval .
provide stockpiles that are neat and regular in form and occupy as small an area as possible .
construct stockpiles by first distributing the material to be stockpiled over the entire base and building upward in successive layers not more than num foot in depth .
do not end dump or conveyor stack materials over the sides of the stockpile .
c. aggregate base material load haul and place .
load haul and place stockpiled aggregate from designated sources on the roadbed .
spread process distribute shape and compact as specified in this subsection .
the department will specify the location and cost of the stockpiled aggregate .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
aggregate base will be by the ton or cubic yard .
num .
aggregate base material stockpiled will be by the ton or cubic yard .
num .
aggregate base load haul and place by the ton or cubic yard .
the engineer will deduct the weight of water in excess of num percent of the weight of dry aggregate from the weight of the aggregate base .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit ____aggregate type _____for base ton or cy ____aggregate type _____in stockpile ton or cy ____aggregate type _____load haul and place ton or cy a separate payment will not be made for glass used in aggregate base .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num reconditioning num description .
recondition the surface of an existing road shape the shoulders and dispose of surplus material .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
scarify the roadbed including the shoulders to the depth and width specified .
pulverize the scarified material so num percent or less of this material exclusive of gravel or stone is retained on a numinch sieve .
moisten and compact the pulverized material to the required density .
blade and water the surface if directed and continue blading and watering during the rolling operations .
satisfactorily maintain the surface until the base or surface course has been placed .
apply additional water to prevent checking or raveling if needed .
excavation and repair soft spots as specified in num.d .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
reconditioning will be by the station or mile and will include blading of shoulders scarifying and pulverizing of the existing roadbed handling of existing asphalt mixtures compaction of the roadbed finishing of the surface and maintenance of the completed surface .
num .
excavation of soft spots and soft spot repair by the cubic yard in its original position using the averageend area method and will include excavation drying replacement and compaction of the inplace soil or with contractors optional replacement material if approved by the engineer .
num .
water by the thousands of gallons mg where num mg equals num gallons transported or conveyed by means of calibrated tanks or distributors or by means of accurate water meters .
only the water used in mixing materials or ordered to keep the surface moist will be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit reconditioning station or mile water for reconditioning mg excavation of soft spots cy soft spot repair cy the department will pay for removal and disposal of unsuitable material under excavation of soft spots .
the department will pay for backfill material used to replace unsuitable material under its respective item or as extra work .
the department will not pay for the contractors optional replacement material .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num opengraded base num description .
construct num or more courses of opengraded base on a prepared surface .
num materials .
provide material for opengraded base as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
place the first layer of opengraded base directly over type ii subgrade separation geotextile in a lift of at least num inches thick but less than num inches thick .
the minimum lift thickness is num inches and the maximum lift thickness is num inches above the initial lift .
compact the first layer with at least num full coverages and compact subsequent layers with at least num full coverages for each numinch lift thickness with a vibratory roller meeting the following requirements num .
a rated minimum centrifugal force of num pounds per impact .
num .
at least num vibrations per minute .
num .
operate at a speed less than num feet per minute .
do not allow equipment on the geotextile before placing the first lift of opengraded base .
do not dump the open graded base directly on the geotextile .
dump the material on the previously placed lift and push ahead .
switch off the vibrators if there is evidence of the vibrating rollers causing excess movement depressions or voids other than what is considered normal compaction displacement until otherwise directed .
during the compaction process keep the opengraded base visibly moist .
keep soil mud or other undesirable fine material from accumulating on its surface once the opengraded base is in place .
if contamination does occur during the construction operation replace material as directed at no cost to the department .
place and compact opengraded base class iii as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard neat line measurement of the roadway section or the ton .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit opengraded base class cy or ton the department will pay for geotextile under num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num cement recycled asphalt base stabilization crabs num description .
recycle the existing roadway pavement and a portion of the base layer to the lines grades and thicknesses of the typical sections .
accomplish the crabs work in num steps num .
prepare roadbed .
num .
pulverizing the existing pavement .
num .
crabs adding cement and mixing .
num .
shaping and compacting .
follow the specified grade control class .
num .
class i crabs use fieldestablished elevations .
num .
class ii crabs use prescribed elevations .
num materials .
use materials conforming to the following requirements num .
portland cement .
use cement as specified in num .
num .
water .
use water that is reasonably clear and free from oil and other contaminates .
num .
testing .
perform quality control density testing using an uncorrected nuclear gauge in accordance with fop for aashto t num method a .
conduct a minimum of num compaction test for every num square yards of crabs work .
num construction requirements .
before mobilization submit a plan of operations for crabs processing including traffic control .
a .
general .
num .
weather limitations .
construct the crabs while the existing pavement temperature is above and is expected to remain above num f for num hours after final completion .
do not spread portland cement over puddled water during rain when rain is imminent or when wind will not allow uniform spread on the roadway .
num .
operational restriction .
add cement and process no more of the roadway than can be repaved in num days of paving production .
num .
traffic control .
unless the approved traffic control plan requires traffic to be detoured to an alternate roadway open the roadway to traffic at the end of each working day by either relaying the unprocessed pulverized material and compacting firmly or adding cement and processing for a finished product .
num .
grade control requirements .
a .
on class i work establish the final crabs surface elevation in the field .
finish the crabs surface to within num foot of the fieldestablished elevation and provide the fieldestablished or specified cross slope at num feet from centerline and at the edge of the crabs surface .
b .
on class ii work obtain a grade book from the department establishing grade elevations for the top of the crabs layer .
finish the crabs surface to within num foot plus of the elevations provided .
do not waste material before approval of the final elevation for either class .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b .
initial pulverization .
num .
preparation of roadbed .
before pulverization strip and waste any vegetation encountered inside the typical crabs section .
num .
pulverize existing surface .
pulverize the pavement to the widths and depths as specified and at a minimum to the full depth of the existing pavement .
reduce the material to a minus numinch size .
a .
document the existing pavement thickness every num mile in each lane .
submit this documentation to the department .
ensure that the full thickness of the pavement is being pulverized .
b .
notify the engineer of any poor quality subbase materials e.g .
soft spots clays silts organic materials as they are encountered .
c. shape and compact the pulverized material before the crabs mixing process .
num .
crabs process .
a. proportioning .
furnish portland cement in bulk .
add the cement to the pulverized material using a mechanical spreader at the specified rate within num percent for the full width of the typical section .
synchronize the application rate with the machine speed to provide uniform application .
spread the cement in a dry state and do not allow blowing of the cement .
after spreading the portland cement mix the cement with the pulverized material to obtain the required depth and width .
distribute only as much portland cement as can be mixed and compacted within the same working day .
b. mixing .
use a road mixing machine pugmill auger or crossshaft mixer capable of providing a uniform homogeneous mixture .
introduce the water through the mixing machine using a metering device .
add the correct quantity of water to produce a mixture between num and num percent by weight of mixed and compacted material .
do not allow water leakage from equipment .
do not add excessive water .
mix the existing pulverized pavement base and cement to the full depth as specified .
shape and roll where necessary to allow the roadway to be open to traffic i.e .
approaches to businesses and residencies .
more than num pass of the mixer may be required .
introduce water with the final mixing pass .
ensure and document the mixing thickness every num mile in each lane .
in superelevated curve sections shape the material before the application of portland cement .
num .
shaping and grade control .
provide continuous grade and crossslope control including surveying blue topping or wire line control depending on crabs class .
it is expected that the pulverized material will swell num to num percent before compaction .
use the centerline of the existing roadway as the typical section control line .
construct the cross slope as shown .
adjustments may be required to the existing roadway profile to provide a consistent grade and to avoid adding new material or wasting existing material .
if necessary reestablish the roadway profile and cross slopes to provide a roadway section which is consistent with the typical section .
obtain approval for transverse grades .
for crabs class ii work the grades in the departmentprovided gradebook may be adjusted to avoid adding new material or wasting existing material upon approval .
use equipment for shaping and setting grade capable of automated mechanical or electronic setting of grade and cross slope angle .
account for swell in the grading operation which may leave the processed surface above the adjacent surface .
incorporate all pulverized material into the crabs layer .
shape and finish the crabs surface without adding new material or wasting existing material .
do not waste or use pulverized material as shoulder material .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num grade designated shoulder material to a location and elevation on the shoulder that is below the top of the crabs layer .
do not use cementtreated material for shoulder material .
place windrow material designated for removal adjacent to but outside the limits of pulverization .
dispose of material following final shaping and before application of cement .
num .
compacting and finishing .
use a motor grader mechanical spreader paver or grade trimmer to shape the mixture .
for the compaction train include at least num rubbertired roller num vibratory roller and num vibratory padfoot soil compactor .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work ..
the vibratory soil compactor will have a minimum centrifugal force of num tons minimum drum width of num inches and minimum pad height of num½ inches .
use the vibratory padfoot soil compactor after the cement has been mixed .
cover the material with a minimum of num complete passes .
additional passes may be required to achieve compaction .
perform all other final process rolling and blading after completion of the vibratory pad foot operation .
establish a roller pattern using inplace density from an uncorrected nuclear gauge .
use the roller pattern as a standard from which to measure compaction .
compaction is achieved when additional roller passes add no more than num pound per cubic feet to the previous inplace density .
ensure a false break or levelingoff point is not used for compaction density .
reestablish a new roller pattern when mixture properties change and at a minimum of every num square yards of finished surface .
perform grading and rolling without wasting material .
accomplish all shaping final process rolling and associated blading within num½ hours of the initial blending of the cement and water .
do not use vibratory rollers on the crabs surface beyond the num½ hours after the addition of water and cement .
num .
protection .
keep the processed and compacted material visibly moist at all times until the initial lift of plant mix is applied .
use equipment that will apply the water in a fog or mist type application free of pressure on the surface being treated .
num .
paving .
pave over the crabs as soon as possible following compaction and within num hours after the introduction of cement and water to the crabs .
when the approved traffic control plan requires traffic to be detoured to an alternate roadway the num hour paving requirement may be waived provided the crabs surface is kept sufficiently moist .
tightblading and static rolling may be required before applying the initial lift of plant mix due to surface deformation raveling or other irregularities created by traffic .
ensure there is no loose material on the crabs surface at the time of plant mix paving .
after paving dress the roadway shoulders to provide a uniform appearance .
num .
prime coat .
immediately before placement of the initial lift of plant mix pavement apply a prime coat full width at the rate specified or as directed .
do not apply a prime coat to the crabs if standing water is on the surface .
apply the prime coat as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
pulverized existing surface and crabs will be measured by the square yard .
portland cement will be measured by the ton using certified weights indicating the truck and trailer number tare weight gross weight net weight and date .
when the measurement of portland cement is based on certified weight certificates the following will apply num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
an occasional loaded transporting vehicle will be weighed on a local certified scale and a copy of the weight certificate will be submitted before the discharge of material .
the engineer will determine when loaded transporting vehicles will be weighed .
num .
each empty transporting vehicle will be weighed before the vehicle leaves the project site .
for discrepancies between the weight certificates and weights obtained at the project site the engineer will be the sole judge in determining the quantity of portland cement used .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit cement recycled asphalt base stabilization class ___ sy portland cement ton pulverize existing surface sy the following work is incidental and the cost included in the crabs contract pay items including num .
stripping and disposing of unsuitable materials .
num .
grade control work .
num .
additional required pulverization and mixing passes .
num .
brooming .
num .
grading rolling and shaping .
num .
mixing water and water required to keep the crabs surface moist for shoulder dressing .
num .
blade the shoulders to be smooth and at a uniform slope leaving no clumps or debris .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num surface courses and pavement protect private property bridges sign posts guardrail and other roadway structures from being discolored by asphalt .
if structures become discolored by asphalt remove the discoloration .
repair or repaint surfaces if required .
apply asphalt at the temperature recommended by the supplier .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num tack coat num description .
prepare and treat an existing surface with asphalt .
num materials .
provide asphalt of the type and grade specified .
provide asphalt as specified in num .
the engineer will accept the asphalt at point of delivery .
num construction requirements .
provide distributor equipment as specified in num .
patch and clean the existing surface and ensure it is without irregularities to provide a reasonably smooth and uniform surface to receive the treatment .
remove and replace unstable corrugated areas with suitable patching materials .
clean the edges of existing pavement that are to be adjacent to new pavement to permit adhesion .
broom before applying tack coat .
provide brooms that are in good condition and capable of sweeping a path at least num inches wide without loosening or displacing embedded materials .
sweep the surface as directed .
accompany each broom by a shadow vehicle if working on highways open to traffic .
equip the shadow vehicle with at least num roofmounted high intensity rotating or strobetype amber flasher that is readily visible from front and rear for num mile .
lightly spray the surface of the roadway to be swept with enough water to prevent brooming operations from creating dust to the extent that it would violate air pollution regulations or create a safety hazard .
do not broom from the surface onto maintained shoulderforeslope areas where the adjacent property owner cares for the area and maintains turf or landscape .
apply asphalt tack so the application is uniform the limits of placement are appropriate there is the least amount of inconvenience to traffic and traffic will not cause pickup or tracking .
mix approximately equal volumes of emulsified asphalt and water before application .
do not apply asphalt if surface or weather conditions can prevent proper construction .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for the tack coat as diluted emulsified asphalt by the gallon with no correction for temperature .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit ____ diluted emulsified asphalt for tack coat gal the department will not pay for reapplication of the asphalt tack required due to time lag between the initial application and the paving operation .
brooming and patching is incidental and included in other contract pay items .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num prime coat num description .
prepare and treat an existing surface with asphalt and blotter as specified .
num materials .
provide asphalt of the type and grade specified in num .
the engineer will accept the asphalt at the point of delivery .
provide blotter as specified in num .
the engineer will accept material at the point of delivery from the contractor provided sources or from designated sources .
num construction requirements .
do not apply asphalt if surface or weather conditions can prevent proper construction .
provide distributor equipment as specified in num .
shape the surface to be primed to the required grade and section .
ensure it is uniformly compact and without ruts corrugations segregated material or other irregularities .
obtain approval of quantities rates of application temperatures and areas to be treated before prime coat application .
apply asphalt to the width of the section to be primed with a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread .
do not exceed the specified asphalt application rate at the spread overlap junction .
correct skipped areas or deficiencies .
provide for numway traffic on the untreated portion of the surface when traffic is maintained .
transfer traffic to the treated portion as soon as the asphalt has been absorbed by the surface and will not pick up and then prime the remaining width of the section .
if a roadway must be used by traffic but the asphalt does not penetrate after application of the prime coat spread blotter with a selfpropelled aggregate spreader supported by at least num wheels equipped with pneumatic tires on num axles as approved .
equip the aggregate spreader with positive controls so the required amount of material will be deposited uniformly over the full width required to absorb the excess asphalt .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
asphalt will be by the ton .
num .
blotter will be by the ton or cubic yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit ____ emulsified asphalt for prime coat ton blotter ton or cy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num chip seal coat warranty num description .
construct a chip seal at a minimum of num layer of asphalt followed by num layer of aggregate .
warrant the workmanship and materials against contractorobligated defects cod for the warranty period as specified in this section .
noncontractorobligated defects ncod will not count against the warrantied work .
applying a fog seal over the chip sealed area is at the discretion of the contractor unless otherwise specified .
a chip seal area determined to be a catastrophic failure will be repaired and the warranty will be extended for an additional year .
the chip seal work will be evaluated using the current version of the departments chip seal coat warranty guide .
num materials .
provide materials in accordance with the following num .
asphaltic binder .
meet the requirements of num .
type grade and other binder characteristics e.g .
viscosity chemical composition of the binder is the contractors option .
num .
use the specified class of aggregate meet quality requirements in num and gradation in table num .
submit the following quality control tests table num contractorprovided tests test test method frequency point of sampling specifications gradation aashto t num num test minimum per num tons from crusher cover coat aggregate see table num fracture count aashto t num num test minimum per num tons from crusher num with at least one fractured face cleanness value idaho it num num test minimum per num tons at point of loading the roadway num .
submit documentation of the materials e.g .
type and grade of binder used control tests charts and other pertinent data .
num construction requirements .
the contractor is responsible for determining the best method and means to construct the chip seal .
public and private property damage claims will be forwarded to the contractor for consideration .
a .
existing roadway conditions .
before chip sealing the existing roadway conditions that may result in ncods will be identified and documented in writing by the contractor and submitted for approval .
pictures of potential ncod areas are suggested .
if approved these preexisting conditions will be excluded and not considered cods .
in the event of a disagreement between the engineer and the contractor on what is expected to be a ncod the contractor will put in writing the disagreement including their reasoning and any supporting documentation e.g .
pictures .
b .
preparation for and application of chip seal .
num .
cover and protect existing manholes valve casings road weather information systems rwis sensors weighinmotion site sensors expansion joints drains street monuments and other items as directed before chip sealing .
retain and protect cattle guards and weighinmotion concrete pads .
if protection of these items is not possible inform the engineer before chip sealing and request direction .
remove protection after chip seal is complete .
num .
clean the pavement surface before chip sealing .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
do not chip seal bridge decks or approach slabs .
after chip seal completion remove and dispose of asphalt aggregate and other material which may have spilled into deck drains and expansion joints .
num .
for beginning and ending joints mask the roadway with effective material e.g .
building paper to create a fine and definite transverse line .
num .
meetlines must be within num foot of lane lines or within num foot of center of lanes .
meetlines are not allowed within a wheel path .
ensure transverse and longitudinal joints are smooth and match the adjacent surfaces .
num .
do not apply chips during the numhour period immediately preceding a holiday or a holiday weekend .
brooming and pilot car operations are permitted within this numhour period .
num .
when not spreading park the distributor to ensure the spray bar or mechanism will not drip on the surface .
c. brooming .
num .
broom to clear the roadway of loose chips .
the department requires the contractor to broom at least num complete coverages with the second brooming approximately num hours after the first brooming .
additional brooming may be necessary to receive limited chip seal acceptance of the work .
num .
use a mechanical rotary type broom .
use a mechanical pickup or vacuum broom for the following conditions a .
in curbgutter sections .
b .
in all guardrail areas .
c. on bridge decks .
d. within num feet of bridges that span water channels wet or dry .
e. within num feet of adjacent wetlands and surface waters that reside within the right of way .
f. maintained shoulderforeslope areas where the adjacent property owner cares for and maintains turf or landscaping .
num .
provide dust control using water or other approved means during brooming .
num .
pick up and properly dispose of excess materials .
num .
broom loose chips from roadway surfaces adjacent to and at the end of chip sealed areas at the end of each days operation .
num .
after the second brooming meets the departments satisfaction the department will accept the brooming in writing before opening the road to full speed traffic unless otherwise directed .
d. limited acceptance warranty period and warranty .
after brooming has been accepted cods in the work will be documented .
the cods that do not exceed the cod threshold may be left to monitor or be repaired .
the cods in excess of the cod threshold will be repaired before limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance is granted .
the department will acknowledge in writing limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance along with any noted cods or ncods .
in the event of a disagreement between the department and the contractor on what is expected to be a ncod the contractor will put in writing the disagreement including their reasoning and any supporting documentation e.g .
measurements pictures .
the warranty period begins upon receipt of the written limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance and continues until april num of the following year .
if cods are documented before warranty repair work and the cods continue to spread or magnify after april num all cods must be repaired .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction it is the departments and the contractors responsibility to monitor document and communicate the emergence of ncods or cods throughout the warranty period .
the department and the contractor will evaluate and photo document the roadway before snow plow season .
if ncods or cods are discovered during the warranty period the engineer and the contractor will notify the other party in writing of their discoveries .
the department will use its resources to handle insignificant warranty repair work e.g .
applying blotter after the limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance at the request of the contractor and the availability of the departments resources .
costs incurred by the department for roadway maintenance of the chip seal directly associated to any cods will be deducted from subsequent progress estimates .
during the warranty period if the department or the contractor determine chip loss is beyond reasonable and resulting in windshield damage or other safety concerns to traveling motorists the contractor will rebroom as needed coordinate with the department to rebroom or submit a repair solution for approval that resolves the safety concerns as soon as practical .
e. cod threshold determination .
the contractor warrants that the chip seal travel lanes shoulders turning lanes and other areas as specified will have a total cod area within the allowable limits for the warranty period .
in april following the engineers limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance or sooner if conditions warrant the contractor will arrange a meeting with the engineer if necessary to conduct an onsite evaluation to review and document ncods and cods .
the engineer will provide in writing the final decisions on what repairs are required in accordance with the departments current version of the chip seal coat warranty guide and num .
warranty repair work will be required if the total cod area exceeds the specified threshold of num percent or more than num of the following guidelines is met num .
if separate cod areas total approximately num square yards in a num mile section and there are other cods under consideration .
num .
if an individual cod area is greater than num square yards in total area and there are other cods under consideration .
num .
if there are regularly occurring individual cods and there are other cods under consideration .
num .
if a cod is linear in nature regardless of width approximately num feet or more and there are other cods under consideration .
if the department determines the required repair work will not benefit the traveling public and if agreed by both parties financial reparation will be considered in lieu of repair work at a cost of num times the bid amount price per square yard .
f. warranty repair .
if it is determined that the cods threshold is exceeded submit a repair plan and repair schedule for approval before starting repairs .
complete repairs by august num .
if repairs can not be made by august num due to events outside the control of both parties as specified in num both parties will agree to an acceptable repair by date .
perform warranty repair work as approved in the contractors repair plan at no additional cost to the department .
the repair may be localized or be full reconstruction depending on the cods identified .
utilize the same source for any localized warranty repair work as the original source .
if this is not possible the engineer will consider other sources that have similarly colored aggregate .
warranty work includes replacing all pavement markings and any other permanent features that are damaged or obliterated due to the chip seal failure or repair process at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will terminate the chip seal coat warranty when the chip seal is accepted or the required warranty repair work has been completed .
the chip seal coat warranty does not apply to the warranty repair work .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num g. pavement markings .
pavement markings will be applied in accordance with department standards and the mutcd .
h. catastrophic failure and repair .
a catastrophic chip seal failure is defined as a total cod area that equal or exceeds the specified threshold of num percent .
if a limited acceptance chip seal coat warranty was already issued before the catastrophic failure occurred the limited acceptance will be immediately revoked .
upon completion of the repairs a new limited chip seal coat warranty acceptance will be made and only the catastrophic areas repaired will have an extended warranty period .
the repair plan of a catastrophic chip seal coat failure will be approved by the engineer and may include removing the remaining chips before rechip sealing the roadway e.g .
if there is little confidence the remaining chips will stay imbedded in the roadway and applying a fog coat .
as needed brooming will be required until the repair is completed .
if the department determines the required repair work will not benefit the traveling public and if agreed by both parties financial reparation will be considered in lieu of repair work and the extended warranty at a cost of num times the bid amount price per square yard .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will utilize plan quantity of acceptably completed work by the square yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantity at contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit chip seal coat warranty sy the warranty repair work including the necessary traffic control and striping will be at no additional cost to the department .
work associated with chip sealing is incidental including num .
cleaning the pavement surface .
num .
protecting existing manholes valve casings street monuments and rwis sensors .
remove and dispose materials used for protection after chip sealing is completed .
num .
restoring items that were not properly protected num .
providing and applying materials including asphalt cover coat aggregates and blotter if necessary .
num .
water applications .
num .
brooming .
num .
maintaining the roadway surface until receipt of written limited acceptance .
num .
removing and disposing excess material .
num .
all other work necessary to chip sealing .
the contractor will supply the department a warranty or performance bond equal to the total contract value .
the contractor is eligible to receive num percent of payment for work completed after limited acceptance has been issued .
maintain the entire value of the warranty or performance bond for the life of the contract .
submit proof of bond using a departmentprovided form or other acceptable form before beginning work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num surface treatment num description .
construct a single or multiple course surface treatment that may consist of the application of num or more chip seal coats or may consist of a prime coat followed by num or more chip seal coats as follows num .
type a apply a chip seal coats .
num .
type b apply a prime coat followed by the application of a chip seal coat .
num .
type c apply num chip seal coats .
num .
type d apply a prime coat followed by the application of num chip seal coats .
a fog coat may be constructed on any of the types of surface treatments as specified .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in asphalt num emulsified asphalt num antistripping additive num aggregate for cover coat material num aggregate for blotter and aggregate for choke sand num provide asphalt of the type and grade specified .
provide asphalt and antistripping additive if required as specified in num .
the engineer will accept the asphalt at the point of delivery .
the emulsified asphalt is subject to viscosity and sieve testing by the department in the field or at a location other than the project site .
schedule the delivery time to allow testing before usage .
expect delays up to num hour for this testing .
provide cover coat material blotter and choke sand as specified in num .
the engineer will accept the cover coat material blotter and choke sand at the point of loading for delivery to the roadway .
submit a chip seal coat design for each stockpile using the mcleod method at least num weeks before construction .
fieldverify the chip seal coat design for spread rate of asphalt and aggregate .
num construction requirements .
a .
chip seal coat .
do not apply asphalt if the roadway surface or weather conditions can prevent satisfactory construction .
do not start chip sealing unless the pavement surface temperatures are num f and rising and do not chip seal when pavement surface temperature exceeds num f unless authorized in writing by the engineer .
if bleeding becomes apparent on the completed chip seal initiate immediate maintenance and traffic control and do not continue chip sealing until corrective action has been initiated .
do not apply chip seals when the wind velocity exceeds num mph without written approval from the engineer .
do not apply chip seals before june num or after september num .
the following equipment or its equivalent is required by the department num .
asphalt application equipment for applying asphalt .
an asphalt distributor and equipment for heating the asphalt .
ensure the distributor is designed equipped maintained and operated so asphalt can be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface at readily determined and controlled rates with uniform pressure .
provide distributor equipment that includes a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents .
equip distributors with a power unit for the pump and fullcirculation vertically adjustable spray bars .
num .
brooms .
use a mechanical rotary type broom .
use a mechanical pickup or vacuum broom for the following conditions a .
in curbgutter sections .
b .
in all guardrail areas .
c. on bridge decks .
d. within num feet of bridges that span water channels wet or dry .
e. within num feet of adjacent wetlands and surface waters that reside within the right of way .
f. maintained shoulderforeslope areas where the adjacent property owner cares for and maintains turf or landscaping .
num .
pneumatictire rollers .
do not operate the rollers at a speed in excess of num mph .
include enough pneumatictired rollers to cover a full spread width with num pass .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work .
num .
selfpropelled aggregate spreader supported by at least num wheels equipped with pneumatic tires on num axles of engineer approved design .
equip the aggregate spreader with positive controls so that the required amount of material will be deposited uniformly over the full width required .
seal approaches before sealing the adjacent roadway .
do not chip seal bridge decks and approach slabs .
protect drains and bridge expansion joints from the chip seal application then remove and properly dispose of material used for this protection after completion of the chip seal .
after chip seal completion remove asphalt and aggregate that may have spilled into drains and deck expansion joint .
do not spread asphalt until the surface has been cleaned as required and the section has been approved .
apply asphalt with a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread over the section to be treated and within the temperature range specified .
design and fieldverify the quantity of asphalt to be used per square yard .
a preliminary asphalt application of from num to num gallon per square yard of surface may be required by the engineer if the texture of the surface allows asphalt to penetrate too rapidly .
use a strip of building paper at least num feet wide and as long as the spray bar of the distributor plus num foot at the beginning of each spread .
paper may be required at the end of each spread if the cutoff is not clean .
remove and dispose of the paper in a satisfactory manner .
ensure the distributor is moving forward at the proper application speed when the spray bar is opened .
correct skipped areas or deficiencies .
carefully mark junctions of spreads to ensure a smooth riding surface .
do not expose asphalt for more than num minute before applying cover coat material .
limit the asphalt spread to the area that the trucks loaded with cover coat material can immediately cover .
the department will allow meetlines within num foot of lane lines or within num foot of center of lanes only .
meet lines are not allowed within a wheel path .
ensure transverse longitudinal joints are smooth and match the adjacent surfaces .
do not spread asphalt more than num inches wider than the width covered by the cover coat material from the spreading device .
do not allow the asphalt to chill set up dry or otherwise impair retention of the cover coat material .
when not spreading park the distributor so that the spray bar or mechanism will not drip on the roadway surface when not spreading .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction spread cover coat material at the designed and fieldverified rate immediately following the application of asphalt .
do not allow the tires of the trucks or aggregate spreader to contact the uncovered asphalt .
do not allow pilot car traffic control operations to cross the fresh asphalt meetline onto newly applied cover coat material .
moisten aggregate stockpiles with water num to num hours before placement to eliminate or reduce the dust coating of the aggregate .
cover deficient areas with additional approved material immediately after the cover coat material is spread .
begin rolling immediately behind the spreading operation and continue until num complete coverages are obtained .
complete rolling within num minutes of spreading cover coat material and before allowing traffic to use the new surface .
if choke sand is specified the following applies num .
immediately after the third roller pass apply choke sand to the entire roadway surface at a rate of num pounds per square yard or as directed .
num .
do not tailgate or use a spinner when applying choke sand .
do not operate equipment at a speed that turns or displaces the cover coat material .
the engineer may require applying approved reject material over the surface to absorb any free asphalt before brooming .
sweep excess material from the entire roadway surface with rotary brooms .
complete the initial brooming by the morning following the previous days chip seal application unless otherwise directed .
do not to displace embedded material when brooming .
pickup excess material in curb and gutter sections and dispose of as directed .
perform second brooming approximately num hours after the first brooming and after traffic has been routed on the chip sealed roadway when required .
provide brooms that are in good condition and capable of sweeping a path at least num inches wide without loosening or displacing embedded materials .
accompany each broom by a shadow vehicle if working on highways open to traffic .
equip the shadow vehicle with at least num roofmounted highintensity rotating or strobetype amber flasher that is readily visible from front and rear for ½ mile .
lightly spray the surface of the roadway with enough water to prevent dust from becoming airborne when brooming operations could create dust to the extent that it would violate air pollution regulations or create a safety hazard .
keep the highway open to traffic .
the contractor may route controlled traffic on the surface treatment as soon as the asphalt is covered .
maintain the first chip seal and allow it to cure for num calendar days if successive chip seals are to be applied .
b .
prime coat .
apply the prime coat as specified in num when required the engineer may require a curing period of num calendar days between the application of the prime coat and the next application of asphalt .
keep the primed surface in repair during the period between the application of the prime coat and the chip seal coat .
patch and repair holes ravels and areas deficient in the primed surface with aggregateasphalt mixtures using penetration methods or other approved procedures .
broom off loose material before subsequent applications of asphalt .
c. chip seal .
apply each chip seal as specified num .
maintain the first chip seal and allow it to cure for num calendar days if successive chip seals are to be applied .
d. fog coat .
apply fog coat as specified in num when required .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will utilize plan quantity of acceptably completed work by the square yard .
chip seal coat will be measured by the square yard .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit chip seal coat cy fog coat will be paid for as specified in num .
the department considers all work associated with chip sealing as incidental and included in the chip seal coat contract pay item including the following num .
cleaning the pavement surface before chip sealing .
num .
protecting existing manholes valve casings street monuments and rwis sensors .
material used for protection is to be removed and properly disposed of after the chip sealing is completed .
num .
restoring items that were not properly protected .
num .
providing and applying materials including asphalt cover coat aggregates and blotter if necessary .
num .
water applications .
num .
brooming .
num .
removing and disposing of excess material .
num .
all other work necessary to chip sealing .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num superpave hot mix asphalt num description .
construct num or more courses of superpave hot mix asphalt hma plant mix including leveling courses if applicable on a prepared surface .
references in this section also apply to warm mix asphalt wma .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in aggregate num asphalt num antistripping additive num hydrated lime num recycled asphalt pavement rap num test materials in accordance with the following applicable standard methods particle size distribution of aggregate fop for aashto t num with materials finer than numum no .
num sieve in mineral aggregate by washing fop for aashto t num method a or b mechanical analysis of extracted aggregate fop for aashto t num preparing and determining the density of hot mix asphalt hma specimens by means of the superpave gyratory compactor .
fop for aashto t num superpave volumetric design for hot mix asphalt hma aashto r num determining the percentage of fracture in coarse aggregate fop for aashto t num method num percent air voids in compacted dense and open bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num theoretical maximum specific gravity and density of bituminous paving mixtures fop for aashto t num bowl method bulk specific gravity of compacted bituminous mixtures using saturated surface dry specimens fop for aashto t num method a pavement straightedge procedures idaho ir num inplace density of asphalt mixtures by nuclear methods fop for aashto t num backscatter mode sampling asphalt mixtures after compaction obtaining cores fop for aashto r num determining volume of liquids in horizontal or vertical storage tanks idaho it num acceptance test strip for hot mix asphalt hma pavement idaho ir num standard practice for operating inertial profilers and evaluating pavement profiles aashto r num determining the asphalt binder content of hot mix asphalt hma by the ignition method fop for aashto t num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num sampling bituminous paving mixtures fop for aashto t num see qa manual section num for sampling method reducing samples of hot mix asphalt to testing size fop for aashto r num moisture content of hot mix asphalt hma by oven method fop for aashto t num plastic fines in graded aggregate and soils by use of the sand equivalent test fop for aashto t num alternate method num mechanical prewet standard method of test for compressive strength of hot mix asphalt aashto t num standard test method for effect of water on compressive strength of compacted bituminous mixtures immersioncompression astm dnum replace astm dnum and astm dnum with aashto t num and aashto t num resistance of compacted asphalt mixtures to moistureinduced damage aashto t num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate method a aashto t num mixture conditioning of hotmix asphalt hma aashto r num sampling asphalt materials fop for aashto r num determining rutting susceptibility of asphalt pavement mixture using the asphalt pavement analyzer apa aashto t num superpave volumetric mix design aashto m num evaluation of the superpave gyratory compactor sgc internal angle of gyration using simulated loading aashto t num standard test method for flat particles elongated particles or flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate fop for astm dnum ratio of length to thickness equal to or greater than num bulk specific gravity and density of compacted asphalt mixtures using automatic vacuum sealing method aashto t num standard practice for rapid drying of compacted asphalt specimens using vacuum drying apparatus astm dnum standard test method for maximum specific gravity and density of bituminous paving mixtures using automatic vacuum sealing method astm dnum specific gravity and absorption of aggregate using automatic vacuum sealing method idaho it num quantitative extraction of bitumen from bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num quantitative extraction and recovery of asphalt binder from asphalt mixtures aashto t num lime for asphalt mixtures aashto t num density of inplace hot mix asphalt hma pavement by electronic surface contact devices fop for aashto t num method c determination of recycled asphalt pavement rap aggregate dry bulk specific gravity gsb idaho it num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction provide superpave hma composed of a combination of aggregate approved additives mineral filler if required rap if used wma additives or process if used and performance graded pg asphalt binder material .
provide a job mix formula jmf and a superpave hma pavement as specified in this section num and num .
table num superpave mixture requirements a ph negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration b for no .
num nominal maximum size mixtures the dust to binder ratio is num to num .
if the aggregate gradation passes beneath the pcs control point specified in num the allowable dust to binder ratio range may increase from num num to num num. c for num½ inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa is num percent .
d for design traffic levels of greater than num million esals ⅜ inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified vfa range is num to num and for no .
num nominal maximum size mixtures is between num and num .
approved sp num mixes may be substituted for sp num mixes .
use the binder content corresponding to num percent air voids .
adjust the sp num mix binder content by selecting the binder content that achieves num percent air voids at num gyrations from the binder content versus air voids graph of the approved mix design and target this binder content in the cjmf .
the sp num mix will be tested during production and accepted as an sp num mix i.e .
measuring binder content and gradation when a substitution is made and the sp num vfa value will be used .
use a qpl antistripping additive .
use a minimum ½ percent approved liquid antistripping additive by weight of total asphalt or use lime as an antistripping additive .
determine the amount of liquid antistripping additive or lime required by performing stripping testing during the mix design development .
if lime is used as an antistripping additive the department does not require liquid antistripping additive .
num .
warm mix asphalt wma .
wma is defined as hma that is produced at a target discharge temperature of num f or less using qpl wma additives or processes .
wma is allowed for use .
qpl wma additives or processes may be used to facilitate mixing and compaction of hma produced at target discharge temperatures above num f however such mixtures will not be defined as wma .
use additives or processes from the qpl .
follow the suppliers or manufacturers written instructions for additives and processes when producing wma mixtures .
use equipment and wma technologies capable of producing an asphalt mixture that meet specifications and is workable at the minimum placement and compaction temperature desired regardless of storage or haul distance considerations .
produce superpave wma by num or a combination of several qplapproved technologies including chemical foaming and organic processes .
mixture type sp num num gyrations sp num num gyrations sp num num gyrations design esals a millions num num num num gyratory compaction gyrations for nini gyrations for ndes gyrations for nmax num num num num num num num num num relative density gmm nini num num num relative density gmm ndes num num num relative density gmm nmax num num num air voids pa num num num dust to binder ratio range b num num num num num num voids filled with asphalt vfa range c num num num num d num num d num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department and the contractor will prepare superpave wma field samples as recommended by the manufacturers representative for wma mixture testing .
num .
recycled asphalt pavement rap .
the department will allow rap in the superpave hma .
provide rap as specified in num .
produce the mixture as specified in num.a .
select the mass of rap the type of rap and the extent of rap processing necessary to meet specifications .
the department will not change specifications or the contract unit price if rap is used in the mixture .
if rap material is to be used from the project obtain a representative sample of material for the mix design .
the mass of rap used in superpave hma is the mass of asphalt binder in percent that the rap contributes to the total mass of binder in the mixture .
rap binder percentages and binder grade selection .
determine the percentage of rap used and the binder grade required to meet specifications .
select the rap percentage in the mix by determining the contribution of the rap binder toward the total binder in the mix by weight .
it may be necessary to use a softer virgin pg binder than is specified to account for the age hardened binder in the rap .
adjust the binder grade specified to account for the stiffening effect of the aged binder in the rap resulting in a composite binder meeting requirements .
the method for determining the binder grade adjustment in superpave hma mixtures incorporating rap is designated as level num or level num as shown in table num .
each level has a range of percentages that represent the contribution of the rap binder toward the total binder by weight .
table num grade adjustment for rap usage level rap binder by weight of the total binder in the mixture binder grade adjustment to account for the stiffness of the asphalt binder in the rap num num to num no binder grade adjustment is made .
num num to num the selected binder grade adjustment for the binder grade specified on the plans is one grade lower for the high and the low temperatures designated .
or determine the asphalt binder grade adjustment using a blending chart .
note see aashto m num for recommended blending chart procedure .
table num identifies the typical binder grades used and the recommended binder grade adjustments for each binder grade at the rap level described in table num .
if the binder grade adjustment is not in table num use table num to determine the binder grade adjustment needed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num typical adjusted binder grades level num level num binder grade specified in contract adjusted binder grade adjusted binder grade num num no adjustment needed num no adjustment needed num num num num num num num num use the following equation to determine the percent of rap by weight of mix x c ab where a optimum asphalt content percent in mixture to produce num air voids .
b percent asphalt content in the rap from chemical extraction andor aashto t num burn with asphalt binder correlation factor .
c percent of rap binder by weight of the total binder desired in the mix .
x desired rap percent by total weight of mix .
the following is an example of the calculation total rap binder desired equals num of total binder in the mixture .
if rap will contribute num asphalt content and the optimum asphalt content is num then x num num num num .
submittals .
submit virgin and rap material for bulk dry specific gravity of aggregate gsb determination .
for superpave mixtures designated as sp num the department will not require hma material samples to be submitted for mix design testing .
submit sp num mix designs for paper review only .
for sp num submit a mix design that meets the requirements of num.a except for the material submittal requirement .
num .
recycled asphalt shingles ras .
ras is not allowed in any superpave hma .
num construction requirements .
a .
mix design .
develop a mix design that includes the jmf and is reviewed approved signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer responsible for the mix design .
use a qualified laboratory .
the department requires the mix design to be developed by an individual that is qualified by the department as a superpave mix design technician spmdt .
submit all worksheets notes calculations and outputs generated by testing equipment .
include signature and waqtcpe license number for testers and reviewers and checked by on each sheet .
num .
mix design requirements .
proportion the aggregate fractions to meet the grading and physical properties of the approved jmf .
the grade of asphalt is specified on the plans .
the contractor may choose to use a pg binder that is equal to or num grade higher on the high temperature side and that is equal to or num grade lower on the low temperature side than is specified and produces a mixture that meets requirements at no additional cost to the department .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num select the grade brand and source of asphalt and additives to be used in the jmf .
the contractor may need to adjust the virgin asphalt pg binder grade used in the mix to achieve the pg binder grade required when rap is used .
the jmf represents the aggregate grading and optimum asphalt binder content that produces the desired mix criteria in the laboratory .
specify a single aggregate gradation the optimal asphalt binder content the theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm and the bulk specific gravity gmb of a specimen compacted to ndesign .
select the optimum asphalt binder content as the asphalt binder content that results in num percent air voids at ndesign .
submit a recommended temperature range from the asphalt binder supplier at which the mixture will be mixed and compacted for superpave testing in accordance with aashto r num .
compact gmb specimens at the recommended mixing and compaction temperatures of the specified pg binder regardless of rap percentage used .
establish a single percentage of aggregate passing the following sieve sizes num num½ num ¾ ½ ⅜ no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num and no .
num from the jmf .
report the sieve results to the nearest whole number except for the no .
num .
report the no .
num to the nearest tenth .
ensure the single percentage passing as shown on the proposed jmf grading is within the minimum and maximum control points specified in num .
design superpave mixes in accordance with aashto r num .
use the equipment specified in aashto t num and a department qualified superpave mix design technician .
report the brand model number and serial number of the superpave gyratory compactor sgc .
use a sgc that meets the requirements of aashto t num and aashto t num internal angle num degrees plus or minus num degrees .
provide superpave mixes that comply with the gradation requirements of num .
condition the superpave mixes in accordance with aashto r num section num except modify so the mix designer selects a temperature to condition the mixture within the compaction temperature range as recommended by the asphalt binder supplier .
compact the design mixture in accordance with aashto t num section num except modify so the mix designer selects a mixing temperature within the mixing temperature range as recommended by the asphalt binder supplier and modify aashto t num section num so the compaction temperature is determined by the mix designer and is used for aashto t num testing .
the number of gyrations used is defined in table num for the type of mix specified .
the department will determine the bulk dry specific gravity of aggregate gsb apparent specific gravity of aggregate gsa and water absorption by percent weight of dry aggregate of the coarse and fine aggregate used in the mixture using aashto t num and idaho itnum .
the department will evaluate the rap gsb if used by determining the rap gse in accordance with idaho itnum .
submit aggregate and rap for gsb testing as specified in num.a.num .
report the asphalt binderaggregate correlation factor for asphalt binder and gradation for each rap stockpile as specified in num .
a contractors representative may be present during the gsb testing to ensure a value the department and the contractor can agree upon if requested .
use the established gsb in the mix design calculation the report and for production paving testing .
the engineer will use the established gsb during the mix confirmation process acceptance test strip testing and verification testing .
allow the engineer num business days for testing .
design and compact the mixture at the ndesign gyrations specified in table num .
use a num percent design air void content at the design number of gyrations ndesign for mixtures as in table num .
verify nmax as part of the design process by compaction of at least num specimens at the design asphalt content to nmax to ensure the number of gyrations required in table num does not produce a mixture that exceeds the relative density of nmax given in table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction ensure the voids in the mineral aggregate vma during design is at least num percent greater than the minimum value specified in num when the mixture is compacted to ndesign .
the engineer will not accept mix designs that do not meet requirements .
ensure the vma of the mixture meets the specification as specified in num during production .
calculate vma as specified in the qa manual section num .
ensure the voids filled with asphalt vfa criteria of the mixture meets the requirements in table num at the design number of gyrations during design and production .
calculate vfa as specified in the qa manual section num .
meet the dust to binder ratio requirements in table num .
the dust to binder ratio or dust proportion dp is by mass the ratio between the percent of aggregates passing the no .
num sieve and the effective binder content .
calculate the effective binder content as specified in the qa manual section num .
ensure the superpave hma mixture has an index of retained strength immersion compression of num percent or more when tested in accordance with aashto t num and astm dnum using a minimum of ½ percent antistrip additive or a determined mass of hydrated lime .
the department will perform asphalt pavement analyzer apa testing on sp num and sp num mixtures .
test in accordance with aashto t num .
do not exceed a num inch nummm maximum rut depth in the tested mixture .
perform num aggregate gradation trial blends at a single asphalt content that achieves a laboratory air void content of num to num percent in accordance with aashto r num .
include additional minus no .
num material in each blend to account for aggregate breakdown during production .
describe in the mix design the methods used to maintain the minus no .
num target value throughout the work .
determine the aggregate gradation in the asphalt mixture by an ignition burn of the asphalt mixture from a laboratory prepared sample .
batch the laboratory sample on the basis of component percentages as shown on the proposed jmf gradation .
obtain the aggregate in accordance with the fop for aashto t num .
report the sieves specified in this subsection beginning with the maximum size for the mix .
conduct testing during the mix design to identify hot mix aggregate subject to breakdown in the ignition furnace .
report the aggregate gradation correction factors determined in accordance with the fop for aashto t num for specification sieves in the mix design .
apply aggregate gradation correction factors to the specification sieves when determining compliance with specifications only when breakdown was determined and reported in the mix design .
submit num correction factor samples produced by the laboratory producing the mix design at the design asphalt binder content for each ignition furnace to be used for mix design confirmation and acceptance verification and dispute resolution testing .
prepare num correction factor samples at the same time in accordance with the fop for aashto t num .
submit num correction factor samples when submitting mix design confirmation materials and samples .
in accordance with the fop for aashto t num each ignition furnace to be used requires a unique asphalt binder correction factor determined using aggregate produced for the work .
determine the asphalt binder correction factor for each furnace where testing will be performed .
a .
warm mix asphalt .
use the aashto r num appendix to design wma mixes and submit the following documentation num wma technology information andor wma additives information .
num wma technology manufacturers written instructions for use .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num wma technology manufacturers target rate for water and additives the acceptable variation for production and documentation showing the impact of excessive production variation .
num wma technology safety data sheets sds .
num wma technology laboratory and field temperature range for mixing .
num wma technology temperature range for compacting .
num asphalt binder performance grade test data over the range of wma additive percentages proposed for use .
num laboratory test data samples and sources of mixture components and asphalt binder viscositytemperature relationships .
use antistripping additives silicone additives wma additives and wma technologies as specified .
comply with approved mix design quantities .
confirm the addition rate through quality control field tests during production .
maintain manufacturers written instructions on file at the asphalt mixing plant and make available for reference when producing superpave wma .
num .
mix design documentation and test results .
submit the following for each jmf submitted include the following a. legible sheets in electronic printed and copied forms and numbered consecutively .
b. orient sheets similarly in the electronic submittal .
c. the names of who is responsible for quality control of the mixture during production of the mix design .
the names of who is responsible for developing the mix design and the names of who performed the tests .
the names of who checked the work .
provide the waqtc or pe license number and signatures of these individuals on worksheets and summary sheets .
d. gradation data for each aggregate component of num trial blends .
include additional minus no .
num material to account for aggregate breakdown during production .
label this item breakdown on the mix design sheet .
describe in detail the methods used to maintain the minus no .
num target value throughout the work .
show percent passing for the following sieves num num½ num ¾ ½ ⅜ no .
num no .
num no.num no .
num no .
num no .
num and no .
num .
report grading to the nearest num percent except for the no .
num sieve .
report the no .
num sieve to the nearest num of a percent .
e. the source source number and materials description e.g .
quarried or gravel .
the proportion of each aggregate in percent of total aggregate from each source and include the specified rap records .
if multiple aggregate sources are used identify the stockpiles with the appropriate aggregate source number on blending and batching sheets .
f. the design esals when specified .
g. the composite washed gradation based on num.a.num.d and num.a.num.e .
h. the bulk dry gsb and apparent gsa specific gravities and water absorption by percent weight of dry aggregate of coarse and fine aggregate for each aggregate component or for the total aggregates used in the mixture .
attach the department documentation for gsb determination .
note the department will determine these values using aashto t num and idaho it num and provide these values to the contractor .
rap gsb when used will be calculated using the rap gse .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction i .
the composite gradation plotted on a num power chart .
j .
the pg binder grade and percentage in units of num percent of asphalt binder material to be added based on the total mass of the mixture .
when rap is used report the adjusted virgin asphalt pg binder grade and the percentage in units of num percent of virgin asphalt binder material to be added based on the total mass of the mixture to achieve the pg binder grade specified .
k. the design traffic level and ninitial ndesign and nmax .
l. report the value of the theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm and bulk specific gravity gmb of the asphalt mixture to num decimal places .
report optimum asphalt content air voids and vma to the nearest tenth and report vfa to the nearest whole number .
m. plot at least num different asphalt binder contents minimum num percent between each point so there is at least num point above and num point below the estimated asphalt binder percentage .
pick the optimum asphalt binder content at num percent air voids from the plotted curve .
run num trial at the optimum asphalt binder content to verify the specimen values match the values from the curve and provide blending and batching worksheets for this trial if requested .
n. the theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm at each asphalt binder content .
the average of at least num specimens at each asphalt binder content .
use the gmm for percent air voids determination using the qa manual section num. o .
the test results for the individual and average bulk specific gravity density and heights of at least num specimens at each asphalt binder content .
p. the percent air voids in the mixture at each asphalt binder content .
q .
the percent vma at each asphalt binder content .
r. dust to binder ratio calculated to the nearest num percent at each asphalt binder content .
s. the immersion compression results at the optimum asphalt binder content .
t. ignition furnace calibration data in accordance with the fop for aashto t num including specimen burn temperature .
u. ignition furnace printed ticket if requested .
attach a copy of the long printed ticket that continuously records the temperature and mass each minute during the burn for the trial at optimum asphalt binder content .
v. graphs showing air voids vma vfa gmb and gmm versus percent asphalt binder content for each of the asphalt binder contents submitted with the trial mix .
no more than num graphs per sheet .
w. the test results from the composite aggregate blend at the proposed jmf proportions indicating compliance with the percentage of fracture in coarse aggregate fine aggregate angularity sand equivalent and flat and elongated in accordance with table num .
when rap is used report the percentage of fracture in coarse aggregate and flat and elongated of the composite blend .
test fine aggregate angularity and sand equivalent on the composite aggregate blend at the proposed jmf proportion without the rap proportion .
x .
report the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures and field mixing and compaction temperature ranges by the asphalt binder supplier .
use the laboratory compaction temperature to compact gyratory specimens for acceptance and verification testing .
y .
report the sample mass determined in the mix design process that results in a gyratory specimen target height of approximately num millimeters plus or minus num millimeters .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num z. label gyratory compaction tables and curves generated by the gyratory compactor from the trial blend .
aa .
submit the gyratory compactor printout that includes specimen height force internal angle and shear if available for each gyration for each specimen compacted to ndes at optimum binder content .
num .
material and sample submittals .
submit the following materials and samples when applicable a .
a numpound uncompacted representative sample of the jmf .
b .
num gyratory briquettes for apa testing .
the apa specimens must have an air void content of num plus or minus num percent air voids .
determine pa of each specimen and clearly label the air void content for aashto t num testing for sp num and sp num only .
c. num individually packaged aggregate specimens conforming to the jmf fabricated in accordance with aashto t num and astm d num except do not add the binder .
provide enough binder without antistrip added and antistrip additive to make num test specimens .
one of the specimens will be used as a buttering batch .
the department will prepare test specimens from the material and perform testing in accordance with astm d num .
the pg binder provided must equal the pg binder grade used in the jmf .
d. a numpound minimum representative sample of each aggregate stockpile for gsb testing and at least a numpound sample of the combined coarse and fine aggregate at mixture proportions .
include blend sheets for the mixture proportions .
e. a numpound minimum representative sample of the rap and the rap stockpile records and test data .
submit the gradation and binder contents of the rap sample as specified in num .
submit the rap asphalt binderaggregate correlation factor as specified in num. f. one thousand num gram sample of other mineral admixtures e.g .
lime or fly ash when used .
the department will use these samples for laboratory examination materials properties evaluation and to perform aashto t num on the specimens for mix design confirmation .
the department will not begin testing until the required mix design paperwork has been received .
the engineer will provide the contractor with a confirmation or rejection of the mix design within num business days after receiving the jmf and materials .
rejection of the mix design will require an additional num business days for reevaluation .
additional materials and a new mix design may be required from the contractor .
obtain department confirmation of the contractors mix design before beginning acceptance test strip placement .
num .
previously used mix designs .
the contractor may use a previously used mix design including the jmf which the department approved and accepted for use on other projects if it meets the requirements of this subsection .
changes to the mix design are not allowed except as noted below adjustments made as specified in num.h table num to the asphalt content and gradation of a previously approved mix design that became the contractorjob mix formula cjmf are acceptable changes .
prepare a submittal that includes a .
the original approved mix design that includes the confirmed jmf from the previous project .
do not make modifications to this document .
b .
documentation supporting adjustments to the previously used mix design num adjustments made to the jmf that make it the cjmf .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num adjustments made to the cjmf during production .
num acceptance test reports plant reports records and diaries supporting these adjustments .
num if no adjustments were made submit acceptance test reports plant reports records and diaries for the cjmf used .
c. current stockpile quality control testing that includes the following to confirm the material in the stockpile is similar to the material used for the original mix design including rap num sieve analysis on the stockpiles to be used including crusher control charts .
num coarse and fine aggregate specific gravities and absorptions performed by the department .
note previously used mix designs that are used during the calendar year of confirmation may omit num.a.num.c if the stockpiles consist of the crushed material including rap from the original mix design .
if more than num calendar year has elapsed from the time of confirmation include num.a.num.c .
changes in gradation specific gravity and absorption due to additional crushing may prevent acceptance of a previously used mix design .
d. ignition furnace correction factors as specified in this subsection using the asphalt content and gradation of the proposed jmf .
num asphalt binder content correction factor in accordance with the fop for aashto t num .
num aggregate gradation correction factors in accordance with the fop for aashto t num. e. use the cjmf from above to run num trial at the optimum asphalt binder content to verify it produces specimen values that match the values from original design curves .
f. a cover letter requesting the use of a previously used mix design stating the project identifiers e.g .
project name key number .
include a summary sheet of the volumetric mix design test results and other appropriate information from prepared specimens using the aggregates the pg binder and additives verified in the previous steps .
the engineer will send previously used mix designs submitted to the central laboratory for review and recommendation .
the asphalt content type and grade aggregate materials gradation and antistrip additive rate type and grade must be the same as previously approved to be considered acceptable as a previously used mix design .
the department will not begin mix design evaluation until supporting documentation is received .
num .
nonstructural and temporary superpave hma .
nonstructural superpave hma refers to paving applications that are out of trafficked areas e.g .
behind guardrails gore areas raised medians asphalt curbs other noncritical nontraffic load applications .
temporary superpave hma refers to pavement that will be removed before the end of the project e.g .
detours pavement used in construction staging .
removal of temporary superpave hma is incidental and the costs included in the superpave hma contract pay item .
for pavement designated in the contract as nonstructural ns or temporary t the class of superpave hma mix will be identified in the bid schedule with the initials ns or t respectively i.e .
spns is superpave hma not in the travelled way and can be any class of superpave hma .
whereas spt is superpave hma used for temporary pavement that must be removed before completion of the project .
superpave hma for temporary pavement may have a class of mix designated on the plans depending on the intended use .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department will not require materials and samples to be submitted for mix design confirmation testing for mixtures designated as ns or t. submit mix designs for paper review only .
num .
mix design tolerance .
the engineer will apply the tolerances in table num to the departments test results when evaluating the jmf .
if the departments test results are within the established tolerances and control points established in num the jmf will be confirmed by the engineer .
the contractor has the option to proceed to the acceptance test strip or submit another jmf for examination and evaluation .
table num quality tolerance quality characteristic tolerance gradation no.num sieve and larger sieves jmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves jmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves jmf value num a no .
num sieve and smaller sieves jmf value num a laboratory air voids num num vma num minimum value num asphalt binder content jmf value num dust proportion dp table num range num vfa table num b immersion compression minimum num aashto t num in sp num and sp num only num maximum gmm and gmb num a in no case will the upper and lower specification limits be outside the control points specified in num. b if the departments vma and pa results are within the tolerances provided the calculated vfa will not be used as an acceptance criteria .
b .
weather limitations for permanent paving .
do not place superpave hma on a wet or frozen surface or when weather or surface conditions will otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the superpave hma material .
place superpave hma as specified in the temperature limitations in table num .
table num air and surface temperature limitations compacted thickness of individual courses top course leveling and courses below the top course less than num foot num f num f num to num foot num f num f greater than num foot num f num f provide a paved surface for travel if the work extends into the winter .
do not start construction on the pavement surface unless the progress schedule realistically shows the pavement can be replaced or completed within the temperature limitations listed above .
c. mixing plants .
operate all equipment in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions or submit an explanation of the variations from the instructions .
use mixing plants capable of producing a uniform mixture and that comply with the following requirements num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
plant scales .
provide plant and truck scales that comply with num .
num .
asphalt storage .
provide asphalt storage tanks to heat and hold the materials at the required temperatures .
store and introduce the asphalt into the mix according to the suppliers required temperatures .
submit the suppliers written instructions .
accomplish heating so the flame is not in contact with the tank .
design the storage system for the asphalt to ensure proper and continuous circulation during the operating period .
install the tank level and provide the engineer a calibrated measuring rod or other approved measuring device .
make provisions for measuring and sampling contents of the storage tanks .
num .
feeder .
equip plants with accurate mechanical means for uniformly feeding the aggregate into the dryer .
when multiple stockpiles are required ensure the rap and virgin cold aggregate feed equipment is capable of providing accurate metering of individual stockpiles into the mix .
determine the moisture content of the virgin aggregates and rap daily during production or as necessary and record the moisture test results .
provide equipment that electronically injects the determined moisture content of the cold feed materials rap and virgin aggregates onto the beltweighing systems and automatically corrects wet material weights to dry material weights .
provide positive weight control and monitoring of the aggregate feed and interlock the rap cold feed rate and virgin aggregate cold feed rate by use of a conveyor scale or other approved device .
weigh the material to within num percent of the intended quantity .
provide a feed system capable of rapid adjustment to maintain a consistent and uniform flow throughout the range of its calibration .
accurately proportion the aggregate through control gates from each compartment .
provide positive mechanical means to adjust num dimension of the rectangular gate .
do not screen or proportion after cold feed blending .
when rap is used use a scalping screen or other approved device installed ahead of the weight system to ensure that rap agglomerates larger than num inches are not fed into the mixing plant .
introduce rap into the mixing plant at a location far enough downstream from the burner to be away from the flame and extremely hot gases .
submit the following mixing plant information a .
dry virgin aggregate rate in tons per hour .
b .
dry rap rate in tons per hour .
c. binder in tons per hour .
d. total virgin aggregates rap and binder in tons per hour .
print the mixing plant information on a ticket at an approved time interval and submit tickets at the end of each production day .
num .
dryermixer .
continuously agitate the aggregates during the heating and drying process in a dryer that is capable of meeting the aggregate moisture requirements of num.f .
equip dryers with automatic burner controls .
include a mixer that may be part of the dryer or a separate unit that is capable of adequate mixing .
operate the plant only within the range of calibration .
num .
asphalt control unit .
interconnect the asphalt control unit with the aggregate feed control so it is capable of delivering asphalt to the mix within num percent of the intended quantity throughout the range of plant operation .
provide satisfactory means by weighing or metering for obtaining the quantity of asphalt delivered .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
thermometric equipment .
provide adequate continuous thermometric recording equipment to show at a minimum the temperature of the asphalt in the storage tank and temperature of the heated material after leaving the dryer or pug mill .
num .
sampling devices .
equip crushing screening and mixing plants with approved sampling equipment operable from the ground or a platform .
construct and operate the device so it will move at a constant rate across the full width of the falling column of material from the discharge belt or chute .
construct the sampling equipment so a representative sample can be taken and conveyed to the ground by a means of a slide chute or other means where the sampled material can be safely and conveniently collected .
provide a sampling device on the mixing plants asphalt binder tank injection line and sample the asphalt binder as specified in the qa manual section num .
num .
storage silo batcher .
equip the plant with a storage silo batcher that opens and closes throughout production to ensure uniform charging of the storage silo .
time the opening and closing so the material does not pass directly from the slat conveyor into the silo .
num .
discharge hopper .
equip the plant with a discharge hopper having dump gates that will permit rapid and complete discharge of the mixture .
num .
hot storage .
provide continuous mix plants with sufficient hot storage capacity to ensure continuous plant operation .
do not remove material below the top level of the cone of the hot storage silo except at the end of the production day .
num .
plant calibration .
calibrate plants for accuracy requirements .
num .
wma technology .
provide wma metering devices that meet the wma technology manufacturers current written instructions for liquid or mineral additives .
document the integration of plant controls and interlocks when using wma additive devices .
comply with the manufacturers written instructions for incorporating additives and wma technologies into the mix .
comply with manufacturers written instructions regarding receiving storage and delivery of additives .
d. hauling equipment .
provide trucks used for hauling superpave hma materials that have tight clean smooth and metal bodies equipped with a positive locking metal gate .
when necessary cover e.g .
with canvas each truck to protect the mixture from the weather .
the contractor may apply a release agent suitable for its intended use to truck beds .
after application drain the truck bed .
do not use fuel oil or other petroleum oils as a release agent .
provide an adequate platform to enable safe sampling when sampling from truck transports .
sample in accordance with the waqtc fop for aashto t num .
e. paver .
provide a selfpropelled paver equipped with an activated and heated vibratory screed that is equal to the width of the paving being performed .
activate screed extensions and heat vibratory screeds except for minor shoulder widening not exceeding num foot and to produce a pavement equal to that produced by the rest of the screed .
equip the paver with a receiving hopper having sufficient capacity for a uniform spreading operation .
equip the hopper with a distribution system to place the mixture uniformly in front of the screed .
provide extended screeds with corresponding auger and tunnel extensions to ensure a uniform head of fresh material across the entire screed .
install reverse screw augers with a minimum efficiency of num percent at the gear box for paving activities .
ensure equipment manuals for the paver and screed are always available for the operators and engineers reference .
the contractor may use alternate paver configurations provided they comply with the manufacturers written instructions and can be demonstrated to produce an acceptable pavement .
the alternate configuration must be approved in writing before use .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction equip the screed with automatic controls that will make adjustments in transverse and longitudinal directions .
provide a sensing device that is adaptable to picking up grade information from a stringline rail ski laser or other approved method .
operate the paver at a speed consistent with the delivery of superpave hma to provide a smooth uniform travel with the paver stopping only under unusual circumstances .
provide a paver including when screed extensions are used capable of producing a smooth uniform texture dense joints and a smooth riding surface .
provide enough trucks to maintain a continuous paving operation .
f. mixing .
do not exceed the control point upper and lower specification limits specified in table numa and table numb when applying the applicable tolerances to the acceptance test strip jmf or cjmf for superpave hma .
do not exceed num percent moisture content in the mixture at the time of placement when tested using aashto t num .
mix material with the range specified in table num .
g. superpave hma paving plan .
immediately before paving the contractor the asphalt supplier the engineer and the department personnel involved in the paving operation will hold a preoperational paving meeting to discuss how to achieve the highest quality surface .
before the preoperational paving meeting submit a superpave hma paving plan .
tailor the plan to the asphalt to be supplied the anticipated jmf and the contractors equipment and operation .
include at least the following num .
breakdown intermediate and finish rollers to be used .
num .
static or vibratory rolling for breakdown and intermediate rolling .
num .
frequency amplitude forceimpact and roller velocity for vibratory rolling .
num .
proximity of breakdown roller to paver with respect to horizontal displacement .
num .
proximity of intermediate roller to breakdown roller .
num .
compaction temperatures for breakdown intermediate and finish rolling .
num .
adjustments to pavingcompaction operation with respect to temperature amplitude frequency lift thickness gradation forceimpact and roller velocity .
num .
rubbertired rolling with respect to pickup of pavement material .
num .
paving equipment preheating and vibratory settings of the screed .
num .
coordination of plant production and paving operations climate and haul distance .
num .
surface and air temperatures anticipated during production .
num .
temperature necessary to allow public traffic onto the new pavement surface .
num .
anticipated traffic control issues .
num .
additional equipment required .
num .
inspection sampling and testing requirements .
num .
other paving issues if any .
h. acceptance test strip .
construct an acceptance test strip in accordance with idaho ir num .
construct num test section of the acceptance test strip using the jmf .
the department does not require acceptance test strips on projects less than num lane mile in length or for leveling courses nonstructural pavement or temporary pavement .
lane miles are the length in miles multiplied by the number of travel lanes .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num construct the acceptance test strip to the same placement width and thickness as the course it represents .
construct additional acceptance test strips at no additional cost to the department if aggregate or asphalt binder sources change or the jmf changes .
the contractor may elect to construct additional test sections .
submit the selected changes for each additional test section in writing .
only a qualified superpave mix design technician or a professional engineer may make changes .
the department will not make separate payments for construction sampling or testing of the initial acceptance test strip or additional test strips .
in lieu of an acceptance test strip the contractor may elect to perform offsite mix volumetric property verification .
do not use departmentowned or controlled sources for offsite testing .
the acceptance test strip is num lot .
produce and compact wma for the acceptance test strip at the lowest mixing and compaction temperatures that will be used during production .
do not mix or compact wma at temperatures during production that are less than the acceptance test strip wma temperatures .
when foaming processes are used the engineer may test the produced material for stripping astm dnum and rutting susceptibility aashto t num .
num .
onsite test strip acceptance .
obtain num mix samples from each test section in accordance with idaho ir num in the engineers presence .
place portions totaling at least num pounds of mix for each mix sample in multiple cardboard storage containers that comply with the qa manual section num .
properly label the containers and immediately submit .
the department will combine the portions making up the samples and split each numpound mix sample at the departments testing laboratory in accordance with aashto r num with ½ tested for acceptance and ½ retained for dispute resolution .
see table num for sampling and testing requirements .
obtain num cold feed aggregate sample increments and immediately submit for testing .
see table num for sampling and testing requirements .
make available at the mixing plant aggregate gradation test results and running averages of stockpiles developed before the acceptance test strip .
obtain num randomly located core samples from the compacted superpave hma placed in each test section and in accordance with idaho ir num .
the engineer will observe the core sampling .
immediately submit the cores for testing to determine the density of the compacted acceptance test strip and to determine the density correction factors for density equipment .
the department will determine core densities in accordance with aashto t num method a or aashto t num .
the department may use astm dnum to dry the cores .
the department will determine density correction factors for density equipment in accordance with aashto t num or fop for aashto t num .
the department will require num hours from the time of receipt of superpave hma mix samples and core samples to perform acceptance testing .
time will begin when the engineer is in possession of the required samples and associated paperwork needed to perform the specified testing .
the department will require an additional num hours to perform acceptance test strip confirmation testing if stripping and rutting susceptibility tests are not performed on laboratory produced wma during mix design confirmation .
num .
offsite mix volumetric properties acceptance .
the engineer will allow the jmf to be verified offsite in accordance with idaho ir num .
when offsite jmf verification is performed obtain num mix samples from each test section in accordance with idaho ir num in the engineers presence .
place portions totaling at least num pounds of mix for each mix sample in multiple cardboard storage containers that comply with the qa manual section num .
properly identify the containers and immediately submit .
the department will combine the portions making up the samples and split each numpound mix sample at the departments num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction testing laboratory in accordance with aashto r num with ½ tested for acceptance and ½ retained for dispute resolution .
see table num for sampling and testing requirements .
obtain num cold feed aggregate sample increments and immediately submit for testing .
see table num for sampling and testing requirements .
at the mixing plant make available the aggregate gradation test results and running averages of stockpiles developed before the acceptance test strip .
the department will require num business days from the time of receipt of superpave hma mix samples and cold feed samples to perform volumetric and aggregate acceptance testing .
time will begin when the required samples and associated paperwork needed to perform the specified testing are in the engineers possession .
num .
density gauge correlation .
after approval of volumetrics construct a density gauge correlation section on the prepared roadway consisting of the first num feet of the first paving day .
obtain num randomly located core samples in accordance with idaho ir num .
the engineer will determine the gmm used in the density determination from the departments num verification tests on the first paving day plus num additional random sample .
the department requires num hours from the time of receipt of cores to perform density acceptance testing .
time will begin when the required samples and associated paperwork needed to perform the specified testing are in the engineers possession .
repair deficiencies created by the coring operation at no additional cost to the department .
obtain approval of repair methods and materials before beginning coring .
the engineer will base acceptance on the requirements in table num .
do not begin production paving until properties of the acceptance test strip are accepted .
table num superpave acceptance test strip testing requirements material quality characteristic test method number of tests point of sampling method sampled by tested by compacted pavement density cores b aashto t num method a or t num as specified in num.h roadway contractor dept .
mix asphalt content e aashto t num num per test section average of num samples aashto t num see qa manual section num num random samples locations determined contractor dept .
gradation c aashto t num contractor dept .
air voids vma vfa dust to binder ratio a aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num method a or aashto t num contractor dept .
rice gravity aashto t num or astm dnum contractor dept .
asphalt pavement analyzer f aashto t num contractor dept .
moisture content aashto t num contractor dept .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num a the average test results from the superpave hma samples for each test section must meet the requirements in table num the astm dnum test will not be required by the department .
b the average density of the cores for each test strip must be less than num percent and greater than num percent of the maximum theoretical density as determined using aashto t num or astm dnum .
the gmm value to be used for each test strip is the average gmm calculated from each test section of the acceptance test strip .
c the average aashto t num gradation of num randomly selected mix samples must meet the gradation requirements in table num for each individual test section .
d the test results from combining num cold feed aggregate samples must meet the requirements in table num .
no tolerance is allowed .
e the average asphalt binder content for each test section must meet the requirements in table num. f samples tested in accordance with aashto t num asphalt pavement analyzer must meet num.a .
num .
acceptance test strip tolerance .
the engineer will apply the following tolerances to the acceptance test strip test properties specified in table num .
table num acceptance test strip tolerance quality characteristic sp num mix tolerance sp num sp num mix tolerance vma none allowed num minimum value num laboratory air voids num num num num asphalt binder content jmf value num selected asphalt content num dust proportion dp table num range num table num range num vfa table num range num table num range num no.num and larger sieves jmf value num a jmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves jmf value num a jmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves jmf value num a jmf value num a no .
num and smaller sieves jmf value num a jmf value num a density none allowed none allowed a the upper and lower specification limits are never allowed to be outside the control points specified in num .
if the departments average test results for each characteristic fall within the tolerances provided and the acceptance test strip is considered acceptable by the engineer the contractor may proceed to production paving .
if an individual test result for a characteristic fails outside the tolerance provided in table num the engineer may require another test strip .
meet specification requirements when production paving begins .
the contractor may place a new acceptance test strip or provide a new mix design to meet specifications instead of proceeding when the test results fall outside the specification limits but are within the tolerance limits .
aggregated fracture aashto t num method num num per test strip combination of num increments cold feed aashto t num num random increments contractor dept .
faa aashto t num method a contractor dept .
fe fop for astm dnum contractor dept .
sand equivalent aashto t num alt .
method num mechanical contractor dept .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction if the departments test results fall outside the tolerances allowed the engineer will consider the acceptance test strip unacceptable and the contractor will not be allowed to proceed to production paving .
the engineer will reject an unacceptable test section for sp num and sp num mixtures and require removal .
the department will not pay for the removal or the applicable contract pay item quantities .
an unacceptable test section for sp num mixtures will be subject to rejection .
if the engineer determines the failed sp num test section may remain in place the contractor may leave the test section in place with a num percent reduction in price or remove the failed material and replace it with acceptable material and receive full payment .
remove the failed sp num test section if rejected .
the department will not pay for removal or for the applicable contract pay item quantities .
on the contractors request the engineer will evaluate the acceptance test results when the departments average test results fall outside the tolerances provided for the listed sieves andor asphalt content .
the engineer will not conduct an evaluation unless the other acceptance characteristic values are within the specified tolerances .
after evaluation the engineer will determine whether the acceptance test strip may be accepted .
if the contractor is unable to meet the requirements the engineer may require a new mix design to meet specifications .
place a new acceptance test strip at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractors testing determines the test strip fails and the contractor chooses to proceed with another test strip before receiving the engineers results the engineer will complete testing of the test strip in question and report the results before accepting material from the next test strip for evaluation .
obtain the engineers test section acceptance before starting production paving .
after acceptance the department will pay for superpave hma pavement and asphalt binder in the test strip under their respective contract pay items .
the engineer will allow slight adjustments to the jmf to obtain the desired air voids density uniformity and constructability for sp num and sp num mixes .
the contractor may make slight adjustments to the asphalt content and gradation of the jmf of an approved acceptance test strip .
if adjustments are not required or when the contractors adjustments to the jmf are used the approved jmf will become the cjmf .
for sp num mixes the contractor may select the asphalt content and gradation of a passing test section within the test strip as the cjmf .
submit the cjmf intended for use during production paving in writing .
use the cjmf to establish target values when producing control charts during production paving .
use the cjmf to establish asphalt content and gradation target values for sp num mixes .
i .
tack coat .
apply an asphalt tack coat to the following surfaces as specified in num num .
existing plant mix surfaces and to the surface of each course constructed except the final course .
num .
paint or spray a thin uniform tack coat of asphalt before placing pavement against the surfaces of curbing gutters manholes portland cement pavement and other structures .
num .
contact surfaces of transverse joints and cold longitudinal joints just before additional mixture is placed against previously laid material .
j .
production paving .
the contractor may request to begin production paving in accordance with the cjmf after the acceptance test strip is approved .
superpave hma paving acceptance is based on the requirements in the qasp table num .
num .
documentationrecords .
maintain documentation including test summary sheets and control charts on an ongoing basis .
maintain a file of gyratory specimen heights for gyratory compacted samples and test worksheets .
file reports records and diaries developed during the progress of the work .
a .
number test results in accordance with the department procedures and record on department approved or supplied forms .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
submit production test results on test summary sheets by num a.m. of the day following production .
c. include the following production test results and mixture information on a department approved test summary sheet daily .
num percent passing on sieves listed in num .
num theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm .
num bulk specific gravity gmb at ndes .
num percent asphalt binder content pb .
num calculated production air voids pa. num calculated voids in mineral aggregate vma and voids filled with asphalt vfa .
num aggregate proportions in use at the time of sampling .
num tons of mix that were inspected sampled and tested .
num cumulative tons of mix .
num dust to binder ratio .
num signature location for the department and the contractor representative .
num mixture moisture content .
num department test result when available .
d. submit copies of failing test results daily .
e. submit the asphalt loading certificates daily .
f. submit a daily plant diary including a description of quality control actions taken e.g .
adjustment of cold feed percentages changes or adjustments on the test summary sheets and the name of the qualified person who made the changes .
g. submit a final hardcopy summary of quality control test summary sheets and control charts at completion of paving operations .
submit the quality control test summary sheets control charts and density worksheets .
documentationcontrol charts .
record the following data on standardized control charts and make them available daily .
the contractor will generate control charts and summary sheets using approved methods .
plot individual test results for each test point .
connect individual points with a solid line .
show specification limits and tolerances on the control chart where applicable .
document corrective actions taken on summary sheets .
include tests and plots in the project files .
plot control charts as follows a .
aggregate gradation .
test aggregate gradation in accordance with aashto t num at the frequency in the qasp table num and plot the results on control charts for each sieve in num .
plot the target gradation for each sieve from the cjmf and plot the upper and lower specification limit for each sieve on the control charts .
the control charts will be used by the contractor as an aid to control the paving operation .
b. asphalt binder content pb .
test asphalt binder content in accordance with aashto t num at the frequency in the qasp table num for superpave hma and plot the results on a control chart .
plot the target asphalt binder content from the cjmf and plot the upper and lower specification limit on the control chart .
the control chart will be used by the contractor as an aid to control the paving operation .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction c. theoretical maximum specific gravity .
test gmm in accordance with aashto t num or astm dnum at the frequency in the qasp table num and plot the results on a control chart .
use at least num determinations that do not vary by more than num .
the average of num determinations constitutes num test result .
allow material to cool to room temperature .
d. bulk specific gravity of compacted mixture .
test gmb in accordance with aashto t num at the frequency shown and determine gmb using the average of num compacted gyratory specimens sampled and tested as specified in the qasp table num .
the num determinations must not vary by more than num .
use this value in calculations requiring a gmb value .
condition loose asphalt mixture samples for at least num hours before testing to allow for binder absorption .
time begins when the binder is introduced to the aggregate .
condition material used for acceptance tests .
match test condition time for material used for acceptance tests to the field conditions of the field compacted mixture .
the contractor must show the engineer that absorption is complete in less than num hours in the field to shorten condition time .
do not overcondition the material by keeping the samples at an elevated temperature .
e. production air voids pa .
calculate air voids at the frequency in the qasp table num and plot the results on a control chart .
target num percent air voids during production paving .
calculate pa by using the values of the gmm and the gmb determined above .
f. voids in mineral aggregate vma .
calculate vma at the frequency in the qasp table num and plot the results on a control chart .
the contractor will target the vma value from the cjmf during production paving .
calculate vma by using the gmb value determined from samples taken during production paving and the gsb value determined for the mix design .
determine percent aggregate content ps from the samples taken during production paving by using this equation num pb .
the department will not recalculate gsb during the project .
g. voids filled with asphalt vfa .
calculate vfa and plot the results at the frequency shown for vma and pa in the qasp table num using the values for vma and pa. take action to correct mixtures that do not remain within the range specified in the qasp table num. h. dust to binder ratiodust proportion dp .
calculate dust to binder ratio or dust proportion using the value for pb the value for minus num and the value for gmm and plot the results at the frequency shown for vma and pa in in the qasp table num .
take action to correct mixtures that do not remain within the range specified in the qasp table num. i .
production limits .
apply the limits in qasp table num to the production paving test properties and plot on control charts .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num production paving quality limits quality characteristic limits sp num mixture no .
num sieve and larger sieves cjmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves cjmf value num a no .
num to no .
num sieves cjmf value num a no .
num sieve and smaller sieves cjmf value num a asphalt binder content cjmf value num sp num and sp num mixtures laboratory air voids ndesign num num vma ndesign num minimum value numb vfa table num value num dust to binder ratio dp table num value num a the upper and lower specification limits are never allowed to be outside the control points specified in num. b for purposes of quality analysis calculations .
k. spreading and finishing .
place the mixture on an approved surface .
use pavers to distribute the mixture over the entire width or over a partial width as practical .
do not extend partial width paving beyond one days production .
place superpave hma in a single lift .
use pavement marking tape to temporarily mark roadway centerline on pavements being used by traffic as specified in num .
unless otherwise specified equip the paver with a shoe on the outside to provide slopes as follows the engineer will allow an numinchwide shoe for depths num foot or less on initial pavement placement .
the shoe must be num inches wide for depths greater than num foot .
the shoe must be num inches wide on pavement overlays .
l. compaction .
compact superpave hma as quickly as possible after placing .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work .
provide vibratory steel wheel or pneumatic tire type rollers in good condition capable of reversing without backlash and operating at speeds slow enough to avoid displacement of the mixture .
use the number and compactive force of rollers that is sufficient to compact the mixture as specified in this subsection .
do not use equipment which results in excessive crushing of the aggregate .
the engineer will reject rollers producing pickup washboard uneven compaction of the surface or other undesirable results .
rolling equipment to be used and its relative position in the compaction sequence is the contractors option as long as the specification densities and smoothness are attained .
independently operate each roller used .
rolling equipment used for the acceptance test strip will be the same type and weight as will be used for subsequent pavement compaction .
to accommodate full production the contractor may use additional rollers more than the number used in construction of the test strip .
do not operate vibratory rollers in the vibratory mode when the internal mix temperature is less than num f or when checking or cracking of the mat occurs at a higher temperature unless otherwise allowed or because wma is used .
follow the paver as closely as possible with breakdown rolling .
perform intermediate rolling as near as possible to the optimum temperature for compaction as determined by written instructions of the asphalt product supplier .
perform finish rolling at as high of a temperature as practical to eliminate marks from previous rolling .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction begin rolling at the sides and proceed longitudinally parallel to the road centerline with each trip overlapping ½ the roller width .
when paving in echelon abutting a previously placed lane roll the longitudinal joint first followed by the regular rolling procedure .
on super elevated curves begin the rolling at the low side and progress to the high side by overlapping the longitudinal passes parallel to the centerline .
do not displace the line and grade of the pavement edges .
keep the wheels properly moistened with water or water mixed with very small quantities of detergent or other approved material to prevent adhesion of the mixture to the rollers .
do not use excess liquid .
do not apply diesel fuel kerosene or other solvents to roller drums or tires to prevent adhesion of the mixture .
thoroughly compact the mixture with mechanical tampers or other approved compactors along forms curbs headers walls and other places not accessible to rollers .
remove the mixture from the gutter surface before rolling .
compact the pavement to a density between num percent and num percent of maximum theoretical density for sp num sp num and sp num mixes .
following acceptance test strip approval pavement density testing for acceptance will be performed by the department using a gauge with the readings corrected by cores in accordance with aashto t num or fop for aashto t num .
the department will use the average gmm of the test section corresponding to the contractors jmf to determine densities for the specified mix production paving .
the contractor is responsible for quality control testing .
when an acceptance test strip is not required the department will base acceptance for pavement density on the density of cores taken from the finished pavement .
obtain num randomly located core samples in accordance with the fop for aashto r num from the compacted superpave hma in the engineers presence .
the engineer will determine the random core locations .
immediately submit the cores for testing .
the department will determine the density of the cores the fop for aashto t num method a or aashto t num .
in addition obtain num randomly located mix samples during hma placement in the engineers presence and immediately submit samples for testing .
obtain the samples in accordance with the fop for aashto t num see the qasp table num note num .
the engineer will randomly locate the mix samples and the department will test the mix samples to determine the gmm value in accordance with the fop for aashto t num or astm dnum .
the department will use the average of the num gmm values to compute inplace density of the cores taken for density acceptance .
if paving will be performed in different construction seasons e.g .
bridge approaches obtain num additional cores from the compacted superpave hma and num additional mix samples for density acceptance when paving resumes .
the contractor is responsible for quality control testing .
repair holes left in the pavement by the coring operation with nonshrink grout at no additional cost to the department .
do not begin coring until repair methods and materials have been approved .
m. joints .
do not roll over the unprotected end of freshly laid mixture .
form transverse joints by cutting back on the previous run to expose a vertical edge the full depth of the course .
slope the cold transverse construction joints open to public traffic at numhnumv .
remove the sloped surface ramp without damage to the base just before paving is resumed .
test the new joint for smoothness as specified in num.p .
construct end transitions between overlays and the adjoining pavement by milling a wedge out of the adjoining pavement starting at the surface and continuing into the adjoining pavement on a numhnumv slope or flatter until a vertical edge equal to num foot or the depth of overlay is reached .
transitions to ramps and crossroads are transverse joints .
the milled wedge is a transverse joint when the adjoining pavement is concrete .
mill the wedge from the pavement to be overlaid with the vertical edge against the concrete when the adjoining pavement is concrete .
taper transitions between overlays and approaches to form a smooth transition while maintaining drainage .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide a positive bond density and a finish surface to the new mixture at longitudinal joints that is equal to the mixture against which it is placed .
the engineer may take density tests at longitudinal joints to ensure the integrity of material in the joint area .
locate the longitudinal joint in the top course at the centerline of the traveled way if the roadway is two lanes wide or at the lane lines if the roadway is more than num lanes wide .
on the lower courses stagger the longitudinal joint and offset it num inches to num foot from the centerline of the traveled way if the roadway is num lanes wide or from the lane lines if the roadway is more than num lanes wide .
match the pavement surface across a longitudinal joint with the transverse slope shown on typical sections .
test joints except crowns for smoothness in accordance with idaho ir num .
use an approved numfoot straightedge .
complete the test and necessary corrections before the material temperature drops below num f. place longitudinal joints straight and true .
use approved methods to bring back to straight and true unacceptable deviations .
make adjustments as needed to achieve the specified results .
obtain approval for superpave hma mix designs before the start of milling operations .
n. miscellaneous pavement .
place miscellaneous superpave hma pavement in irregular areas e.g .
raised or depressed medians gores tapers radii excluding approach radii tapered paving for guardrail terminal widening .
include areas that taper from num to num feet maximum width and gore areas from roadway shoulders to termini in this work .
do not include pavement widening for installation of guardrail in this work .
o .
leveling course .
construct the leveling course of superpave hma with a compacted thickness greater than num foot in multiple courses .
place the leveling course on the existing surface in quantities as approved .
use pavers andor motor graders and a sufficient number of pneumatic tire rollers to adequately place and compact the leveling course to the required crosssection and grade .
use a steelwheel roller for final rolling if the leveling course is to be used as a wearing course or if a seal coat is to be applied .
when blade laid leveling course is specified place superpave hma in wheel ruts and other surface irregularities .
blade superpave hma into the low areas using a motor grader .
normally num passes are required to fill depressions .
follow each pass of the motor grader with a pneumatic tired roller to provide compaction .
position the blade of the motor grader so light contact with the existing pavement surface is maintained .
the contractor may dispose of excess coarse aggregate resulting from placing the blade laid leveling course along the edge of the roadway .
when machine laid leveling course is specified place superpave hma on the roadway with a paver to restore crown super elevation or rideability .
operate the screed close to the existing pavement surface .
the engineer will accept minor surface tears from this operation .
use pneumatic and vibratory rolling for compaction .
p. surface smoothness .
place pavement complying with schedule ii .
for schedule iii only perform prepaving quality control and acceptance surface smoothness testing analyze the results of this testing and submit the results .
submit prepaving results .
before paving submit a plan showing how schedule iii smoothness will be achieved .
submit quality control results by the next working day following placement .
if the quality control testing results show surface smoothness is not within the acceptable specification limits suspend paving operations until it can be shown the steps taken to modify operations will result in acceptable smoothness .
perform acceptance testing on the final lift and submit the results before corrective action .
complete acceptance testing within num week of paving completion .
perform quality control testing in international roughness index iri .
request to use quality control testing for acceptance before the start of paving .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction acceptance surface smoothness testing must be verified by the engineer .
the profile run must be witnessed by the engineer and a preliminary copy of the report submitted immediately after the end of the run .
the engineer will not accept the testing unless witnessed .
submit the profile data in a format suitable for evaluation using proval or other industry standard software .
do not perform corrective action until approved .
the engineer may elect to perform additional testing for verification .
if the results vary from the contractors iri results by more than num percent the engineer will use the departments iri results for acceptance .
use class num or class num profilers as defined in astm enum .
operate profilers in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and aashto r num .
set the profiler as follows num .
high pass or prefilter off or at least num feet .
num .
bump detection on num .
dip detection on num .
resolution num inch num .
low pass filter off num .
other filters off measure the finished pavement as follows num .
test the surface with a numfoot straightedge at locations determined by the engineer .
identify the locations that vary more than ¼ inch from the lower edge when the straightedge is laid on finished pavement in a direction parallel with centerline or perpendicular to centerline .
remove the high points that cause the surface to exceed the ¼ inch tolerance by grinding .
num .
profile the surface num feet from and parallel to each edge of each traffic lane .
the engineer will use the average of the results for each num mile section to calculate incentive payments and determine sections requiring corrective action .
the department requires the pavement to comply with the following surface smoothness schedule requirements a .
where longitudinal grade is num percent or less pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having centerline radius of curve num feet or more must meet the surface smoothness requirements for the smoothness schedule specified .
the engineer will add consecutive num mile sections of roadway tested together to obtain the mile section .
there will be no overlapping of the num mile or num mile sections to change cumulative test results .
num smoothness schedule using iri a schedule i projects target iri values range from num to num inches per mile per num mile .
corrective action required above num inches per num mile .
b schedule ii projects target iri values range from num to num inches per mile per num mile .
corrective action required above num inches per mile per num mile .
c schedule iii projects target iri value range defined as one of the following i .
for sections with a prepaving iri less than num inches per mile per num mile the final index must not exceed num inches per mile per num mile .
ii .
for sections with a prepaving iri of num inches per num mile or greater use the smoother of either num .
a num percent improvement of the prepaving index .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
a maximum final index of num inches per mile per num mile .
corrective action is required above the target iri .
b .
the engineer will exclude acceptance test strips pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve of less than num feet and pavement within the super elevation transition of such curves or pavement with a longitudinal grade greater than num percent from incentivedisincentive payments .
meet the corrective action requirements for the smoothness schedule specified .
num .
profile the pavement to provide continuous uninterrupted profile data .
the department will not apply profile smoothness tolerances and incentivedisincentive payments to the following a. pavement within num feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from a structure deck an approach slab or an existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
b. pavement for approaches and structure decks .
c. roadways with a speed limit less than num mph .
d. interstate ramps .
smoothness acceptance for these areas will be as specified with straightedge requirements .
do not profile pavement for approaches .
operate the profiler at a speed equal to or less than the manufacturers recommended speed .
calibrate the profiler at the beginning of the work and as needed thereafter .
grind individual high points in excess of num inch within num feet or less as determined by the california profilograph simulation until such high points do not exceed num inch .
after individual high point grinding has been completed perform additional grinding in sections requiring corrective action to reduce the iri to a maximum of num inches per mile per num mile section along lines parallel with the pavement edge .
grind parallel to centerline .
extend adjacent grinder passes within ground area to produce a neat rectangular area having a uniform surface appearance .
make smoothly feathered transitions at transverse boundaries between ground and unground areas .
apply a fog coat to the ground pavement surface as specified in num after grinding has been completed .
use powerdriven grinding equipment that is specifically designed to smooth portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
use a machine with an effective wheelbase at least num feet and a cutting width of at least num feet .
instead of diamond grinding the contractor may use a selfpropelled milling machine of the type used for removal of asphalt pavement provided a special milling head is used that is designed to provide a texture similar to diamond grinding .
use a milling head with cutting teeth that do not exceed a spacing of num inch .
restrict the machine forward speed to num feet per minute while milling .
if the texture produced by milling is unsatisfactory the engineer will require diamond grinding .
provide grinding or milling equipment of a shape and dimension that does not encroach on traffic movement .
check the pavement for smoothness after grinding as specified in this subsection and make additional corrections necessary to achieve smoothness .
submit a report and graph showing compliance of the final surface to the smoothness requirements .
the department will not pay for the cost of grinding milling or related work e.g .
fog coat disposal of milled material traffic control flagging profiling surface repair of ground or milled areas or temporary striping .
if correction of the roadway as specified will not produce satisfactory smoothness results or it reduces pavement thicknesses and serviceability the engineer may accept the completed pavement and will deduct from monies due or may become due to the contractor the sum of num for each individual high num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction point or num for each num mile section .
under these circumstances the engineers decision whether to accept the completed pavement or to require corrections is final .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
pavements leveling courses and asphalts by the ton .
the engineer will not permit batch weights as a method of measurement .
the superpave hma quantity will be the weight used in the accepted pavement and will include the weight of the aggregate asphalt and additives in the mixture .
num .
antistripping additive by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt .
num .
miscellaneous pavement by the square yard .
final measurement will be based on plan quantities unless changed by the engineer .
miscellaneous pavement measurement is in addition to the measurement of asphalt and superpave hma material .
num .
approaches per each regardless of width or length .
separate mailbox turnouts will be measured as an approach .
mailbox turnouts adjacent to an approach will be considered as part of the approach and no separate measurement will be made .
approach measurements are in addition to the measurement of asphalt and superpave hma material .
num .
wedge milling for the transition section by the square yard .
num .
tack coat will be paid for as specified in num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit superpave hma pavement class sp ___ ton superpave hma pavement including asphalt and additives class sp ton leveling course class sp ton leveling course including asphalt and additives class sp ton ___asphalt binder for superpave hma pavement ton ___percent antistripping additive for superpave hma pavement toa miscellaneous pavement sy approaches each wedge milling sy the cost to produce the required aggregate in each stockpile to accommodate blends is incidental and included in the contract unit price for the superpave hma contract pay item .
when superpave hma includes rap in any proportion the department will not include the asphalt binder contributed by the rap in the quantity for asphalt and additives when asphalt and additives are paid for separately .
for each evaluation section the contractor is entitled to a payment adjustment excluding acceptance test strips and schedule iii surface smoothness work .
an evaluation section is defined as a num mile per traffic lane or fraction as applicable .
the department will not pay an incentive for pavement on the roadway shoulders center turn lanes turn bays crossovers tapers or other miscellaneous pavement .
the department will pay incentive as specified in table num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num iri initial inches per mile per num mile section payment per num mi schedule i schedule ii num num or less num or less num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num and corrective action num or greater num or greater num and corrective action individual high points individual high points the department will make only num incentive payment per evaluation section .
an evaluation section runs consecutively from the point paving begins to the point paving is interrupted e.g .
at bridges the end of lane paving areas specifically excluded by the specifications .
the department will prorate partial sections based on their percentage of a full section .
the department will base incentive payments on initial profiles before corrective work on the top course of paving .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num road mix pavement num description .
construct num or more courses of road mix pavement on a prepared base or road surface .
num materials .
provide asphalt of the type and grade specified .
provide asphalt and antistripping additive as specified in num if required .
the engineer will accept the asphalt at the point of delivery .
provide aggregate as specified in num .
the engineer will accept the aggregate at the point of delivery from contractorprovided sources or the crushing plant from designated sources .
num construction requirements .
a .
season and moisture limitations .
do not apply asphalt if surface or weather conditions prevent proper construction .
do not construct road mix pavement before may num or after september num .
b .
equipment .
provide scarifying mixing spreading finishing and compacting equipment an asphalt distributor and equipment for heating the asphalt .
ensure the distributor is designed equipped maintained and operated so asphalt can be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface at readily determined and controlled rates with uniform pressure .
provide distributor equipment that includes a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents .
equip distributors with a power unit for the pump and fullcirculation vertically adjustable spray bars .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work .
c. preparation of roadbed .
uniformly compact the roadbed surface .
keep the prepared base in good condition before placing the bituminous surface course .
leave the prime coat undisturbed for at least num hours .
spread blotter as specified in num in an approved quantity to absorb the excess asphalt if the asphalt does not penetrate and the roadway must be used by traffic .
allow the tack coat to dry until it is tacky enough to receive the road mix material .
d. placing aggregate .
uniformly spread aggregate on the road by the use of spreader boxes or other approved mechanical spreading devices .
e. application of asphalt .
uniformly distribute the asphalt in successive applications in quantities and at intervals as approved .
ensure the mixing equipment follows immediately behind the distributor after each asphalt application to partially mix the aggregate and the asphalt and ensure the asphalt application temperature is as specified .
f. mixing .
windrow the entire mass of asphalt and aggregate on the road surface after the last asphalt application and partial mixing and then mix until aggregate particles are coated with asphalt the whole mass has a uniform color and the mixture is without fat or lean spots balls or uncoated particles .
avoid cutting into the underlying course or contaminating the mixture with earth or other extraneous matter during the mixing operations .
the engineer may require confining the mixing process to part of the width or area of the roadway to allow traffic to pass .
add aggregate or asphalt as required and remix if the mixture shows an excess a deficiency or uneven distribution of asphalt .
if the mixture contains excessive amounts of moisture or volatile matter blade aerate or otherwise manipulate the mixture until the moisture and volatile contents are satisfactory .
do not spread the mix if the surface to be covered is in unsatisfactory condition .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num blade loose material into a windrow at the end of each days work or when the work is interrupted by weather or other conditions whether mixing is completed or not and keep in a windrow until operations are resumed .
g. spreading compacting and finishing .
spread the material by a patrol or a mechanical spreader as approved .
avoid cutting into the underlying base if spreading from the windrow .
roll the surface after the material is spread .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work .
perform initial rolling with a pneumatictire roller and final rolling with a numwheel or tandemtype steelwheel roller .
roll parallel to the road centerline starting at the outer edges of the road overlapping the shoulders and progress toward the center overlapping on successive passes by at least ½ the width of the roller except on superelevated curves where rolling progresses from the lower to the upper edge .
end each pass at least num feet in advance or to the rear of the end of the preceding pass .
blade the surface during compaction to fill ruts and remove incipient corrugations or other irregularities as necessary .
continue rolling until the surfacing is a uniform texture and meets the compaction specified .
h. surfacing approaches .
construct road mix pavement on approaches as specified or as directed .
i .
surface smoothness .
the engineer will test the completed surface in accordance with idaho it num .
ensure the surface does not vary more than ¼ inch from a numfoot straightedge .
j .
aggregate for road mix pavement in stockpile .
provide aggregate material in stockpiles at approved locations .
prepare the stockpile site by clearing and smoothing as directed .
construct stockpiles that are neat and regular in form and occupy as small an area as possible .
construct by first distributing the material to be stockpiled over the entire base and building upward in successive layers at least num feet in depth .
do not enddump or convey materials over the sides of the pile .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptable work as follows num .
aggregate and asphalt for road mix pavement by the ton .
num .
antistripping additive by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt .
num .
approaches by the each paved regardless of size .
num .
aggregate for road mix pavement in stockpile by the ton or cubic yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit aggregate for road mix pavement ton approaches each aggregate for road mix pavement in stockpile ton or cy aggregate for road mix pavement load haul and place ton emulsified asphalt for road mix pavement ton percent antistripping additive for road mix pavement toa num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num scrub coat num description .
construct a scrub coat on the road surface .
num materials .
provide asphalt of the type and grade specified .
provide asphalt and antistripping additive as specified in num if required .
the engineer will determine acceptability of the asphalt at the point of delivery .
provide aggregate for scrub coat as specified in num .
the contractor does not need to use multiple stockpiles .
the engineer will determine acceptability of the aggregate from the contractorprovided sources at the point of delivery and at the crushing plant from designated sources .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
do not place scrub coat material on wet or frozen surfaces .
ensure the ambient and surface temperature is num f and rising .
clean the surface by brooming or other approved methods .
b. mixing .
mix the plant mix scrub coat as specified in num .
mix the road mix scrub coat as specified in num .
produce mixtures at the lowest temperature that will produce a uniform workable mixture not exceeding num f. c. equipment .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work .
d. spreading compacting and finishing .
apply the tack coat as specified in num before applying the scrub coat .
sufficiently aerate the scrub coat material before spreading .
spread and tight blade from shoulder to shoulder or as directed .
fill depressions irregularities and cracks and smooth to create a uniform surface .
roll with pneumatic tire rollers concurrently with the spreading .
finish roll with a steelwheel roller .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
scrub coat asphalt and antistripping additive by the ton if required .
the engineer will not accept batch weights as a method of measurement .
a deduction will not be made for the weight of the asphalt or other additives in the mixtures .
num .
antistripping additive by the percentage of additive per ton of asphalt .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit ___ plant mix scrub coat ton ___ aggregate for road mix scrub coat ton ___ emulsified asphalt for scrub coat ton ___ percent antistripping additive for scrub coat toa ___ plant mix scrub coat including asphalt and additives ton the department will not make separate payment for asphalt and additives for plant mix scrub coat including asphalt and additives .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num fog coat num description .
apply a fog coat and blotter if required .
num materials .
provide fog coat material that is diluted emulsified asphalt .
provide the emulsified asphalt as specified in num .
mix approximately equal volumes of emulsified asphalt and water before application .
provide blotter material as specified in num .
the engineer will determine acceptability of material from the contractorprovided sources at the point of delivery and at the source from designated sources .
num construction requirements .
a .
equipment .
provide equipment for applying the fog coat as specified in num.b and blotter material as specified in num .
b .
application of fog coat .
apply fog coat material with a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread .
ensure the distributor does not exceed num mph .
do not exceed the specified asphalt application rate at the junction of the spread overlap .
correct skipped areas or deficiencies .
obtain approval for the quantities rate of application and temperature of the fog coat material before applying the fog coat .
do not apply the fog coat if surface or weather conditions prevent proper construction .
apply the fog coat so there is the least amount of inconvenience to traffic and to permit numway traffic without pickup or tracking .
apply the fog coat on the roadway in the same direction as traffic travels .
place fog coat over a seal coat within num working day of the completed seal coat or as conditions allow .
c. application of blotter .
spread blotter at the approved rate to absorb the excess asphalt if the fog coat material does not penetrate and the roadway must be used by traffic .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
diluted emulsified asphalt by the gallon after dilution with no correction for temperature .
num .
blotter by the ton or cubic yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit diluted emulsified asphalt for fog coat gal blotter ton or cy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num portland cement concrete pavement num description .
construct a portland cement concrete pavement as specified .
submit a proposed mix design .
the engineer will review the mix design for compliance with the specifications .
a .
classification .
proportion the materials for concrete to produce a workable concrete mix as specified in table num .
table num basic mix design parameters concrete class in num psi num dayabg minimum cementitious content lbydnumcdef water to cement ratio slump in air content percent num num num maximum num maximum num a the class of concrete is the specified compressive strength when using the applicable tests as specified in num. b a design value of num psi is specified to achieve the specified compressive strength .
c cementitious is cement plus secondary cementitious material scm .
d it may not always be possible to produce concrete of the required strength using the minimum cementitious contents .
no separate payment will be made by the department for additional cementitious material required to meet specified strength .
e use scm as specified in num. f it may not always be possible to produce concrete using the minimum scm content that will ensure mortar bar expansion does not exceed num percent expansion when tested in accordance with astm cnum aashto tp num or crd cnum .
if additional scm is needed to meet mortar bar expansion requirements the contractor may add it without a corresponding increase in cement provided the strength requirements are met .
obtain approval to add lithium or other mitigating measures to meet the mortar bar expansion requirement .
g concrete class designated as class f will contain scm .
minimum scm content varies by product for fly ash and slag cement slag minimum content is num by weight of total cementitious material .
fly ash will not exceed num of total cementitious material .
slag will not exceed num of the total cementitious material .
ternary and quaternary blends will contain at least num scm .
total scm content will not exceed num .
b .
acceptance .
concrete acceptance is based on compliance with parameters specified for paving concrete .
strength is accepted based on the results of the numday compressive strength tests determined in accordance with aashto t num .
the average strength of num companion cylinders is num test .
when the numday strength for a test falls below the specified strength concrete represented by that test is subject to rejection or a price adjustment .
the engineer may accept paving concrete at a reduced price if the strength is within num percent of the specified strength .
concrete represented by tests more than num percent below specified strength is subject to rejection .
remove unacceptable concrete at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will use table num to determine the unit price adjustment of failing paving concrete allowed to remain in place .
table num unit price adjustment percent of specified strength pay factor num num num num num num num num num subject to rejection a a if allowed to remain in place the pay factor will be num .
the department will pay for the accepted concrete quantity at the contract unit price multiplied by the price adjustment pay factor as determined from table num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num core drilling at no additional cost to the department is an acceptable alternative test to dispute test results for concrete subject to price adjustment or rejection .
the engineer will determine the location and number of cores and witness coring and testing .
repair holes left by the coring operation at no additional cost to the department .
obtain approval for repair methods and materials before beginning repairs .
cores obtained within num calendar days of the time of placement will be considered by the department as representing the numday strength .
cores obtained after num calendar days will only be acceptable to the engineer when the contractor submits a correlation curve developed by a department approved independent testing laboratory to relate strength at the actual test age to numday strength for the particular class and design mix represented by the cores .
the department and the contractor agree to accept the results of the tests of the drilled cores instead of the results of the test cylinders when drilled cores are approved as the method of determining strength .
obtain and test cores in accordance with aashto t num with the following exceptions num .
protect cores from moisture gain or loss .
num .
test as soon as possible without further conditioning other than preparation of the ends if needed .
take at least num representative cores from each area of inplace concrete that is considered potentially deficient .
replace cores that show evidence of damage during coring or removal with a new core before testing .
tests performed by an approved independent testing laboratory on cores taken from the work may include compressive strength cement content determined by astm cnum and petrographic analysis determined by astm cnum including water cement ratio and air content .
remove concrete represented by cores with an average strength less than the specified strength unless accepted at a reduced price by the engineer .
make corrective changes in the materials mix portions concrete fabrication procedures or other corrective action before continuing to use concrete that does not comply with the specified compressive strength at no additional cost to the department .
if results of numday strength tests are low or show a downward trend predicting concrete may not meet the specified numday strength make corrective changes .
changes are subject to approval .
num materials .
provide materials as specified portland cement num aggregate num joint fillers and sealers num silicone joint sealant num reinforcing steel num dowel bars num tie bars num membraneforming curing compound system num num airentraining admixtures num set retarding admixtures num waterreducing admixtures num lithium nitrate admixtures num secondary cementitious materials num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction water num epoxy resin base bonding systems num the engineer will determine acceptability of aggregate at the concrete mixing plant .
obtain approval of admixtures before use .
determine an aggregate correction factor in accordance with aashto t num and submit with each mix design .
test in accordance with the following standard methods compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field use num inch diameter by num inch single use molds made of plastic .
aashto t num obtaining and testing drilled cores and sawed beams of concrete provisions of aashto t num relating to astm and american concrete institute aci references do not apply aashto t num slump of hydraulic cement concrete aashto t num mass per cubic foot cubic meter yield and air content gravimetric of concrete including cement content aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the laboratory use num inch diameter by num inch single use molds made of plastic .
aashto r num measuring length of drilled concrete cores aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method aashto t num measuring texture depth of portland cement concrete using a tire tread depth gauge idaho it num pavement straightedge procedures idaho it num standard practice for operating an inertial profiler system aashto r num method of testing thickness of plastic concrete pavement idaho it num determination of the rate of evaporation of subsurface moisture from concrete idaho it num determining the percentage of fracture of coarse aggregate aashto t num method num sampling freshly mixed concrete waqtc tm num standard test method for determining the potential alkali silica reactivity of combinations of cementitious materials and aggregate accelerated mortarbar method astm cnum temperature of freshly mixed portland cement concrete aashto t num determining the potential alkali silica reactivity of combinations of cementitious materials lithium nitrate admixture and aggregate accelerated mortarbar method crd c num standard test method for static modulus of elasticity and poissons ratio of concrete in compression astm cnum num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num standard test method for length change of hardened hydraulic cement for mortar and concrete astm cnum coefficient of thermal expansion of hydraulic cement concrete .aashto t num standard method of test for surface resistivity indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration aashto t num standard method of test for potential alkali reactivity of aggregates and effectiveness of asr mitigation measures aashto tp num num construction requirements .
a. proportioning .
the concrete mix design is the contractors responsibility and includes making and testing compressive strength specimens .
make and test compressive strength specimens using the contractors laboratory or a departmentapproved independent laboratory .
uniquely identify each mix design submitted .
for work exceeding num cubic yards submit the following at least num calendar days before proposed use num .
the proposed mix design .
num .
copies of test reports .
num .
data .
num .
worksheets .
num .
samples of the proposed aggregate cement scm and admixtures .
num .
final set time with the mix design as measured using aashto t numm t num .
num .
mixing water source .
num .
proposed curing compound .
num .
theoretical maximum density .
num .
rate of development of electrical resistivity to num calendar days .
num .
modulus of elasticity at num calendar days .
num .
drying shrinkage .
num .
coefficient of thermal expansion .
do not produce concrete until the mix design is approved by the central materials laboratory .
for work less than num cubic yards submit the following at least num calendar days before proposed use num .
the proposed mix design .
num .
copies of test reports .
num .
data .
num .
worksheets .
num .
final set time with the mix design as measured using aashto t numm t num .
num .
mixing water source .
num .
proposed curing compound .
num .
theoretical maximum density .
num .
rate of development of electrical resistivity to num calendar days .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
modulus of elasticity at num calendar days .
num .
drying shrinkage .
num .
coefficient of thermal expansion .
do not produce concrete until the mix design is approved .
limit the fine aggregate by weight of total aggregate to num percent in the proposed mix designs .
use only angular coarse aggregate .
angular aggregate is defined as having greater than num percent fractured faces .
the department will base fracture on the aggregate particles retained on the no .
num sieve with num or more fractured faces as determined by aashto t num method num .
the minimum mix design compressive strength is num psi when tested at num calendar days and is determined from the average of num specimens produced and cured in the laboratory .
in addition to strength report the air content and slump .
strength data is valid only if air content slump and watercement ratios are within the required limits for the specified mix class .
use the cement scm and other mitigative additives proposed for use in the mix design to produce laboratory specimens in accordance with astm cnum or aashto tp num .
if lithium nitrate is used to mitigate asr perform crd c num .
when performing astm cnum or crd c num limit mortar bar expansion to num percent or less .
when using aashto tp num limit expansion to num percent or less at num calendar days or num percent or less at num calendar days .
perform testing on the coarse and fine aggregates together or separately .
if testing is performed on the coarse and fine aggregates together report the blend percentage on the test and be within num percent of the blend percentage used in the mix design .
if tested separately use mitigation based on the aggregate requiring the most mitigation .
use number num coarse aggregate .
establish the exact proportions from trial mixes from the materials to be used in the work and make adjustments to use the least amount of sand necessary to produce concrete with the required workability and strength .
at the contractors option a combined gradation number numc may be used .
design the proposed mix using ku mix from the university of kansas and submit for approval .
include documentation and worksheets in the submittal .
base the combined gradation and sand equivalent on the average of the stockpile as determined by the production quality control tests .
submit quality control charts and tests with the mix design .
the contractor may reduce minimum cementitious material contents by num percent if a combined gradation is used .
if the contract does not require scm the contractor may submit a mix design subject to the same requirements as if the contract requires scm .
do not vary calcium oxide cao content more than num percent above that used for astm cnum or aashto tp num testing where fly ash is used in the concrete mix for asr mitigation .
if the fly ash has a cao content greater than num percent above the fly ash used for testing additional astm cnum or aashto tp num testing at the higher cao content is required by the department .
wherever scm are is used use the same scm source cement source mill and cement type throughout the work for each mix design .
submit lab test reports to verify the revised mix design meets specification requirements .
a num inch maximum slump is allowed for hand finishing if a slipform concrete paver is not used to construct concrete pavement .
a num inch maximum slump and a num percent reduction in numday compressive strength is permissible for concrete medians and other nontraveled surfaces excluding shoulders .
b .
equipment .
num .
mixers and hauling equipment .
a. mixers agitators and nonagitating hauling equipment .
mixers may be stationary mixers or truck mixers .
agitators may be truck mixers or truck agitators .
equip truck mixers and agitators with an num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num accessible revolution counter for the drum blades or paddles to verify revolutions .
ensure a national ready mix concrete association nrmca standard metal plate or plates are attached to each mixer and agitator by the manufacturer and plainly marked with the various uses for which the equipment is designed the volume of the drum the capacity of the drum or container in terms of the volume of mixed concrete and the speed of rotation of the mixing drum or blades .
equip stationary mixers with an acceptable timing device that will prevent discharge until the specified mixing time has elapsed .
equip truck mixers with a calibrated water flow meter or other approved measuring device to control the quantity of mixing water added in the field .
b .
provide mixers that when loaded to the rated mixing capacity and the concrete is mixed for the time or revolutions prescribed combine the ingredients of the concrete into a thoroughly mixed uniform mass and discharge the concrete with satisfactory uniformity as specified in num.d .
c. provide agitators that maintain the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and are capable of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity when loaded to rated capacity as specified in num.d .
d. provide nonagitating equipment with bodies that are smooth mortartight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete without segregation .
num .
paving equipment .
construct pavement using paving equipment that uniformly spreads at the proper thickness for the width of the area being paved consolidates the freshly placed concrete and produces a finished surface meeting straightedge and profile index requirements of num.k before grinding .
if the pavement produced does not meet these requirements suspend concrete paving operations until the deficiencies or malfunction is corrected .
use selfpropelled paving machines that comply with the following a. placerspreader receive the concrete mixture into hoppers adjacent to the area to be paved .
b. slipform paver equipped with automatic screed control mechanisms that operate from stringlines erected near the right and left side of the machine .
check the depth of placement at num feet intervals to achieve the design thickness between the outside edges after the stringlines are established .
consolidate the concrete with internal vibrators .
limit the rate of vibration to less than num vibrations per minute for surface vibrators and num to num vibrations per minute for internal vibrators .
provide a tachometer or other suitable device for measuring and indicating the actual frequency of vibrations .
do not rest vibrators on new pavements or side forms .
connect power to the vibrators so the vibration will cease when the forward or backward motion of the machine is stopped .
c. machine paving with forms the contractor may finish concrete pavement in small irregular areas as specified in num.b instead of using slipform pavers when approved .
d. bridge deck machine the contractor may finish concrete pavement in small irregular areas with a concrete bridge deck finishing machine as specified in num instead of using slipform pavers when approved .
finishing and surface test specifications apply .
num .
concrete sawing equipment .
provide at least num production saws including num standby unit adequately powered to perform the work .
provide saws that are multiple arbor or multiple blade gang saws .
mount saws operating on num to numhour old nonrigid pavement on a work bridge so the machine weight is not placed on the new concrete .
provide adequate artificial lighting for night sawing .
maintain equipment in good working order and have it on the job before the first placement and continuously during concrete paving num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction operations .
maintain an ample supply of saw blades during the sawing operations .
do not pave until concrete sawing equipment is onsite and ready for use .
c. handling measuring and batching materials .
produce concrete that meets the approved mix design .
submit the proportioned ingredients for each batch .
request changes to the mix design and obtain approval from the engineer for a new mix design before batching concrete .
minor adjustments due to varying moisture in the aggregates changes in aggregate gradation when using a combined gradation and minor adjustments of approved admixtures are not considered changes in the mix design and will not require another approval .
report the minor mix adjustments in writing to the engineer before batching .
num .
measure cement by weight .
weigh cement in an individual hopper and keep separate from the aggregates until released for discharge .
attach the cement hopper to a separate scale for individual weighing or to the aggregate scale for cumulative weighing .
weigh cement before adding the other ingredients if weighing cumulatively .
use a cement scale and weigh hopper that is separate and distinct from the aggregate weighing equipment .
provide cement batchers with a dust seal between the charging mechanism and hopper .
install the dust seal so it does not affect the weighing accuracy and is vented to permit the escape of air .
provide a selfcleaning hopper fitted with a means to ensure complete discharge .
provide sufficient wind protection to prevent interference with batching accuracy .
ensure the cement as weighed is within num percent of the design weight .
num .
measure aggregates by weight .
weigh individual aggregates within two percent of the required weights and the total weight of the aggregate within num percent of the total required weight .
handle aggregates from stockpiles or other sources to the batching plant so uniform grading and stable moisture content is maintained .
stockpile or bin aggregates to drain for at least num hours before batching aggregates produced or handled by hydraulic methods or washed aggregates .
verify aggregate gradation meets the requirements for the proposed mix design .
num .
measure water by volume or by weight .
arrange the measuring device so the measurements will not be affected by variable pressures in the water supply line .
do not use wash water as a portion of the mixing water .
weigh or measure water within num percent of the required amount .
num .
measure scm by weight .
weigh the scm within num percent of the design weight .
num .
measure dry admixtures by weight and paste or liquid admixtures by weight or volume .
dispense admixtures used in small quantities in proportion to the cement as airentraining admixtures with the mixing water .
adjust the quantity of admixtures used in accordance with manufacturers written instructions .
use admixtures that meet num .
d. mixing and delivering .
num .
mix and deliver concrete by any of the following means a .
central mixed concrete .
mix completely in a stationary mixer and transport the mixed concrete to the point of delivery in agitating equipment or in approved nonagitating equipment .
b .
transit mixed concrete .
mix completely in a truck mixer at the batching plant or while in transit .
c. truck mixed concrete .
mix completely in a truck mixer at the point of delivery after adding mixing water .
d. shrink mixed concrete .
mix partially in a stationary mixer and complete the mixing in a truck mixer .
e. mix in an approved mixer that volumetrically measures the concrete ingredients and continuously produces concrete that meets the requirements of astm cnum .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
operate truck mixers and truck agitators within the rated capacity and at a speed of rotation for mixing or agitating as designated by the equipment manufacturer .
num .
the minimum mixing time for mixers of num cubic yards or less capacity is num seconds when a stationary mixer is used for the complete concrete mixing .
obtain approval of the mixing time for mixers of num cubic yards or more capacity .
measure mixing time from the time cement and aggregates are in the drum .
charge the batch into the mixer so some water will enter before cement and aggregates and water is in the drum by the end of the first ¼ of the specified mixing time .
num .
the contractor may reduce the mixing time in the stationary mixer at least num seconds for shrink mixed concrete .
complete the mixing in a truck mixer with between num and num revolutions of the drum or blades at mixing speed .
do not exceed a batch volume of num percent of the drum gross volume .
num .
when a truck mixer is used for complete mixing mix each batch of concrete with between num and num revolutions of the drum or blades at mixing speed .
use agitating speed for additional revolutions .
num .
when a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete completely mixed in a stationary mixer use agitating speed for mixing during transport .
num .
when a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete apply the following a .
deliver the concrete to the project site and complete discharge within num hours after the introduction of the cement to the aggregates or before the drum has revolved num revolutions whichever comes first .
b .
in hot weather or under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete a time less than num hours may be necessary .
c. begin the mixing operation within num minutes after the cement has been intermingled with the aggregates when a truck mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete .
d. if additional mixing water is approved at least num additional revolutions of the truck mixer drum at mixing speed are required before discharge of concrete .
the engineer may allow mixing water only num time during the discharge of the concrete .
e. the engineer may require tests for consistency at approximately the beginning the midpoint and the end of the load .
if the results vary by more than num inch do not use the mixer or agitator until the condition is corrected .
num .
transport central mixed concrete in suitable nonagitating equipment .
provide covers when specified .
equip bodies with smooth mortartight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a controlled rate without segregation .
completely discharge concrete within num minutes after the introduction of the cement to the aggregates .
num .
do not use aluminum pipe or aluminum truck beds to convey concrete .
num .
provide concrete at a temperature of at least num f and not more than num f at the time of placing .
e. conditioning of subgrade or base course .
check the base or subgrade surface and correct deficiencies before placing concrete .
place concrete pavement on the uniformly moistened surface of the completed base or subgrade .
moisten asphalt treated base surfaces immediately ahead of the placement of concrete pavement to ensure compliance with temperature requirements .
remove excess moisture before paving .
f. temperature limitations .
place concrete pavement with the following precautions num .
during cold weather when ambient temperature falls below num f produce mixed concrete with a temperature at least num f and less than num f at the time of placing .
the water andor the aggregate may num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction need to be heated to a temperature of between num f and num f. the contractor may place concrete pavement when the air temperature is below num f as specified in num.m .
num .
do not place concrete on frozen subgrade or use frozen aggregates in the concrete .
num .
do not place concrete if the concrete temperature is greater than num f at time of placement .
do not place concrete when the evaporation rate is greater than num pounds per square foot per hour when tested in accordance with idaho it num .
night or early morning placement may be necessary to avoid excess evaporation .
ice used as a part of the mixing water must be completely melted by the time mixing is completed .
num .
do not place concrete on a surface with a temperature exceeding num f. g. hand placing concrete .
the following conditions allow hand placing and finishing methods num .
breakdown of the mechanical equipment when the concrete is already deposited on the grade .
num .
narrow widths or areas of irregular dimensions where operating mechanical equipment is impractical .
obtain approval before placing concrete in wood or metal forms .
num .
do the following when hand placing and finishing methods are allowed a .
place a test section to show the proposed operation is capable of satisfactorily consolidating and striking off the concrete to the required grade section and applicable smoothness requirements when engineer requested .
b .
spread concrete evenly .
do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of the concrete mass .
use surface vibrators internal vibrators or other methods that produce equivalent results without segregation to consolidate concrete .
thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along forms or adjoining pavement so gravel pockets along the edges of the finished pavement are prevented .
repair gravel pockets found after removing the forms .
consolidate uniformly across the full pavement width .
strike off the concrete to the intended surface profile after consolidation .
c. provide a screed at least num feet longer than the maximum width of the slab to be struck off .
use a screed constructed of metal or other suitable material clad with metal rigid enough to keep its shape and is approved .
d. move the screed forward on the forms with a combined longitudinal and transverse shearing motion always moving in the direction in which the work is progressing and manipulated so neither end is raised from the side forms during the striking off process .
repeat until the surface has uniform texture is true to grade and crosssection and has no porous areas if necessary .
e. smooth the concrete by floating after it has been consolidated and struck off .
do not float concrete within num feet of consolidation and strike off .
the contractor may use long handled floats having blades at least num feet in length to smooth and fill in open textured areas in the pavement .
the contractor may use a full width float .
move ahead in successive advances of not more than one half the length of the float .
continue floating until irregularities are removed .
remove free water on the pavement with the float or other suitable tool .
f. float the surface transversely using a long handled float when the crown of the pavement will not permit using a longitudinal float .
do not work the crown out of the pavement .
g. remove excess water and laitance from the pavement surface after floating .
use a straightedge at least num feet long with a long handle for operating at the edge of the pavement .
lap successive drags ½ the length of the blade .
h. finish the surface of the concrete pavement as specified in num.j .
use hand methods that result in the finish as specified in num.j when a selfpropelled comb is not practical .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num i. smoothness requirements apply .
j .
do not place additional water on the concrete surface during the machine or hand finish operation .
h. joints .
construct joints as specified .
use suitable guidelines or devices to ensure sawing the joints at the proper location .
num .
stress relief joint sawing .
make the initial stress relief saw cuts to control shrinkage cracking as soon as the concrete has hardened enough to permit sawing without raveling .
saw to the depth width line and spacing as specified .
continue stress relief sawing operations at night or under inclement weather conditions as required .
keep the sawing operation up to pace with the paving operation otherwise stop paving work until the sawing operation can keep pace with the paving operation .
single cut stress relief joints will be ¼ inch wide and will be saw cut to num depth of the concrete pavement .
single cut stress relief joints will be sealed with a hot poured elastomeric joint filler meeting the requirements of num .
backer rods will not be used .
when a single saw cut joint is specified thoroughly clean the sides of the joint and the adjacent pavement surface approximately num inch on each side of the joint of scale dirt dust and other foreign material by jet water blasting immediately after sawing .
remove the residue from sawing and water blasting from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
prevent the residue from entering lanes used by traffic .
num .
sealant reservoir construction .
allow the concrete to cure at least num hours and then saw the joints to the width and depth as specified to accommodate sealant placement when a sealant reservoir is specified .
do not saw wider than specified .
thoroughly clean the sides of the sealant reservoir and adjacent pavement surface approximately num inch on each side of the joint of scale dirt dust and other foreign material by jet water blasting immediately after sawing .
remove the residue from sawing and water blasting from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
prevent the residue from entering lanes used by traffic .
repair damage e.g .
spalling fracturing to the concrete pavement .
properly cure repairs before installing the joint sealant .
num .
tie bars .
place deformed tie bars of the specified length size and material .
place tie bars using approved mechanical equipment rigidly secured by chairs or other supports to prevent displacement .
do not treat the tie bars this will impair bonding with the concrete .
locate tie bar within tolerances as specified or as directed .
num .
load transfer devices .
incorporate load transfer devices into the concrete pavement by using dowel bar assemblies or dowel bar inserters .
a. dowel bar assemblies .
num fabrication .
fabricate dowel bar assemblies or baskets in single units for appropriate lanes before being placed on grade .
use approved dowel basket manufacturers .
submit material detail sheets with basket size and complete anchoring details including analysis of basket strength and stability for approval .
num anchoring .
securely anchor dowel bar assemblies at grade to prevent displacement during concrete paving .
secure baskets with at least num pins to ensure they hold bars within tolerance .
the engineer will check dowel basket placement and anchorage before concrete placement .
cover dowel bar assemblies with fresh concrete immediately ahead of the paver .
properly realign and reanchor any dowel baskets removed to accommodate delivery of concrete before the paver arrival .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num location .
check and document dowel bar location at least every num joints after placement of concrete .
locate the baskets and dowels in plastic concrete with a hand trowel or other approved method to verify location and accuracy .
note and mark the joint locations that are not acceptable and take action to determine and correct the deficiencies ahead of the paver .
num dowel bars .
coat dowel bars in accordance with aashto m num type a or b .
give type b dowel bars in assemblies a thin coating of graphite grease or approved equal as a bond breaker .
on ramps tapers and widenings use less than num assembly sections in a joint .
b. dowel bar inserters .
as an alternative to dowel bar assemblies on grade the contractor may insert dowel bars into the plastic concrete by an approved mechanical device that ensures reconsolidation around the bars .
place the bars parallel to the pavement centerline and surface .
insert the bars before the passage of the final finishing beam or screed .
num approval .
do not use dowel bar inserters without prior engineer approval .
use an approved method to detect and verify the location of dowel bars .
num location .
use ground penetrating radar gpr magnetic tomography mitscan pacometer or other approved device to establish the location and to ensure compliance with the tolerances of the dowel bar placement of at least num percent of the joints .
the engineer will select the joints to be inspected at random .
take at least num cores to verify the calibration of the insertion equipment .
when inspection shows dowel bars out of tolerance inspect remaining joints with the approved device .
repair holes left in the pavement by the coring operation at no additional cost to the department .
obtain approval for repair methods and materials before beginning repairs .
num dowel bars .
coat dowel bars in accordance with aashto m num type a or b .
give type b dowel bars to be inserted a num layer bond breaker coating .
use an approved dry film e.g .
numm tfe on the first layer .
apply a thin layer of form oil over the dry film .
use extra precautions to prevent form oil runoff from contaminating the fresh concrete .
locate load transfer devices within tolerances as specified or as directed regardless of method of incorporation .
dowel bars whether placed in baskets or inserted must have at least num inches of bar embedded in each slab .
retrofit missing dowels or dowels out of tolerance in the wheel path area .
the engineer may accept payment in place of retrofitting bars in areas outside of the wheel path .
as payment missing dowel bars will be charged by the department to the contractor at the cost to retrofit the bars into the slabs .
provide positive control and an approved method of marking dowel bar locations for correlation to sawed joints .
dowels are required where the new concrete pavement abuts the existing concrete pavement .
drill holes into the existing concrete pavement as specified or as directed and epoxy grout dowel bars into the holes .
obtain approval of epoxy grout before use .
num .
construction joints .
place construction joints at right angles to the centerline when there is an interruption of more than num minutes in the concrete paving operations .
do not place transverse joints closer than num feet apart .
place the construction joint at the same location as would be used for a transverse joint whenever possible .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
random cracks .
after sawing is completed remove random cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement whether transverse or longitudinal by replacing the cracked slabs .
remove and replace cracked slabs at no additional cost to the department .
i .
tolerance in pavement thickness .
construct pavement as specified .
the pavement thickness is subject to price adjustment in accordance with table num .
once the pavement is sufficiently cured to support foot traffic the engineer will check the completed pavement thickness of the concrete by measuring the distance from the concrete pavement surface to the underlying surface in accordance with fop for aashto tnum .
provide five num inch diameter cores for verification of the depth as directed .
the contractor may take cores as approved to dispute depth measurements taken by the engineer .
the engineer will witness the coring .
core test and repair the concrete pavement at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will determine pavement thickness by average depth measurements in accordance with fop for aashto t num .
an adjusted unit price for pavement is defined as a single placement width num mile long .
the engineer will determine the average thickness of the pavement in accordance with fop for aashto t num calculated as follows num .
when the thickness is more or less than num inch of the specified thickness but less than num inch that section is eligible for an incentive or disincentive price adjustment as specified in table num .
num .
when the thickness is more than the target range of the specified thickness no price adjustment will be made by the engineer for the concrete left in place .
num .
the average thickness applies for each section individually .
the engineer will calculate thickness incentive or disincentive by comparing the measured average thickness to the plan thickness for the concrete paving .
the department will make an adjusted payment for the test section in accordance with table num .
each depth measurement set represents the pavement thickness for a num mile segment or in the case of a beginning or ending measurement the distance will extend to the end of the pavement section .
j .
final finish .
finish the surface of the concrete pavement by tining and use a selfpropelled steel comb .
tining will be specified as longitudinal or transverse .
provide longitudinal tining if the method is not specified .
num .
general .
give the pavement an initial and a final texturing before the curing operations .
perform the initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that will produce striations parallel with centerline .
use burlap that is a coarse fabric of jute or hemp .
use a single piece burlap drag extending the entire width of the paving operations .
install burlap drags brooms and tine devices on selfpropelled equipment having external alignment control .
maintain a constant area of burlap in contact with the pavement surface when texturing .
replace the burlap drag whenever results are unacceptable to the engineer .
provide broom and tine devices with positive elevation control .
maintain downward pressure on the pavement surface during operation to achieve uniform texturing without measurable variations in pavement profile .
operate the selfpropelled texturing machines at a constant travel speed that keeps pace with paving operations .
stop placing the concrete when the finishing equipment does not comply with these provisions .
resume when the equipment deficiency or malfunction is corrected .
use spring steel tines on the final texturing device that have a rectangular crosssection num inch wide on num inch centers and whose length thickness and resilience will form grooves approximately num inch deep in the fresh concrete surface .
form the grooves in the plastic concrete without tearing the surface and without bringing pieces of the coarse aggregate to the top of the surface .
produce a final texture with a num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction uniform appearance with the grooves having a depth num inch num inch .
maintain a numinch gap between each tine strip to prevent overlapping the tined surface and producing a weak surface area .
measure the groove depth in accordance with idaho it num .
make adjustments to the tining operation when more than num readings in a set of num are outside the intended depth range .
round the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints and construction joints to a radius of num inch before the concrete has taken its initial set .
produce a welldefined and continuous radius and a smooth dense mortar finish .
do not unduly disturb the surface of the slab by tilting the tool during use .
eliminate tool marks appearing on the slab adjacent to the joints .
in doing this do not disturb the rounding of the corner of the slab .
completely remove concrete on top of the joint filler .
test joints with a straightedge before the concrete has set .
make correction if one side of the joint is higher than the other or if they are higher or lower than the adjacent slabs .
correct areas of concrete pavement which are not finished as specified in these requirements by retexturing .
the contractor may retexture by cutting transverse grooves in the concrete pavement surface by means of saw blades or other approved devices .
space the grooves num inch center to center and num inch in width and depth .
obtain approval to use alternative patterns .
do not polish the concrete pavement surface after cutting .
num .
longitudinal tining .
perform final texturing with a spring steel tine device that will produce grooves parallel with the centerline .
tine the concrete surface within num inches but not closer than num inches of longitudinal pavement edges and formed joints .
num .
transverse tining .
perform final texturing with a spring steel tine device that will produce grooves parallel to the transverse joints or perpendicular to the centerline .
repeat the grooving pattern across the pavement .
secure the tines of a double tine comb together .
do not use the comb within num foot of either edge when the finishing machine causes edge slump .
comb these unfinished edges by hand .
k. surface test .
test the finished pavement the next working day after placement as follows num .
use a numfoot straightedge on the surface at locations determined by the engineer .
when the straightedge is laid on finished pavement in a direction parallel with centerline or perpendicular to centerline locate surface areas that vary more than num inch from the lower edge .
remove high points that cause the surface to exceed these tolerances by grinding .
num .
furnish and operate the profiler .
operate the profiler at the manufacturers recommended speed .
calibrate at the beginning of the work and as needed thereafter .
supply a profiler calibrated in good working condition and ready for operation before work of any concrete pavement begins .
provide a competent and experienced operator to operate the equipment .
profile the surface in iri .
make num profiles num feet from and parallel to the edge of each driving lane .
surface smoothness testing must be verified by the engineer .
the profile run must be witnessed by the engineer and an electronic copy of the results submitted immediately after the end of the run .
testing will not be accepted unless witnessed by the engineer .
at the engineers request submit the profile data in a format suitable for evaluation using proval or other acceptable software .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the engineer may elect to perform additional testing as verification .
if the results vary from the contractors iri results by more than num percent when profiled under the same environmental conditions the engineer will use the departments iri results for acceptance .
use class num or class num profilers as defined by astm enum .
operate profilers in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and aashto r num .
set the profiler as follows a .
high pass or prefilter off or a minimum of num feet .
b. bump detection on .
c. dip detection on .
d. resolution num inch .
e. low pass filter off .
f. all other filters off .
apply the following iri requirements where longitudinal grade is num percent or less pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve num feet or more must meet the surface smoothness requirements for the smoothness schedule specified .
the engineer will add consecutive num mile sections of roadway tested together to obtain a mile section .
overlapping of the num mile or num mile sections to change cumulative test results is not allowed .
a .
schedule i projects .
target iri of num to num inches per mile or less per num mile .
corrective action required above num inches per mile per num mile .
b .
schedule ii projects .
target iri of num to num inches per mile or less per num mile .
corrective action required above num inches per mile per num mile .
c. schedule iii projects .
target iri of num inches per mile per num mile .
a schedule ii project adjoining existing pavements may be revised to a schedule i project provided the adjoining pavement is ground and maintained at the minimum specified thickness .
a profile is not required in the following areas of pavement a. pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve less than num feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves .
b. pavement within num feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from an existing pavement not constructed under the contract .
c. pavement for ramps approaches structure decks city streets or county roads .
d. pavement within num feet of a transverse joint that separates the pavement from a structure deck or an approach slab .
after individual high point grinding has been completed perform additional grinding in sections requiring corrective action to reduce the iri to a maximum of num inches per mile in any num mile along any line parallel to the centerline .
perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the area ground in each lateral direction so the lateral limits of grinding are at a constant offset from and parallel to the nearest lane line or pavement edge and in each longitudinal direction so the grinding begins and ends at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline within any one ground area .
ensure ground areas are neat rectangular areas of uniform surface appearance .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction produce a pavement surface true to grade and uniform in appearance with longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroy appearance .
produce ridge peaks approximately num inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves with approximately num to num evenly spaced grooves per foot .
remove fins resulting from grinding before opening to traffic .
use power driven selfpropelled grinding equipment specifically designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
use a machine with an effective wheel base of at least num feet and of a shape and dimension that does not encroach on traffic movement outside the work area .
use equipment capable of grinding the surface without causing spalls at cracks joints or other locations .
smoothly feather transitions between ground and unground areas of concrete at transverse boundaries .
do not exceed num inch vertical variations in elevation between ground and unground areas of concrete .
feather out these variations with additional grinding using an appropriate crossslope adjustment .
grinding to obtain smoothness incentives will be allowed provided the grinding will not result in pavement thickness below the specified thickness .
if correction of the roadway as specified will not produce satisfactory results as to smoothness or it reduces pavement thicknesses and serviceability the engineer may accept the completed pavement and will deduct from monies due or that may become due to the contractor the sum of num for each individual high point or num for each num mile section .
in these circumstances the engineers decision whether to accept the completed pavement or to require corrections as described is final .
l. curing .
cure concrete pavement with a system num whitepigmented membraneforming curing compound as specified in num .
cure the concrete with num applications of the curing compound for a total coverage of at least num gallon per num square feet .
apply each application of the curing compound under pressure at a rate at least num gallon per num square feet on textured surfaces of concrete pavement .
apply the second coat of membrane in the opposite direction of the first coat .
uniformly spray the entire surface of the pavement with the num complete applications of the membraneforming curing compound after finishing the surface and sides and before the initial set has taken place by an approved machine method .
thoroughly mix the membraneforming curing compound before use .
agitate the curing compound during application to prevent settling and separation .
show the intended method for mixing and agitating the compound before each paving usage for engineer approval .
hand spray odd widths or shapes and slab edges .
do not apply curing compound to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
if the film is damaged within num hours immediately repair the damaged portion with additional compound at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will sample test and approve each manufacturers identified lot of curing compound before use .
allow num weeks for laboratory testing of the curing compound once it has been received by the central materials laboratory .
quantities of curing compound over num gallons can be inspected and sampled by the department at the manufacturers plant for acceptance testing .
direct inspection requests to the engineer and the central materials laboratory in writing at least num calendar days before ordering material .
m. cold weather concreting work plan .
submit a cold weather concreting and curing work plan for approval when there is a probability of air temperatures below num f during the placing and curing periods .
detail the methods and equipment proposed to produce mixed concrete and deliver it with a temperature of between num f and num f at the time of placing .
the water andor the aggregate may need to be heated to a temperature from num f to num f. include the methods to protect the finished concrete from freezing and cracking and address how curing will be continuously monitored to ensure the required strength is developed before opening to traffic .
detail num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the methods and equipment proposed to ensure the required concrete temperatures are maintained .
include the materials and labor anticipated for the work .
do not place concrete until the plan is approved .
when the ambient temperature falls below num f meet the following concreting operations requirements num .
provide a supply of suitable blanketing material alongside the work before placing the concrete pavement in quantities sufficient to cover the anticipated area of concrete pavement placed during the expected period of cold weather protection .
num .
anytime the air temperature is expected to drop to num f or less spread the blanketing material provided over the surface and exposed sides of the concrete pavement to a depth sufficient to prevent freezing of the concrete .
immediately cover the concrete whenever the air temperature drops to num f or lower .
num .
provide at least num approved calibrated temperature recording device for every num square yards of concrete pavement placed .
whenever the air temperature is expected to drop below num f place and operate recording thermometers .
remove and replace concrete damaged by frost action at no additional cost to the department .
num .
the contractor may remove the protection blankets in a minimum sized area for a time not to exceed ½ hour for sawing joints .
num .
maintain a temperature at the surface of the concrete of at least num f for num calendar days .
after num calendar days the cold weather protection can be suspended if it is demonstrated with fieldcured cylinders or maturity method that the concrete pavement has reached a compressive strength of at least num psi .
num .
when protection blankets are no longer required remove the blankets so the temperature of the concrete does not drop more than num f during the first num hours .
monitor the temperature with a recording thermometer attached to the edge of the concrete pavement or as approved .
num .
provide thermocouples and its associated equipment to show compliance with the cold weather plan .
n. sealing joints .
construct joints as specified in num in accordance with the sealant manufacturers written instructions or as otherwise specified .
install joint sealant after grinding for surface smoothness and before the pavement is opened to traffic .
perform joint sealing only when the ambient and pavement temperatures are num f or higher the pavement surface is dry and weather conditions are dry or in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
provide sealant material as specified in num .
submit a copy of the sealant manufacturers written instructions for handling storage and application before beginning the work .
num .
neoprene compression seal .
when neoprene compression seal is used install the sealant material into the joint as specified in num using equipment and techniques recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the finished joint seal has the shape factor and surface recess as specified .
install the longitudinal joint seal first and then cut at the intersections of the transverse joints .
install the transverse joint seal through the cut in the longitudinal seal to form a tight intersection .
install the transverse seal in num continuous piece .
do not stretch the seal in excess of the manufacturers written instructions .
do not twist the seal or have deformities that interfere with the seal making complete contact with the joint face .
num .
silicone joint sealant .
use the size backer rod as specified and the type of bond breaker recommended by the sealant manufacturer if required .
clean the joint within num hour before placing the sealant by sandblasting and air blowing with compressed air at num psi minimum .
provide oil and moisturefree compressed air .
do not place the sealant if dust moisture oil or foreign material is present on the concrete receiving the sealant .
apply the sealant material into the joint using equipment and techniques num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the finished joint seal has the shape factor and surface recess as specified .
remove excess joint sealing material immediately and clean the pavement surface .
do not use sand or similar material as a cover for the seal .
the engineer will reject the joint material for failure in adhesion or cohesion .
repair the joint to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
have a technical representative of the manufacturer present at the project site for at least the first num days of joint preparation and sealing when silicone joint sealant or neoprene compression seal is used .
follow the manufacturers written instructions andor recommendations made by the technical representative as approved .
a separate payment will not be made by the department for the services of the technical representative or for implementing the approved recommendations .
o .
multiple lane construction .
do not place concrete in adjacent lanes sooner than num hours after finishing of the first lanes .
the engineer may allow the operation of equipment and trucks on newly paved concrete due to the lack of space elsewhere if conditions are deemed justified and meet these conditions num .
determine compressive strength by maturity testing in accordance with astm cnum .
validate the maturity curve with the first placement and every num calendar days or num cubic yards thereafter whichever is greater .
cure cylinders used for validation testing using the same procedures as used in developing the initial maturitystrength relationship .
when initially validating the maturity curve validate at least num points on the maturity curve at least num of which will be at a period of less than num calendar days .
at least one point occurring within num calendar days is required for subsequent validation .
a maturity curve will be considered valid if the validation points are within num percent of the original maturity curve .
develop the maturitystrength relationship and provide maturity curves along with supporting data and field procedures for monitoring maturity for approval at least num calendar days before use .
provide equipment including thermo or maturity meters thermocouples wire and qualified personnel to monitor maturity and submit information .
num .
protect the surface of the new pavement from scarring and abrasion .
operate equipment on mats skids or other approved protective devices .
remove accumulation of concrete sand gravel or other debris deposited on the new pavement as directed .
replace cracked or broken panels or slabs on the new pavement caused by operating the equipment at no additional cost to the department .
p. protection of pavement .
repair or replace pavement damaged before final acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
protect the edges and surface of the unhardened concrete against the effects of rain .
use metal or wood protective materials having a width of at least the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material e.g .
burlap or cotton mats curing paper plastic sheeting for the protection of the pavement surface .
have these materials available onsite while paving .
when rain appears imminent stop paving operations and begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and cover the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
q .
opening to traffic .
do not allow traffic on the pavement until a num psi or greater compressive strength is attained determined by maturity testing in accordance with astm cnum .
develop the maturitystrength relationship and submit maturity curves along with supporting data and field procedures for monitoring maturity for approval at least num calendar days before use .
provide equipment including thermo or maturity meters thermocouples wire and qualified personnel to monitor maturity and submit information .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num validate the maturitystrength relationship with the first field placement and then every num calendar days or num cubic yards whichever is greater .
cure cylinders used for validation testing using the same procedures as used in developing the initial maturitystrength relationship .
when initially validating the maturity curve validate at least of num points on the maturity curve at least one of which will be at a period of less than num calendar days .
at least num point occurring within num calendar days is required for subsequent validation .
a maturity curve will be considered valid if the validation points are within num percent of the original maturity curve .
clean the pavement before opening to traffic .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for concrete pavement by the square yard .
the square yard measurement will be based on the width of the top surface of the pavement as shown on the typical section on the plans and additional widening where specified or directed .
the length will be measured horizontally along the centerline of each ramp or roadway .
pavement areas will be computed to the nearest num square yard .
the engineer will not make a final measurement of the completed pavement except for authorized changes during construction or where many errors are found in the contract quantity .
the engineer will then compute a revision or correction and add to or deduct from the contract quantity .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit concrete pavement sy drilling holes for the dowels is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
verifying dowel bar location is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit prices .
the department will not pay for fieldcured cylinders .
the department will not pay for grinding and related expenses including disposal of ground material traffic control flagging profiling and temporary striping .
the department will not make additional payment for corrective treatment to meet smoothness requirements .
a. thickness price adjustment .
the department will make the following price adjustment to the contract unit price for each evaluation section quantity exceeding the thickness specified .
if thickness measurements show deficient thickness the contractor has the option of removing and replacing the pavement at no additional cost to the department or leaving the pavement in place and receiving the deductions specified in table num .
table num thickness price adjustment excess or deficiency in thickness inch price adjustment percent of contract unit price over num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num over num num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the department will not pay an incentive for thickness in evaluation sections where pavement grinding has occurred to achieve smoothness .
the engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than num inch and determine if the deficient area is sufficient to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement .
remove the affected areas of pavement within the limits specified and replace it with concrete of the specified quality and thickness at no additional cost to the department .
remove the sections of pavement the full length between transverse joints .
if in the engineers opinion a deficiency in excess of num inch will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the contractor may elect to leave the pavement in place but will not receive payment for the deficient area of pavement .
when the pavement contains no longitudinal joints the area of such pavement for which payment will not be made is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit multiplied by the distance between probes on both sides of the deficient measurement that shows measurements within the thickness limits .
where the pavement contains longitudinal joints the width used by the department is the width between longitudinal joints and the edge of the pavement .
the engineer may order the contractor to core drill the finished pavement to determine thickness of the pavement in areas where smoothness corrections are made .
the engineer will determine the pavement thickness by coring after smoothness corrections have been completed .
b .
profile incentive .
the contractor is entitled to a profile incentive payment for each evaluation section as determined by the smoothness schedule specified .
an evaluation section is a num feet wide placement num mile long or fraction as applicable with profiles in the driving lanes only .
the num mile long sections runs consecutively from the point paving begins to the point paving is interrupted e.g .
at bridges end of lane paving areas specifically excluded by the specifications .
the profile index requirements are specified in num.k .
the department will not pay a profile incentive payment for pavement on the roadway shoulders turn lanes or other miscellaneous pavement .
the department will pay a profile incentive as follows .
num .
schedule i projects .
a .
for an iri between num inches per mile per num mile and num inches per mile per num mile use the following formula profile incentive num section iri x num. b .
for an iri less than num inches per mile per num mile the profile incentive is num for each num mile section .
c. for an iri greater than num inches per mile per num mile a profile incentive payment will not be made .
num .
schedule ii projects .
a .
for an iri between num inches per mile per num mile and num inches per mile per num mile use the following formula profile incentive num section iri x num. b .
for an iri less than num inches per mile per num mile the profile incentive is num for each num mile section .
c. for an iri greater than num inches per mile per num mile a profile incentive payment will not be made .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
schedule iii projects .
a .
a profile incentive payment will not be made .
the department will make only one profile incentive payment whichever payment is greater in accordance with the initial iri reading determined as specified in num.b .
when more than num profile run is made in an evaluation section the department will use the roughest iri to calculate the profile incentive payment .
the engineer may reject the pavement when the initial iri exceeds num inches in a num mile section .
if grinding is required as specified in num.k make a profile run after grinding to ensure minimum specifications have been met .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num urban concrete pavement num description .
construct portland cement concrete pavements as specified in num .
num materials .
provide materials and test as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
a. proportioning .
meet the requirements as specified in num.a with the following exceptions num .
use number num coarse aggregate or numc combined aggregate gradation as specified in num .
num .
the contractor may increase maximum slump to num inches if finishing machines that provide only surface vibration are used and num inches if hand methods are used .
num .
the engineer may require type iii cement where earlier pavement strengths are necessary .
b .
equipment .
num .
mixers and hauling equipment .
meet the requirements specified in num.b.num .
num .
paving equipment .
meet the requirements specified in num.b.num .
a. placerspreader .
meet the requirements specified in num.b.num.a .
b. slipform paving .
use equipment as specified in num.b.num.b .
c. machine paving with forms .
provide forms so the constructed pavement meets the specified thickness crosssection grade and alignment .
adequately support forms to prevent deflection or movement .
do not allow the top of the forms to deviate more than num inch in num feet and do not allow the alignment of the forms to deviate more than num inch in num feet allow the concrete to set sufficiently to withstand form removal without chipping or spalling when forms are removed the day after placement .
spray the edges of the concrete with curing compound if forms are removed before the expiration of the curing period .
clean oil and examine used forms for defects before they are used again .
use machines or combination of machines capable of consolidating the concrete across the full width of the placement into a uniform and homogeneous mass without rock pockets and without separation of mortar and aggregates .
machines may be subject to engineer approval .
the engineer may request a test section placed to show the equipment can satisfactorily strike off and compact the concrete to the required density grade and sections .
the contractor may use internal pan beam or roller type vibrating units .
do not operate the vibration equipment when the machine is not in motion .
run machines to consolidate finish to the established grade and crosssection and establish a smooth even surface so only a very moderate amount of hand finishing is necessary .
do not overwork the concrete and bring an excess of fines to the surface .
remove water or laitance from the surface with a grout rod or scraping straightedge at least num foot wide with a long handle and operated from the pavement edge .
perform the finishing operations as needed .
d. bridge deck machine .
use equipment as specified in num.b.num.d .
use the following sequence of operations for placing concrete with any of the methods described in this section num strikeoff .
num consolidate .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num float .
num remove laitance .
num straightedge .
num final surface finish .
do not add water to the surface of the concrete during this sequence of operations .
num .
concrete sawing equipment .
meet the requirements specified in num.b.num .
c. handling measuring and batching materials .
meet the requirements specified in num.c .
d. mixing and delivering .
meet the requirements specified in num.d .
e. conditioning of subgrade or base course .
meet the requirements specified in num.e .
f. temperature limitations .
meet the requirements specified in num.f .
g. hand placing concrete .
meet the requirements specified in num.g.num .
limit hand methods to irregular areas irregular sections and pavement placed in confined work areas moisten the forms and surface of the base immediately ahead of the placement of concrete pavement .
place concrete in a continuous operation between construction joints .
deposit concrete so rehandling is minimized .
spread concrete evenly .
do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of the mass of concrete .
use surface vibrators internal vibrators or other equivalent method to produce consolidation without segregation .
ensure adequate consolidation next to forms and uniformly across the full pavement width .
strike off concrete to the intended surface profile after consolidation .
smooth concrete by floating after it has been struck off and consolidated .
do not move ahead in successive advances more than ½ the length of the float .
continue floating until irregularities are removed .
float the concrete within num feet of the consolidation effort .
remove free water on the pavement with the float or other suitable tool .
thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along forms or adjoining pavement so gravel pockets along the edges of the finished pavement are prevented .
repair gravel pockets found after removing the forms .
place reinforcing steel around hardware e.g .
manholes valve covers street monuments as specified or as directed .
allow local traffic access by placing concrete in intermittent areas or leaving temporary gaps in the pavement .
the engineer may request a test section to show the proposed operation is capable of satisfactorily consolidating and striking off the concrete to the required grade and section .
scrape the surface of the concrete with a grout rod after floating .
use a grout rod at least num foot long with a long handle for operating at the edge of the pavement .
use the grout rod to correct irregularities in the pavement surface and remove water and laitance .
h. joints .
transverse and longitudinal joints for urban pavement may be contraction joints or construction joints .
where possible place longitudinal joints on lane lines except through transitions and in intersections .
for intersections and other irregular areas place joints as specified in the joint location plan or as directed .
num .
stress relief joints .
form or saw transverse and longitudinal contraction joints .
a. construct formed contraction joints by embedding a preformed joint material .
cut filler to the exact sections of the joint .
extend the length of the premolded joint filler to within num inch of both panel edges .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction i. transverse contraction joints .
place transverse contraction joints dummy joints after consolidation and finishing of concrete have been completed and before initial set .
cut a groove into the surface at the location of the joint using a tool provided with stops tee iron to prevent cutting the groove deeper than the planned depth of the joint filler .
insert joint filler into the groove until the top is flush with the pavement surface with a deviation of not more than num inch below the surface .
ensure joint filler is at right angles to the surface and always in a straight line .
ii .
longitudinal contraction joints .
construct longitudinal contraction joints in true alignment with respect to their proper location on centerline or parallel to the plan joint location .
if multiple lanes are constructed simultaneously use a sawed joint instead of the preformed joint material .
restore the surface finish of the pavement against the filler strip with hand floats after the joint filler has been embedded in the concrete .
while performing this operation maintain filler strip in a vertical or normal position true to alignment .
after finishing ensure the entire area of the joint is true to grade and smoothness without irregularities .
b .
meet the requirements specified in num.h .
num .
sealant reservoir construction .
meet the requirements specified in num.h.num .
num .
tie bars .
meet the requirements specified in num.h.num .
num .
load transfer devices .
meet the requirements specified in num.h.num .
num .
construction joints .
place construction joints as follows a. transverse construction joints .
make transverse construction joints at the end of each days paving or when placing of concrete is discontinued for more than num minutes .
place the construction joint at the same location as would be used for a contraction joint if possible .
if the joint occurs at other locations construct a joint using tie bars at least num feet away from the nearest contraction joint .
b. longitudinal construction joints .
locate longitudinal construction joints as specified in the joint location plan or as directed .
num .
random cracks .
meet the requirements specified in num.h.num .
i .
tolerance in pavement thickness .
provide as specified num.i .
j .
final finish .
float slab after screeding if necessary to produce a uniform surface without porous spots irregularities depressions small pockets or rough spots .
use a steel tine to finish the surface .
provide tines that are approximately num inches long and spaced at approximately num to num in intervals .
use nominal tine width of num inch .
ensure the depth of tined grooves is num inch num inch .
check groove depth in accordance with idaho it num .
make adjustments to the tining operation when more than three readings in a set of ten are outside depth range .
perform the tining in such a way as to minimize surface tearing or aggregate removal .
tine with stroke transverse to the roadway centerline and full width of the roadway except for troweled smooth strips num foot wide along curb faces .
do not overlap adjacent strokes .
k. surface test .
meet the requirements specified in num.k.num to test the pavement and applicable sections for grinding .
l. curing .
meet the requirements specified in num.l .
m. cold weather concreting plan .
provide as specified in num.m .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num n. sealing joints .
provide as specified in num.n .
o .
multiple lane construction .
provide as specified in num.o .
p. protection of pavement .
provide as specified in num.p .
q .
opening pavement to traffic .
provide as specified in num.q except to protect curbs cast separately from the pavement for num hours by keeping traffic off the adjacent pavement or by placing barricades along the curb .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably complete work for urban concrete pavement by the square yard .
measurement will be based on the width of the top surface of the pavement as shown on the typical crosssection of the plans with additional widening where specified or directed .
the length will be measured horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
pavement areas will be computed to the nearest num square yard .
the engineer will not make a final measurement of the completed pavement except for authorized changes during construction or where many errors are found in the contract quantity .
the engineer will compute a revision or correction and add to or deduct from the contract quantity .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit urban concrete pavement sy drilling holes for the dowels is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit prices of other concrete pavement items .
verifying dowel bar location is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit prices of other concrete pavement items .
the department will not pay for fieldcured cylinders .
the department will not pay for grinding and related expenses including disposal of ground material traffic control flagging profiling and temporary striping .
thickness price adjustment .
the department will make the following price adjustment to the applicable contract unit prices for each evaluation section quantity exceeding the thickness shown on the plans and as specified in table num .
if thickness measurements show deficient thickness the contractor has the option of removing and replacing the pavement at no additional cost to the department or leaving the pavement in place and receiving deductions in payment as specified in table num .
table num thickness price adjustment excess or deficiency in thickness inches price adjustment percent of contract unit price over num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num through num num over num num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than num inch and determine if the deficient area is sufficient to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement .
remove the affected areas of pavement within the limits specified and replace it with concrete of the specified quality and thickness at no additional cost to the department .
remove the sections of pavement the full length between transverse joints .
if as determined by the engineer a deficiency in excess of num inch will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the contractor may elect to leave the pavement in place but will not receive payment for the deficient area of pavement .
when the pavement contains no longitudinal joints the area of such pavement for which no payment will be made by the department is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit multiplied by the distance between probes on both sides of the deficient measurement that shows measurements within the thickness limits .
where the pavement contains longitudinal joints the width used by the department is the width between longitudinal joints and the edge of the pavement .
the engineer may order the contractor to core drill the finished pavement to determine thickness of the pavement in areas where smoothness corrections are made .
the engineer will determine the pavement thickness by coring after smoothness corrections have been completed .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num microsurfacing num description .
microsurface as specified .
provide a microsurfacing mix placed with a properly proportioned blend of fine graded aggregate liquid admixture polymermodified emulsified asphalt and water .
use the mixture to fill ruts and as an evenly spread surface treatment .
ensure the cured slurry is homogeneous fills cracks and adheres firmly to the surface with a skid resistant texture .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in asphalt num aggregate num num construction requirements .
determine when microsurfacing is to be mixed and spread after the emulsified asphalt arrives on the project site .
shotting .
while some shotting small beads of asphalt in suspension in the emulsion is normal for the emulsion an excessive amount of shotting is an indication that the emulsion is ready to break and should not be used .
a .
mix design .
the mix design is the contractors responsibility .
at least num weeks before microsurfacing submit a complete mix design that meets the specification .
use the same component materials aggregate and gradation in the mix design as will be provided on the project site .
submit a new mix design to the engineer if aggregate source aggregate blend gradation or asphalt emulsion source is changed .
provide the component materials within the following limits residual asphalt num to num by dry weight of aggregate mineral filler num to num by dry weight of aggregate polymerbased modifier minimum of num solids based on bitumen weight content provide a mix design that meets the following international slurry seal association issa test requirements issa test no .
description specification issa tbnum a wet track abrasion loss numhour soak numday soak num gftnum maximum num gftnum maximum issa tbnum mix time num f controllable to num seconds minimum issa tbnum lateral displacement loaded wheel test method a specific gravity after num cycles of num lb num maximum num maximum issa tbnum wet stripping pass num minimum issa tbnum excess asphalt by loaded wheel tester and sand adhesion num gftnum maximum issa tbnum wet cohesion num minutes minimum set num minutes minimum traffic num kgcm minimum num kgcm minimum or near spin minimum a perform the wet track abrasion test under laboratory conditions as a component of the mix design process .
ensure the issa test results are signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state where the tests were performed .
a list of laboratories experienced in microsurfacing mix designs may be obtained from the issa .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b. mixing equipment .
provide a machine specifically designed and equipped to allow for the application of the microsurfacing material .
mix the material by an automatic sequenced selfpropelled microsurfacing mixing machine .
use a continuous flow mixing unit able to accurately deliver and proportion the aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler control setting additive and water in a revolving multiblade doubleshafted mixer capable of discharging the mixed product on a continuous flow basis .
provide sufficient storage capacity to maintain an adequate supply to the proportioning controls .
use of truckmounted units is not allowed .
the microsurfacing equipment will use a computerized material monitoring system with integrated material control devices such that the amount of each material can be determined at any time .
the monitoring system will be calibrated as specified in num.g .
the monitoring system will be capable of recording displaying and printing the following information num .
individual sensor counts for emulsion aggregate mineral filler water and additive .
num .
aggregate emulsion and mineral filler output in pounds per minute .
num .
percentages of emulsion mineral filler water and additive .
num .
cumulative totals of aggregate emulsion mineral filler water and additive .
num .
scale factor for all materials .
c. proportioning device .
provide properly marked individual volume or weight controls for proportioning material to be added to the mix e.g .
aggregate mineral filler emulsified asphalt additive and water .
these proportioning devices are usually revolution counters or similar devices and are used in material calibration and in determining the material output at any time and will require before approval for use .
d. spreading equipment .
spread the mixture uniformly by means of a conventional augured surfacing spreader box attached to the mixer and equipped with paddles to agitate and spread the material throughout the box .
provide a front seal to prevent loss of mixture at the road contact point .
provide an adjustable rear seal to act as final strikeoff .
provide a spreader box that is able to side shift the box to compensate for variations in the pavement geometry .
e. rutfilling equipment where shown on the plans microsurfacing will be used to fill ruts utility cuts and other depressions .
when rutting or deformations allow a full width scratch course may be applied with the spreader box using a metal or stiff rubber strikeoff otherwise ruts will be filled independently with a rut box of num or num feet in width .
all rutfilling material will cure under traffic for at least num hours before an additional course is placed .
f. auxiliary equipment .
provide suitable surface preparation equipment hand tools and other support equipment as necessary to perform the work .
g. calibration .
before construction calibrate each mixing unit used to perform the work in the engineers presence .
notify the engineer at least num working day in advance when calibration will be performed .
the engineer may accept previous calibration documentation covering the exact materials to be used provided they were performed in the current calendar year .
ensure the documentation includes an individual calibration of each material at various settings which can be related to the machines metering devices .
a machine is not allowed to be used until the calibration has been completed or documentation accepted .
h. weather limitations .
apply microsurfacing if the air temperature is less than num f and when both pavement and air temperature are above num f and rising .
apply microsurfacing when there is no danger the finished product will freeze or be rained on within num hours .
do not apply microsurfacing during rain when road surface moisture is present or during other adverse weather conditions .
do not apply microsurfacing when the temperature is expected to drop below num f within num hours of placing microsurfacing .
cease microsurfacing operations when the weather or other conditions prolong opening road surface to traffic beyond one hour .
i .
surface preparation .
clear vegetation loose material dirt mud and other extraneous materials from the surface immediately before applying the microsurfacing .
if water is used allow cracks to dry thoroughly .
obtain num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num approval of the surface preparation before microsurfacing .
an approved fabric material will be used to protect utility covers and street monuments before microsurfacing .
alternate methods may be used to protect utility covers and street monuments if approved .
j .
mix stability .
prevent premature breaking of the emulsion in the spreader box .
ensure the mixture is homogeneous during and following mixing and spreading .
do not allow excess water or emulsion or segregation of the emulsion and aggregate fines from the coarser aggregate .
k. water application .
prewet all dry locations by fogging ahead of the spreader box .
adjust the rate of application of the fog spray during the day to suit temperatures surface texture humidity and dryness of the pavement .
water used in prewetting is an incidental cost to microsurfacing .
l. appearance of the mix .
the microsurfacing will be of the desired consistency upon leaving the mixer .
carry a sufficient volume of material in the spreader box so a complete coverage is obtained .
maintain a coverage thickness be between num inch and num inch except in ruts .
avoid overloading the spreader .
remove lumps balls or unmixed aggregate .
do not leave streaks such as those caused by oversized aggregate in the finished surface .
if streaking develops the engineer will stop the work until the situation has been corrected .
excessive streaking is defined as more than num drag marks greater than num inch wide and num inches long or num inch wide and num inches long in any num square yard area .
no transverse ripples or longitudinal streaks of num inch in depth or greater will be permitted when measured by placing a numfoot straightedge over the surface .
m. joints .
prevent excess buildup uncovered areas or unsightly appearance on joints .
provide a numfoot straightedge and ensure the surface does not vary more than num inch from the lower edge when the straightedge is laid flat on the pavement in a direction parallel to centerline or normal to centerline .
n. hand work .
hand work surface areas which can not be reached with the mixing machine using squeegees to provide complete and uniform coverage .
if necessary before mix placement lightly dampen the area to be hand worked to provide a uniform appearance .
produce the same type of finish as applied by the spreader box .
complete handwork during the machine application process .
repair irregularities at the locations of temporary traffic control markers .
o .
traffic and curing .
protect the microsurfacing from traffic damage until the mixture cures and will not be damaged by vehicle tires .
repair any traffic damage at no cost to the department .
allow microsurfacing applied for rut filling to cure at least num hours before being covered by the full lane width placement .
traffic may be permitted on the rut filling material during this period under the same requirements for protection surface preparation and repair as for other placements .
p. cleanup .
remove debris daily .
q .
test strip .
construct a test strip at least num feet in length before production placement .
initial set must be achieved within num minutes and must show no signs of distress when exposed to traffic action after curing for num hour .
if the microsurfacing does not meet these conditions remove and replace the microsurfacing at no additional cost to the department .
make necessary adjustments if the test strip does not perform as required .
obtain the engineers approval before repeating the test strip .
the engineer may require a new jobmix design and test strip if failures indicate an ingredient problem .
acceptable test strips within the project site will be paid at contract unit prices .
r. production microsurfacing .
the contractor will place microsurfacing mix that meets the jobmix design and the following num .
control the ingredient proportions with metering or measuring devices on the microsurfacing equipment .
use readings from the metering or measuring devices to determine compliance with limits stated in the approved jobmix design and specifications .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
limit any increase or decrease in the amount of mineral filler added to the mix during production to within num percent of the jobmix design not to exceed specifications .
num .
limit the setcontrol agent to within num percent of the jobmix design .
num .
verify that the emulsion submitted with the jobmix design is the same emulsion used throughout the work .
num .
limit the emulsion content to within num percent of the jobmix design not to exceed specifications .
the engineer may require a new jobmix design and reapproval of the microsurfacing if large disparities occur between the approved mix design and production application .
s. reporting .
num .
maintain quality control documentation and make available to the engineer upon request or at completion of daily work .
num .
randomly calculate the percent asphalt content of the mixture from the equipment computer display readings at least three times daily .
num .
randomly calculate the yield of the aggregate being placed from the equipment computer display readings at least three times daily .
num .
provide printouts from the computerized control unit and maintain a daily report and log sheet containing the following information a .
aggregate used ton dry .
b. microsurfacing emulsion used ton .
c. mineral filler used pounds .
d. water used in mixture gallons .
e. additive used in mixture gallons .
f. surface area completed square yards .
g. surface area application rate dry pounds aggregate per square yard .
h. percentage of emulsified asphalt based on dry aggregate .
t. acceptance .
acceptance of the asphalt emulsion and aggregate will be based on the following num .
polymermodified emulsified asphalt .
the engineer will accept polymermodified emulsified asphalt including the viscosity and residue percent obtained at the plant by manufacturers certification and the verification testing performed by the department .
the engineer will sample asphalt twice a day from a random truck or trailer onsite in accordance with aashto t num and deliver to the central materials laboratory within num calendar days for viscosity and evaporation residue laboratory verification testing .
the department will assess a price adjustment in accordance with the departments laboratory operations manual section num when test results indicate the asphalt does not meet the specifications .
perform field testing to ensure the asphalt emulsion has not broken excessively during transportation to the project site .
before introduction to the microsurfacing machine check each load of emulsion for shotting by sieving in accordance with aashto t num sodium oleate solution is not required .
submit results .
num .
aggregate .
stockpile aggregate num calendar days before placement operations begin in an approved location .
obtain approval before using stockpile locations within the right of way .
notify the department when production stockpiles are in place .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the engineer will sample and test the aggregate stockpile for acceptance .
the engineer will reject aggregate material not meeting the jmf gradation tolerances or other material requirements specified above .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows the printouts from the calibrated computerized monitoring will be used to measure the pay items .
microsurfacing aggregate will be measured by the ton .
polymermodified emulsified asphalt will be measured by the ton including mineral filler emulsified asphalt and additives .
submit printouts daily .
num basis for payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit microsurfacing aggregate ton polymermodified emulsified asphalt ton the department considers water cleaning the surface and protecting the microsurfacing until it has set sufficiently to allow traffic to run on the new surface without displacing the new material included in the microsurfacing unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num concrete pavement rehabilitation num general .
perform concrete pavement rehabilitation as follows num .
repair the roadway num lane at a time with traffic being maintained on the remaining lane .
limit the work areas to num miles in length with only the active work area closed within the nummile limit .
obtain approval for night work .
open lanes to traffic at night except for those areas that are in the curing process .
separate work areas by at least num miles .
num .
schedule concrete slab replacement operations to ensure removal and replacement are completed during num working day .
if unforeseen circumstances prevent concrete placing temporarily fill the cavity with crushed base before leaving the project site .
crushed base used to temporarily fill cavities is considered incidental work .
num .
complete the work in the following order a a slab replacement full or partial .
b b repairing spalls .
c c subsealing grout method .
d d grinding .
e e repairing cracks and h resealing joints .
f f reconstruction of plant mix shoulders and num. g g sealing edge joints .
note c will not precede d by more than num calendar days and ec by num calendar days .
grind subsealed pavement and seal crack joints the same construction season .
num .
rehabilitation work is specified in num .
a. slab replacement .
remove and replace concrete pavement in failing areas b .
repairing spalls .
core or saw around the perimeter of the specified area chip or sandblast the spall repair area and patch the cavity with rapidhardening concrete or epoxy mortar .
c. subsealing .
provide pavement subsealing by determining a grout hole pattern drilling holes through the portland cement concrete pavement pumping grout through the holes into the voids and patching the drilled holes with mortar .
d. grinding .
grind the portland cement concrete pavement surface to eliminate joint faulting restore proper drainage and provide riding characteristics and skid resistance or any combination as specified .
e. repairing cracks .
repair cracks in concrete pavement by routing or sawing with a small diameter segmented saw cleaning and sealing .
complete crack repairs concurrently with joint repair work .
f. reconstruction of plant mix shoulders .
reconstruct and reseal the plant mix shoulder as specified and include cutting joint preparation grade control stockpiling and cleanup .
stockpile tailings from the milling operation at the designated location .
g. sealing edge joints .
cut a sealant reservoir and seal between the existing plant mix shoulder and the concrete pavement .
h. resealing joints .
remove the existing joint materials and clean and reseal portland cement concrete pavement joints to be rehabilitated .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num materials .
a. slab replacement .
meet materials and testing requirements as determined .
meet the requirements of aashto m num or astm c num type i or ii grade num or num with class selected to match field temperature of epoxy for grouting tie bars and dowels .
obtain approval to use quick setting nonshrink mortar or other alternative materials for grouting tie bars and dowels into existing slabs .
b .
repairing spalls .
provide rapidhardening concrete meeting astm cnum modified as follows num .
water will be the only liquid component .
num .
calcium chloride or metallic aggregate is not allowed .
num .
minimum compressive strength of num psi at num hours num psi at num day and num psi at num calendar days .
num .
furnish certified test reports showing compliance .
or epoxy binder for mortar conforming to aashto m num or astm cnum type iii grade num or num with class selected to meet field temperature .
c. subsealing .
provide grout consisting of portland cement and water as specified in num and fly ash in accordance with astm cnum class c or class f. obtain written approval to use other admixtures .
provide materials certification for fly ash as specified in num .
ensure the grout plant has a positive displacement cement injection pump and a highspeed colloidal mill .
operate the colloidal mixing machine between num and num revolutions per minute with a rotor operating in close proximity to a stator creating a high shearing action and subsequent pressure release to make a homogenous mixture .
if limestone dust grout is approved for use a paddle type mixer may be substituted for the highspeed colloidal mixer .
ensure the injection pump has pressure capability of num psi when pumping grout slurry mixed to a numsecond flow cone time .
proportion grout ingredients by volume consisting of num part cement num parts fly ash and enough water to provide a grout efflux time ranging between num and num seconds when measured in accordance with idaho field test manual army corps of engineers test method crdcnum .
control the flowability with time measurements at the beginning of the grouting operation and periodically throughout the injection process .
do not hold mixed material in the mixer or injection sump pump for more than num hour after mixing .
the department will not pay for any wasted material held for longer times .
accurately measure dry cement and fly ash by weight if in bulk or provide packaged containers of uniform volume .
introduce water into the mixing process through a meter or scale with a totalizer to measure the amount of water used during each work shift .
use mortar to patch holes in pavement slabs that meet num or commercial rapidsetting concrete patching material meeting astm cnum .
provide materials certification for commercial rapidsetting mortar as specified in num .
d. grinding .
none specified .
e. repairing cracks .
provide sealant types as specified hotpoured sealant num coldapplied sealant num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction f. reconstruction of plant mix shoulders .
meet the following requirements superpave hot mix asphalt num g. sealing edge joints .
provide the sealant types as specified hotpoured sealant num coldapplied sealant num provide heat resistant backer rod material in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions e.g .
cotton or cellulose upholstery cord premolded urethane foam .
ensure the backer rod is slightly larger in diameter than the width of the sawed joint .
furnish various size backer rods to accommodate variations in joint widths .
h. resealing joints .
provide the sealant type as specified hotpoured sealant num coldapplied sealant num provide heatresistant backer rod material as recommended by the manufacturer e.g .
cotton or cellulose upholstery cord premolded urethane foam .
ensure the backer rod is slightly larger in diameter than the width of the sawed joint .
furnish various size backer rods to accommodate variations in joint widths .
num construction requirements .
a. slab replacement .
remove concrete slabs designated for full or partial replacement without damaging the surrounding pavement or base .
make full depth saw cuts around the perimeter of the slab area to be removed to prevent damage to the concrete which is to remain in place .
do not use impact methods e.g .
drop hammers hoe rams to facilitate slab removal .
the contractor may leave tie bars in place if they can be straightened and cleaned .
if tie bars are sawed off or destroyed during slab removal install new bars at the spacing specified by drilling and grouting them into the adjacent slabs .
grout load transfer dowel bars into the adjacent slabs and then lubricate before placing the concrete as specified .
obtain approval of the template when drilling holes for dowels and tie bars .
preserve and maintain the existing base in close conformance to the original grade except where removal of unstable materials is directed .
load removed concrete unstable material and debris as it is removed and dispose in an approved location .
the contractor is responsible for determining a suitable disposal area .
meet num except a numinch slump is allowed when hand methods are used or a numinch slump for when machine methods are used .
align transverse joints with existing joints .
provide joint design and sealant as specified .
install replacement concrete as specified in num except slipform pavers will not be required .
the engineer will not allow plastic strip joints as permanent joint filler .
use increased concrete slab depth to fill minor irregularities below grade as directed .
where leveling or excavation and backfill of unstable areas are directed use plant mix to provide a nonerodible base directly under the replacement slab .
provide plant mix leveling at least num inch thick .
in reconstructed areas place at least a num inch thick plant mix base .
payment will be made under applicable contract items or as specified in num .
preserve the existing transverse and longitudinal joint system when placing fresh concrete in the replacement slabs .
at locations where new concrete is to be placed against existing concrete set numinch strips of foam tape or other approved material in place before pouring concrete .
thoroughly remove strips by sawing when preparing the num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num joints for sealant .
when replacing adjacent or consecutive slabs control shrinkage cracking with stress relief joints saw cut at interim joint locations .
the engineer will decide when the replacement slabs will be opened to traffic .
the engineer will not allow the contractors equipment or traffic on the new slabs until test specimens have attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
when using higher cement factors to achieve early strength additional air entraining agent may be required to ensure entrained air content of the fresh concrete is within the normal range of num to num percent .
b .
repairing spalls .
repair pavement spalls as specified or as directed .
the engineer will mark spalls to be repaired on the pavement surface .
unless otherwise specified repair spalls in a rectangular shape except in cored areas .
perimeter cut the area to be repaired to a depth of num inches with a diamond blade saw or bit .
after sawing or coring chip the cavity out to sound concrete with a jackhammer or other suitable equipment weighing less than num pounds to minimize damage to the surrounding concrete .
use a small hand held chipping hammer for final chipping .
promptly clean loose material from the pavement minimum depth .
make arrangements and use a suitable disposal area for broken concrete and other waste .
prepare place and cure the patch in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
restrict traffic on the patches for at least num hours .
maintain existing pavement joints and cracks to the full depth of the cavity by forming through the patch as necessary with a minimum of ¼ inch compressible material .
ensure patching material does not enter the joint or crack below the cavity .
c. subsealing .
drill holes num inches or less in diameter through the pavement and underlying base to the depth as specified by air or hydraulic equipment .
protect the pavement surrounding each hole from damage .
limit the breakout at the bottom of the drill hole to num percent or less of the pavement thickness .
limit drilling operations to less than num work shift ahead of the grouting operations .
locate the holes in the configuration as specified .
drill at least num consecutive slabs before beginning grouting operations and continue throughout each run or work period .
prewet and wash the holes as necessary to obtain thorough distribution of the injected material .
pump grout with less than num psi pressure through the holes until voids under the pavement slab are filled .
limit slab movement or rising as a result of pressure grouting to num inch or less .
provide and utilize suitable devices to monitor slab movement during pressure grouting .
inject grout into only num hole at a time on any slab or adjoining slabs .
when grout appears at any longitudinal or transverse joint crack or adjacent hole or when monitoring devices indicate slab movement cease pressure grouting immediately at that hole .
allow water displaced from the void structure by the grout to flow out freely .
do not allow excessive loss of the grout through cracks joints or from back pressure in the hose or in the shoulder area .
if continued grouting is no longer feasible cease subsealing operations at that location .
the department will pay for holes drilled at the contract unit price for materials used .
perform pressure grouting when temperatures are above num f during suitable weather and when the subgrade material is not frozen .
take necessary precautions to prevent grout from being pumped or wasted into any drainage facility or other open structure .
upon completion of the grouting operation remove grout from the drilled holes to a depth of at least num inches below the pavement surface .
clean the holes and fill with mortar and finish flush with the concrete pavement surface .
at the end of each work period leave the work area in a clean swept and neat condition .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction if cracks develop between adjacent grout injection holes either from drilling or pumping repair these cracks using an epoxy injection method satisfactory to the engineer .
the engineer may require replacement of the entire panel or a designated portion .
either method will be at no additional cost to the department .
keep traffic off of a grouted slab for at least num hour after grouting .
d. grinding .
the engineer will not require grinding on bridge decks and roadway shoulders unless specified or required to improve drainage .
num .
general .
schedule and proceed with construction operations to produce a uniform finished surface .
grind to eliminate joint or crack faults and ensure positive lateral drainage is maintained on a constant cross slope between grinding extremities in each lane .
transition auxiliary or ramp lane grinding from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and acceptable riding surface .
grind the area specified until the pavement surfaces of adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane and the pavement surface deviations are num inch or less when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
ensure the faulting is eliminated at joints and cracks the overall riding characteristics are within the acceptable limits and the depth of material removed is sufficient for the pavement surface to be textured including the bottom of ruts .
the engineer will not require extra depth grinding to eliminate minor local depressions .
the contractor will remove solid grinding residue before it is blown away by traffic or wind and will prevent residue from flowing across lanes used by traffic or into gutters or drainage facilities .
any damage to these facilities will be corrected at no cost to the department .
the contractor will dispose of the grinding residual .
num .
equipment .
furnish grinding equipment meeting the following a. selfpropelled .
b .
designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades .
c. effective wheel base of at least num feet .
d. cut or plane width at least num feet .
e. shape and dimension that does not encroach on traffic movement .
f. does not causes raveling aggregate fractures spalls or joint damage .
num .
surface finish and testing .
meet the smoothness requirements of num.k .
produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroy appearance .
the peaks of the ridges will be approximately num inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves with approximately num to num evenly spaced grooves per foot .
remove fins resulting from grinding before opening to traffic .
inspect transverse joints and transverse cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
grind areas where misalignment of the planes of the surfaces on adjacent sides of the joint or crack are in excess of num inch until the surfaces are flush .
make smoothly feathered transitions at transverse boundaries between ground and unground areas of concrete .
ensure vertical misalignment between ground and unground concrete surfaces at longitudinal boundaries does not exceed num inch .
if required perform additional grinding with appropriate cross slope adjustment to feather out the misalignment .
e. repairing cracks .
meet num.h .
repair as specified .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num f. reconstruction of plant mix shoulders .
provide milling machines or grinders with the following characteristics num .
power operated .
num .
selfpropelled .
num .
sufficient power traction stability and capability for removing a thickness of asphaltic concrete to the desired profile depth and cross slope in num pass .
num .
capable of accurate and automatic establishing and maintaining of profile grades along each edge of the cut by reference from the existing concrete pavement by means of a ski or matching shoe or from an independent grade control .
num .
controls dust and other particulate matter created by the cutting head .
mill the plant mix shoulder to the depth width and slope as specified .
the engineer may require the pavement milling operations be referenced from an independent grade control rather than a ski in those areas where this type of control is appropriate .
obtain approval for operations to establish and maintain independent grade control .
load and haul tailings from the milling operation to the stockpile site the same day .
remove loose material by sweeping .
the engineer may require sweeping with a pickup type broom where milling residue can not be satisfactorily removed otherwise .
prevent milled plant mix material from being spilled or swept onto any lanes used by traffic .
promptly remove loose material from these areas .
schedule operations to ensure num miles of separation between the milling and paving operations is not exceeded .
meet num .
apply a tack coat of diluted cssnum at a rate of num gallon per square yard to the milled surface before placing the plant mix surfacing .
saw cut the sealant reservoir between the reconstructed plant mix shoulder and the existing concrete pavement to the width and depth specified .
ensure sawing removes plant mix material from the pcc slab .
where irregularities make this impractical use hand tools to complete the removal of any remaining bituminous material not tightly bonded to the slab .
apply sealant in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
the engineer requires a backer rod .
g. sealing edge joints .
saw the edge joint sealant reservoir to the dimensions specified .
meet the material storage joint preparation and sealant application in accordance to the manufacturers requirements .
h. resealing joints .
perform joint resealing in accordance with the sealant manufacturers requirements .
place sealant when the pavement surface and weather conditions are dry .
remove all of the existing material from the joints with a plow ripping teeth wire brush saw or other equipment as approved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
do not use equipment that will cause spalling of the pavement surface beyond the limits of the joint .
the engineer will not allow gang saws to remove existing material from joints formed with tape .
dispose of material removed from the joints in an approved manner .
saw the sealant reservoir to the width and depth as specified with a powerdriven saw equipped with diamond blades .
repair any damage e.g .
spalling fractures to the concrete pavement at no cost to the department .
before sawing the sealant reservoir in new concrete ensure the concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi .
as soon as each joint is cut thoroughly clean scale dirt dust old sealant residue and other foreign material from the sides and adjacent pavement surface for a width of approximately num inch on each side at the joint .
accomplish this by sandblasting or jet waterblasting .
remove sawing and sandblasting residue from the pavement surface before it is blown by traffic or wind .
clean repair and cure spalls fractures breaks or voids in the surface of the joint before installing the joint sealant .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction immediately before the placement of the backer rod and the sealant clean the joints by sandblasting using at least num psi of compressed air .
stop work if there is oil or moisture in the compressed air and do not resume work until suitable adjustments have been made .
submit a copy of the manufacturers written instructions pertaining to the storage and application of the sealant at least num calendar days before beginning installation of the sealant .
when silicone joint sealant is used have a technical representative onsite for at least the first num full days when joint preparation and sealing is taking place .
comply with the written instructions andor recommendations made by the technical representative and approved by the engineer .
the department considers the services of the technical representative incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
apply the sealant material into the joint using equipment and techniques in accordance to the manufacturers written instructions .
recess the finished joint seal surface as specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
the quantity of drilled holes will be per each .
num .
the quantity of grout actually used for subsealing will be by the cubic feet of grout dry measure .
the department considers dry measure when using bulk material as computed on the basis that num pounds of cement equals num dry cubic foot and num pounds of fly ash equals num dry cubic foot .
prepackaged material will consist of num cubic foot sacks of the materials .
the department considers water to be incidental and will not be included in grout measurements .
the engineer will presume cracks emanating radially from the grout injection holes to have been caused by improper injection techniques .
the engineer will reduce grout quantity for each num lineal feet of such crack measured by num cubic foot .
num .
the quantity of pavement grinding milling pavement from the existing plant mix shoulder pavement removal and placing and finishing pavement will be by the square yard .
the engineer will measure pavement grinding by multiplying the finished ground width regardless of the number of passes with the grinder by the total ground length .
pavement removal is computed using the average squared dimensions .
measurement includes removal disposal replacement dowel and tie bars base leveling preparation and any other work necessary to prepare the forms for replacement concrete .
placing and finishing pavement will be based on the top surface of the pavement using the average squared dimensions .
measurement includes placing finishing curing and joint construction .
num .
the quantity of sealing resealing joints crack repair and sealing edge joints will be by the foot .
num .
plant mix surfacing will be by the ton of mix used in the accepted surface and include the weight of the aggregate asphalt and additives in the mixture .
num .
furnished concrete pavement and excavation of unstable material will be by the cubic yard .
concrete measurement is based on batch weights and excavation is computed using the average squared dimensions of the excavated area multiplied by the average depth .
measurement includes providing and delivering the concrete .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit drill hole subseal each grout cf grind concrete pavement sy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num resealing joints ft milling pavement sy plant mix surfacing ton sealing ft repairing pavement cracks ft repairing spalls sf pavement removal sy furnish concrete pavement cy placing finishing pavement sy excavate unstable material cy sealing edge joints ft the department will consider brooming incidental work and the cost included in the milling pavement contract unit price .
the department will consider asphalt additives and cssnum tack coat as incidental and the cost included in the plant mix surfacing contract unit price .
the department will consider backer rod and sealant incidental work and the cost included in the sealing contract unit price .
the department will consider the cost of repairing damaged or destroyed dowels base and plant mix shoulders and slabs as incidental to the pavement removal contract unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num cold inplace recycled cir pavement num description .
cold mill the existing bituminous pavement to the width and depth as specified mix emulsified asphalt recycling agent eara recycling additive dry portland cement or hydrated lime slurry and water with the millings relay and compact the mixture in place .
produce a hydrated lime slurry onsite .
direct application of dry quicklime to the roadway is not allowed .
num materials .
the department defines eara as an emulsion used for cir designed to allow acceptance of rolling traffic at num f and num percent humidity within an optimal time of num hours .
num .
emulsion .
ensure eara meets the property requirements specified in num .
ensure additives added to the emulsion mix to provide the quickset properties are approved by the manufacturer .
num .
for coldmilled bituminous material meet the following gradation requirement sieve size percent passing num¼ inch num num .
lime .
use granular quicklime cao or hydratedslaked lime caohnum to produce the lime slurry .
provide quicklime as specified in num.a .
the engineer will require certification the chemical composition and physical property have been met .
num .
cement .
use type ii portland cement as specified in num .
num .
water .
provide water without harmful soluble salts and a quality that the asphalt will not separate from the emulsion before the cir pavement is in place .
num .
materials acceptance .
asphalt emulsion and aggregate is accepted based on the following a. eara .
a manufacturers certification is required including the viscosity and residue percent obtained at the plant .
sample the eara twice a day from a random truck or trailer onsite in accordance with aashto t num and ship to the central materials laboratory within num calendar days for viscosity and evaporation residue verification testing .
when the eara does not meet specifications a price adjustment will be made as specified in the department laboratory operations manual section num .
perform field testing for the purpose of ensuring the asphalt emulsion has not broken excessively during transportation to the project site .
before introduction to the pug mill mixer check each load of emulsion for shod by sieving as described in aashto t num sodium oleate solution is not required .
submit the results .
b .
cold milling .
before starting compaction submit the gradation test at the minimum required frequency of num test per lane mile .
c. cir pavement .
perform density testing for control strips and test sections in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
place the initial lift of hma within num hours after curing and supplemental compaction is complete unless reprocessing is required .
the temperature limitations for plant mix paving will apply .
plan to remove and replace the recycled material in a continuous process one lane of the roadway at a time which will allow the material to be compacted and finished in the same day .
before opening to traffic roll loose material num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num on the newly recycled surface into the mat .
apply a fog coat full width at a rate of num gallon per square yard .
after the fog coat apply blotter as specified in num to the fogcoated area .
obtain the engineers approval before the recycled roadway is opened to traffic .
control dust at all times .
minimize aggregate fracture during recycling .
recycle the existing pavement with a recycling train .
use hydrated lime slurry or dry spread portland cement .
lime for recycled treated pavement .
meet the following num .
lime slurry plant .
use mixing equipment specifically designed for production of hydrated lime slurries .
equip plants with scales and meters to accurately proportion lime and water within num percent by weight .
provide transports to convey the slurry to the roadway with sufficient agitation to prevent settlement and maintain a uniform homogeneous mixture .
num .
lime metering .
introduce the hydrated lime slurry by a spray bar located at the mill head as required by the engineer by weight of cir material .
calculate the weight of the cir material by pounds per cubic yard for volume of cut .
use metering device to accurately measure the quantity of hydrated lime slurry required to within num percent .
num .
lime feed tank .
use agitators or similar equipment to keep hydrated lime slurry in suspension and maintain a uniform homogeneous mixture when held in the lime slurry feed transport tank .
provide hydrated lime slurry in a uniform pumpable consistency and uniformly incorporate into the cir material at the specified percentage .
ensure the rate of application is approximately num½ percent of dry quicklime added by weight to the existing bituminous pavement to be recycled .
spread dry cement in front of the recycle train no more than num feet in front of the cold planer so it is incorporated into the cir material at the specified percentage .
b .
equipment .
num .
recycling train .
provide a recycling train with the following major components planing machine crusher pug mill mixer and eara storage .
a. planing machine .
provide a selfpropelled planing machine having at least a numfootwide rotary cutter capable of evenly removing the existing pavement to a depth of num inches in a single pass .
ensure the unit is capable of accurately establishing profile grades within a tolerance of num inch by reference from the existing pavement or from independent grade control and have a positive means for controlling cross slope elevations and an effective means for removing material from the surface .
the engineer will not allow a heating device to soften the pavement .
equip the unit to discharge water into the mixing chamber or at the milling head with a fully variable control and meter capable of accurately measuring the rate of feed .
b. crusher .
provide a portable type crusher capable of reducing the oversized recycled materials to the specified size .
the engineer may require additional screening and crushing .
c. pug mill mixer .
mix the cold recycled bituminous mixture in a pug mill type plant capable of providing a mix of rap recycling additive eara and water .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction equip the pug mill with positive control for linking the rap eara and water feeds in a manner that will maintain a constant ratio of each part .
equip the plant with facilities that the contractor can verify and calibrate the rap eara and water quantities by an acceptable method .
measure the rap by weight and proportion the eara and water by weight or by volume .
ensure the equipment is capable of feeding and maintaining a constant rate of rap within a tolerance of plus or minus num percent by total weight of the designated amount and a constant rate of eara and water feeds within plus or minus num percent by total weight of the designated quantities .
equip the mixing plant with positive displacement pumps and a computerized metering system that can accurately meter the amount of eara and water .
interlock the pumps to the beltweighing system that measures the quantity of rap entering the mixing plant .
design the interlock so the eara and water can not be added until the rap enters the mixer .
equip overrides of the interlock system with short duration timers to prevent their continuous use .
the engineer will allow the use of overrides only during startup periods .
provide readouts on the beltweighing device and computerized metering system that show the quantity in tons of rap water and eara being fed into the mixer at any given time .
provide totalizer readouts to allow determination of accumulative quantities of each part .
d. eara storage tanks .
make available accurate volume measuring devices or manufacturers calibration charts and a thermometer for measuring the volume and temperature of the tanks contents .
the engineer will not allow solid or semisolid particles in the eara in the final mix .
equip every line delivering eara to the mix with an onoff valve and a changeable filter element .
change filters at the rate recommended by the manufacturer .
prevent detrimental effects to the recycled material due to interruption of the operation to change filters .
the engineer will reject loads of eara that break prematurely in the storage tanks or haul vehicles or cause frequent plugging of the filters .
num .
cold milling .
cold mill the existing bituminous pavement to the depth specified on the plans .
do not damage the material below the plan depth of removal with the coldmilling operation .
num .
mixing .
the quantity of eara added will be as necessary to fully coat all aggregate without filling voids with excess asphalt .
mix eara at a rate between num to num percent by dry weight of coldmilled material as specified in the mix design .
add water to the coldmilled material to facilitate uniform mixing with the emulsified asphalt .
add water before or concurrently with adding the eara .
continue mixing until the eara and water have been distributed throughout the rap to form a uniformly coated mixture .
ensure the temperature of the eara before entry into the mixture is at least num ºf and less than num ºf .
num .
placing .
place the recycled material using a selfpropelled bituminous paver .
except for unavoidable delay or breakdown proceed with recycling and placing material by the paving machine at a rate sufficient to provide continuous operation of the paving machine .
cold mill and recycle no more of the roadway than what can be repaved in one days paving production .
if recycling operations result in excessive stopping of the paving machine suspend recycling and paving operations until the rate of recycle is synchronized with the capacity of the paving machine .
restrict placing operations to the pavement temperature of num ºf and rising .
in addition do not perform num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num placing operations when it is anticipated that the atmospheric temperature will drop below numº f within num hours of mixing or when rain is expected .
ensure the final surface including the shoulders is within num inch from the bottom of a numfoot straightedge laid in any direction on the surface on either side of the roadway crown .
when tests show that the pavement is not within the specified tolerance take immediate action to correct equipment or procedures in the paving operation to eliminate the unacceptable pavement irregularities .
correct surface deviations within num hours by reprocessing the surface abrasive grinding or micro milling .
perform corrective work including traffic control at no additional cost to the department .
when a pickup machine is used to feed the windrow into the paver hopper pick up the entire windrow to the underlying material .
num .
compaction .
use compaction equipment andor rolling methods to produce the required compaction without damaging the work and the following a .
include in the compaction train at least one numton minimum weight vibratory and one numton minimum weight rubbertired roller .
b .
provide compaction as specified in num.l .
the department has divided the cir layer into control strips and test sections .
each control strip is defined as an area of at least num square yards and of the same depth to be used in the test sections .
each test section is defined as an area num square yards or less .
after num days of production the test section size may be increased to a maximum of num square yards if specified densities are being obtained .
if any test section fails the density requirements the num square yards maximum will again be used .
a .
construction of control strips .
construct control strips using the same procedures and on the same coldmilled material to be used in the construction of the remainder of the work .
use the same type mass and sequence of rollers on the control strips as the test sections .
construct one control strip at the beginning of work of each roadway course .
construct an additional control strip when a change is made in the type or source of material or whenever a significant change occurs in the compaction of the material .
the engineer may require a new control strip after num test sections have been constructed without a new control strip .
compact the control strip .
the required compaction is achieved and final process rolling is defined as when the final roller pass adds no more than num pound per cubic foot to the previous inplace density .
make sufficient additional roller passes to determine that a false break or levelingoff point is not used for compaction density .
upon completion of the rolling the engineer will determine the mean density of the control strip by taking num tests at randomly selected locations within the control strip area utilizing test method fop for aashto t num .
the engineer will govern compaction of successive test sections by the mean density obtained in the control strip .
leave approved control strips in place to become a section of the completed roadway .
the engineer will subject control strips to the same surface tolerance requirements as the remainder of the work .
b. compaction requirements of test sections .
the engineer will evaluate the density of each test section based on the results of num tests performed at randomly selected locations within the test section as described in test method fop for aashto t num .
the specified mean density obtained for the num tests is at least num percent of the mean density obtained in the approved control strip and each individual test value obtained is at least num percent of the mean density obtained in the approved control strip .
if the mean density of a test section does not meet the num percent requirement continue the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction compactive effort on the entire test section until the required mean density is obtained .
if an individual test value does not meet the num percent requirement continue the compactive effort on the area represented by that test until the required density is obtained .
report density test results to the nearest num percent .
c. compaction requirements for small sized areas .
in cases where the test section size can not be as specified the engineer will accept compaction on the basis of a single test for every num square yards of area or less .
the engineer may adjust the specified individual test density to at least num percent of the mean density of the approved control strip .
num .
finishing .
if segregation occurs in the windrow or behind the paver the contractor may be required to make changes in the equipment or operations .
these changes may include the following a .
increasing the crushing effort .
b .
adjusting the amount of water in the mixture .
c. adjusting or modifying the paver .
the engineer will accept cold recycled pavement visually after compaction .
correct mixture not acceptably mixed or that ravels .
reprocess areas showing an excess or deficiency of eara or not acceptably mixed .
if raveling occurs provide additional rolling .
if the engineer determines the unacceptable material is due to the contractors operations perform the corrective work at no additional cost to the department .
before placing the initial lift of hma perform supplemental compaction when the moisture content of the recycled pavement is less than num percent by weight .
supplemental compaction is conducted using control strip and breakover compaction methods described above when the pavement surface temperature is at least num f. num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
cir pavement will be by the square yard .
no separate payment will be made for dust control or changes in equipment or operation due to segregation .
num .
eara will be by the ton .
num .
emulsified asphalt for fog coat will be as specified in num .
num .
blotter will be as specified in num .
num .
lime will be by the ton .
the engineer will use the dry weight to the nearest num ton incorporated in the work at the rate and in the quantity specified or directed .
the quantity of lime will not include lost displaced used in reworking used in restoration work or used contrary to specifications or the engineers direction .
the engineer will consider water included in the cir pavement unit contract price .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit cold inplace recycled pavement sy emulsified asphalt recycling agent ton lime or cement for treated recycled pavement ton num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num cold milling num description .
remove existing seal coat and plant mix pavement by cold milling to the widths and depths as specified or as directed .
transverse wedge milling will consist of cold milling a transverse wedge for the purpose of matching the profile grade of the wearing course to the lip of the gutter elevations .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
cold mill the pavement surface to the specified depths using sensing devices to control the depth and smoothness .
do not damage the bridge deck or approach slab and do not leave excess pavement in place .
taper cut ends to construct a ramp of numhnumv slope .
the ramp will consist of inplace unmilled pavement .
square up the tapered area and mill to the specified depth and width before placing the new plant mix pavement .
when milling operations create a situation where water can not drain transversely off the roadway create relief cuts or other approved methods to provide drainage .
sweep all loose material with pickup brooms .
prevent coldmill tailings from being spilled or swept onto any lane used by traffic .
some handwork may be required at certain locations e.g .
manholes inlets valve boxes meter boxes .
provide a poweroperated selfpropelled milling machine that is capable of automatically and accurately establishing profile grades along each edge of the machine within num foot vertical by reference from the existing pavement by means of a numfoot minimum ski or from an independent grade control .
the equipment will be controlled by an automatic system for controlling depth and crosssection at a given cross slope rate .
a numfoot ski for coldmilling profile grade control may be used if approved .
a numfoot ski for coldmilling profile grade control is not allowed on bridge deck areas .
use a mill with a tooth spacing of num inch or less .
the surface texture depth will not be greater than num inch .
the contractor will use a fine head mill with tooth spacing of num inch or less for all milling on bridge decks or areas where traffic will be driving over the surface for more than num days .
provide a machine capable of controlling dust and other particulate matter created by the mill cutting action .
do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
the texture produced by cold milling will be a grid pattern with uniform striations or other patterns which will provide optimum conditions for placement of plant mix pavement .
construct a numfoot long test section showing the machine is capable of meeting these requirements .
do not stockpile or dispose of coldmill tailings on the project site .
the coldmill tailings are the contractors property unless otherwise specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptable completed work by the square yard .
measurement will be from the coldmilled area regardless of the depth or number of passes required to achieve depth and width .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit cold milling sy a separate payment will not be made for repair of damage caused by coldmilling operations to structures guardrail landscaping or other features .
a separate payment will not be made for brooming loading hauling designated use of or stockpiling of coldmilled materials .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num structures num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num structures num description .
construct structures .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
before placing concrete obtain approval for the excavation depth and the foundation materials .
b. cofferdams and cribs .
construct cofferdams and protect fresh concrete against damage from a sudden stream rise or from erosion .
do not place timber or bracing inside cofferdams or cribs that can not be removed without damage to the concrete .
use cofferdam or crib material of sufficient length to allow a numfoot lowering of footings .
prevent concrete materials from being carried away when pumping from the foundation enclosure interior .
do not pump when placing concrete or for at least num hours thereafter unless it is done from a suitable sump or well point separated from the concrete work .
remove cofferdams cribs sheeting and bracing down to the elevation of the original ground line or to the new stream bed elevation for a channel change or to the top of footings in dry holes .
remove so there is no damage to the new structure .
c. foundation seal .
construct a concrete foundation seal when specified .
pump out the foundation enclosure and place the masonry in the dry .
ensure the seal has set sufficiently to withstand the hydrostatic pressure before pumping to dewater a sealed cofferdam .
when weighted cribs are used and the weight is used to partially overcome the hydrostatic pressure acting against the bottom of the foundation seal provide special anchorage e.g .
dowels keys to transfer the entire weight of the crib into the foundation seal .
d. drainage of substructure .
thoroughly and effectively drain the material behind abutments retaining walls and wing walls by using granular backfill .
e. bearing and anchorage .
set bearing plates in exact position to have a full and even bearing on the masonry .
ensure that anchor bolts are in the correct location and elevation .
adjust the position of expansion bearings to correspond with the temperature at the time of installation .
f. placing concrete .
place the concrete in slab spans tbeams or deck girders in num continuous operation .
if continuous placement of concrete girders or decks of a multispan continuous structure is required or approved the department may require a set retarding admixture .
if a set retarding admixture is required submit a placing schedule for approval showing the proposed amount of admixture to be used .
provide chemical set retarding admixtures that meet aashto m num type b or type d. the department will not allow a reduction in the concrete numday strength .
g. construction joints .
make construction joints only where located on the plans or shown on the placement schedule .
place construction joints as directed if not detailed on the plans or in the case of an emergency .
use shear keys where necessary to transmit shear .
extend reinforcement beyond the construction joint at least the splice length of the reinforcing bar .
retighten the forms before placing new concrete on or against concrete that has hardened .
roughen the concrete to a depth of at least ¼ inch where shear keys are not provided .
roughen the surface of the hardened concrete so there are no loosened particles of aggregates or damaged concrete at the surface .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num thoroughly clean construction joints of foreign matter and laitance and saturate with water before fresh concrete is placed against the joint .
continuously place concrete from joint to joint .
carefully finish true to line and elevation the joint face edges exposed to view .
num method of measurement .
not specified .
num basis of payment .
not specified .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num concrete num description .
provide portland cement concrete .
separate bids may be taken on schedule no .
num concrete placed in the substructure and schedule no .
num concreted placed in the superstructure .
a .
classification .
provide the classes of concrete specified in table num .
table num basic mix design parameters concrete class in num psi num daya minimum cementitious content lbydnum bc maximum water cement ratio air content percent num and greater defg num num num num num to less than num defg num num num num num num num num num seal concrete num num num num a numerical part of class designation is the specified compressive strength when using the applicable tests as specified in num. b cementitious is cement and secondary cementitious materials scm .
c it may not always be possible to produce concrete of the specified compressive strength using the minimum cementitious contents .
a separate payment will not be made by the department for additional cementitious material required to meet the specified compressive strength .
d concrete designated as class a will have an air content of num plus or minus num percent .
e concrete designated as class c will have a maximum water cement ratio of num water reducer required and air content of num plus or minus num percent .
f concrete designated as class f will contain scm .
minimum scm content varies by product for fly ash and slag cement slag minimum content is num by weight of total cementitious material .
fly ash will not exceed num of total cementitious material .
slag will not exceed num of the total cementitious material .
for silica fume minimum content is num by weight of total cementitious material .
silica fume will not exceed num of the total cementitious material .
ternary and quaternary blends will contain at least num scm .
total scm content will not exceed num. g provide scm meeting the requirements of num .
table num selfconsolidating concrete flow in jring test value j in lab only visual stability index static segregation index num j num num maximum num maximum provide class num concrete and use nos .
numa numb or num size coarse aggregate or combined gradation nos .
numc or numc aggregate gradations except for class num and above concrete and prestressed girders .
use nos .
numa or numb size coarse aggregate or no .
numc combined aggregate gradation for class num concrete and above and prestressed girders .
minimum cementitious material content may be reduced num percent by the contractor when using a combined gradation .
ensure the slump does not vary more than num inch or that flow does not vary by more than num inches during placement .
ensure the flow and the jring flow do not vary by more than num inches .
should an increase or decrease in the slump or flow be desirable for the concrete as batched the aggregate blend or the additive dosages may be adjusted .
maintain the ratio of the weight of water to weight of cement .
the department will not require aashto t num mitigation testing as part of the mix design and will not require the use of asr mitigation measures for class num class num and seal concrete except when used in structural foundation and bridge applications .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
acceptance .
the department will base acceptance of concrete on parameters specified for the given concrete class .
the department will base acceptance of strength from the results of numday compressive strength tests performed as specified in num on cylinders made from concrete samples being placed .
the department will consider average strength from num companion cylinders as one test .
precast prestressed and castinplace posttensioned concrete .
provide precast prestressed and castinplace posttensioned concrete meeting the release strength and numday strength as specified .
conventionally reinforced concrete .
the engineer may accept conventionally reinforced concrete provided the strength is no more than num percent below the specified strength .
replace unacceptable concrete at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will use the price adjustment for concrete that does not meet the intended strength but is allowed to remain in place as follows percent of specified strength pay factor num num num num num num num num num subject to rejection a a if allowed to remain in place as determined by the engineer the pay factor will be num .
the department will pay for the acceptable concrete quantities at the contract unit price multiplied by the applicable pay factor .
the contractor may core drill concrete subject to price adjustment or rejection as an alternative test for acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will determine the core locations and how many and witness coring and testing .
limit the coring to num set of num if the engineer determines that taking multiple cores will be detrimental to the integrity and quality of the work .
repair holes left by the coring operation at no additional cost to the department .
obtain approval of repair methods and materials before beginning repairs .
the department will consider cores obtained within num calendar days of placement as representing the numday strength .
cores obtained after num calendar days will only be accepted when the contractor submits a correlation curve developed by a departmentapproved independent testing laboratory to relate strength at the actual test age to numday strength for the particular class and design mix represented by the cores .
the engineer and the contractor will accept the test results of the drilled cores instead of the test cylinders results when the contractor elects to submit acceptable drilled cores .
obtain and test cores in accordance with aashto t num except protect the cores from moisture gain or loss and test as soon as possible without further conditioning other than preparing the ends if needed .
take at least num representative cores from each member or area of concrete in place that is considered potentially deficient .
if before testing num or more of the cores shows evidence of having been damaged subsequent to or during removal replace with a new core .
tests by the contractor may include compressive strength cement content determined by astm cnum and petrographic analysis determined by astm cnum including water cement ratio and air content .
if the average strength of the cores from conventionally reinforced concrete is less than the specified strength for the area represented the engineer will require the concrete be removed or accept at a reduced price as specified in this subsection .
the engineer may reject the member and require replacement at no cost to the department if the average core strength is less than the required strength .
in some cases the engineer may perform additional analysis to determine if the concrete may be allowed to remain in place and accepted at a reduced price .
tests by the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction engineer may include compressive strength cement content determined by astm cnum and petrographic analysis determined by astm cnum including water cement ratio and air content .
make corrective changes in the materials mix portions concrete fabrication procedures or other corrective action before continuing at no cost to the department if the concrete used in the work fails to meet the specified compressive strength .
make approved corrective changes if numday strength test results are low or show a downward trend predicting concrete may not meet the specified numday strength .
the engineer may accept concrete with specified strength of num psi or less including seal concrete from qualified aggregate material suppliers by certification .
the department requires concrete mix designs including strength test data for acceptance by certification .
for each concrete mix design regardless of the pay item in the contract test the first load then again before reaching num cubic yards .
test again before reaching num cubic yards and again within every num cubic yards thereafter .
include test results for slump unit weight air content and compressive strength to verify the certification .
for precast concrete products test once within every num cubic yards of concrete used .
include test results for slump unit weight air content and compressive strength to verify the certification .
use only manufacturers that provide precast concrete products that hold current certification under the npca plant certification program the acpa qcast plant certification program or pci plant certification program .
num materials .
provide material as specified in portland cement num aggregate num permanent metal forms num membraneforming curing compounds num airentraining admixtures num set retarding admixtures num waterreducing admixtures num lithium nitrate admixtures num water num secondary cementitious materials num obtain approval of admixtures before use .
determine an aggregate correction factor for the concrete aggregate for each mix design in accordance with aashto t num .
conduct testing in accordance with the following standard methods compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field except cylinders will be molded only in single use molds made of plastic .
aashto t num standard method of test for surface resistivity indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration .
aashto t num obtaining and testing drilled cores and sawed beams of concrete provisions of aashto t num relating to astm and aci references do not apply aashto t num slump of hydraulic cement concrete aashto t num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num mass per cubic meter cubic foot yield and air content gravimetric of concrete including cement content aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the laboratory except cylinders will be molded only in single use molds made of plastic .
aashto r num measuring length of drilled concrete cores aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method aashto t num measuring texture depth of portland cement concrete using a tire tread depth gauge idaho it num pavement straightedge procedures idaho it num determination of the rate of evaporation of subsurface moisture from concrete idaho it num determining the percentage of fracture of coarse aggregate aashto tp num method num sampling freshly mixed concrete waqtc tmnum when concrete is delivered by means of a concrete pump obtain samples at the final point of placement discharge pipe .
provide a safe and accessible platform for sampling the fresh concrete in close proximity and elevation to the final point of placement .
accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkalisilica reaction aashto t num temperature of freshly mixed portland cement concrete aashto t num standard test method for determining the potential alkalisilica reactivity of combinations of cementitious materials and aggregate accelerated mortarbar method astm cnum determining the potential alkalisilica reactivity of combinations of cementitious materials lithium nitrate admixture and aggregate accelerated mortarbar method crd c num standard method of test for potential alkali reactivity of aggregates and effectiveness of asr mitigation measures aashto tp num standard method of test for slump flow of selfconsolidating concrete cylinders aashto r num standard method of test for passing ability of selfconsolidating concrete concrete by jring aashto t num standard method of test for visual stability index of selfconsolidating concrete aashto t num num construction requirements .
a. proportioning .
submit a concrete mix design and include compressive strength data from the contractors laboratory or an approved independent laboratory .
uniquely identify each submitted mix design .
submit the proportion of the ingredients for each mix design for engineer review .
submit the theoretical maximum density and final set time with the mix design .
measure final set using aashto t numm t num .
proportion each batch as specified in num .
test the proposed mix design in accordance with applicable listed test procedures and aashto t num .
ensure basic mix strength equals or exceeds the design mix strength calculated for the specified class of concrete .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction determine the basic mix strength by one of the following methods num .
average of at least num consecutive field production tests using the proposed mix design provided the tests cover a period of at least num calendar days and during the last num months .
num .
average strength of num test cylinders from a laboratory prepared trial mix based on the proposed mix design and prepared during the last num months .
in addition to strength report the air content for each test .
strength data obtained by either method is valid only if air content tests are within required limits for the specified mix class .
determine design mix strength by one of the following methods a .
method num .
product of the specified strength class of concrete multiplied by the appropriate factor obtained from table num .
calculate coefficient of variation from at least num consecutive field production tests using the proposed mix design or a similar mix design provided the tests cover a period at least num calendar days and during the last num months .
the mathematical definition of coefficient of variation appears in the aci manual of concrete practice section num .
the department allows interpolation .
table num strength factor similar mix percent num num num factor for concrete except castinplace girders num num num factor for castinplace girders num num num coefficient of variation is a statistical measure of the variation in strength among specimens from a given plant .
if coefficient of variation is above num percent review plant operations and develop an appropriate factor .
if fewer than num test results are available multiply the calculated coefficient of variation by the following factor in table num before using the table num .
the department allows interpolation .
table num coefficient of variation strength factor no .
of tests num or more num num num less than num factor for modified c.v. num num num num use method num b .
method num .
sum of the specified strength class of concrete plus the value obtained from table num .
table num strength value concrete class location design mix strength specified strength num psi thru num psi concrete except cast inplace girders specified strength num psi castinplace girders specified strength num psi specified strength over num psi concrete specified strength num psi the department requires the laboratory specimens produced in accordance with astm cnum aashto tp num or crd c num be prepared using the cement fly ash and other mitigative additives proposed for use in the mix num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num design .
determine the lithium nitrate dosage in accordance with crd c num when using lithium nitrate for asr mitigation .
do not allow expansion of mortar bars to exceed num percent with the addition of fly ash slag or other additives when tested in accordance with astm cnum or crd cnum num .
do not allow the miniature concrete prisms to exceed num percent at num calendar days or num percent expansion at num calendar days when tested in accordance with aashto tp num .
the contractor may test the coarse and fine aggregates together or separately .
if testing is performed on the coarse and fine aggregates together report the blend percentage on the test and be within num percent of the blend percentage used in the mix design .
when tested separately base mitigation actions on the aggregate requiring the most mitigation .
ensure the fly ash used in the concrete mix for asr mitigation does not have a calcium oxide cao content more than num percent above the cao content of the fly ash used for astm cnum or aashto tp num testing .
if the fly ash used in the concrete mix for asr mitigation has cao content greater than num percent above the fly ash used for testing the department will require additional astm cnum or aashto tp num testing at the higher cao content .
if fly ash is used only as a mineral admixture determine the dosage of lithium nitrate based on crd c num testing without fly ash .
whenever scm is used provide the same scm source cement source mill and cement type throughout the work in an individual mix design .
the engineer will only approve a change on submission of laboratory test reports by the contractor to verify the revised mix design meets specification requirements .
the contractor may use highrange water reducers superplasticizers meeting astm cnum subject to the following additional requirements num .
do not exceed watercementitious materials ratio design parameters in table num excluding water contained in the admixtures .
cementitious materials are the sum of cement fly ash silica fume ground slag or other pozzolans .
num .
when segregation is evident stop placement and take corrective action .
do not allow slump to exceed num ½ inches .
superplasticizer redosing to maintain slump may be completed up to num times .
slump concrete temperatures and air content must remain within the specification limits after redosing .
the engineer may allow additional drum revolutions beyond the limit in a redosing situation .
when concrete is pumped to the point of placement adjustments to basic mix proportions may be required to ensure concrete meets specifications at the placement end .
be responsible for such adjustments at no additional cost to the department .
notify the engineer in writing before implementing such adjustments .
the department requires laboratory verification as a new mix design for changes other than admixture dosage adjustments .
b .
equipment .
num .
mixers and agitators .
mixers may be stationary or truck mounted .
agitators may be truck mixers or truck agitators .
equip truck mixers and agitators with a means of counting of the drum blades or paddle revolutions and can be readily verified .
ensure each mixer and agitator has a metal plate or plates attached that plainly identifies the various uses the equipment is designed for the drum volume the drum capacity or container in terms of the mixed concrete volume and the rotation speed of the mixing drum or blades .
ensure plates meet nrmca standards .
equip stationary mixers with timing device that will not permit discharge until the specified mixing time has elapsed .
equip truck mixers with a calibrated water flow meter or other approved measuring device to control the quantity of mixing water added in the field .
num .
provide mixers .
when loaded to the rated mixing capacity and the concrete mixed for the time or revolutions prescribed combine the concrete ingredients into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and discharge the concrete with satisfactory uniformity as specified in num.d .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
provide agitators .
when loaded to rated capacity maintain the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and discharge the concrete with satisfactory uniformity as specified in num.d .
c. handling measuring and batching materials .
produce concrete that meets the approved mix design .
submit the proportion of the ingredients for each batch to the engineer at the time of batching .
prepare a batch ticket on an acceptable form for each batch of concrete delivered .
show on the ticket the project name project number supplier name mix design number date and time batched load number truck number percent moisture in aggregate volume batched and the weight measurement of each individual component of the mix added to the batch .
deliver the batch ticket to the engineer at the point of discharge before incorporating the concrete into the work .
submit changes to the mix design for approval .
minor adjustments due to varying moisture in the aggregates and minor adjustments of approved admixtures are not considered changes in the mix design and will not require approval of a new mix design .
report minor adjustments to the engineer before batching .
num .
measure cement by weight .
weigh cement in an individual hopper when measuring by weight and keep separate from the aggregates until released for discharge .
attach the cement hopper to a separate scale for individual weighing or to the aggregate scale for cumulative weighing .
if cement is weighed cumulatively weigh it before the other ingredients .
ensure the scale and weigh hopper for cement is separate and distinct from aggregate weighing equipment .
provide cement batchers with a dust seal between the charging mechanism and hopper installed in such a way as to not affect the weighing accuracy and vented to permit the escape of air .
ensure the hopper is selfcleaning and fitted with means to ensure complete discharge .
provide sufficient wind protection to prevent interference with batching accuracy .
ensure the cement as measured is within num percent of the design weight .
num .
measure aggregates by weight .
weigh aggregate within num percent of the required weights and the total weight of the aggregate within num percent of the total required weight .
handle aggregates from stockpiles or other sources to the batching plant so uniform grading and stable moisture content is maintained .
stockpile or bin aggregates for draining at least num hours before being batched when produced or handled by hydraulic methods or washed .
num .
measure water by volume or by weight .
arrange the measuring device so the measurements will not be affected by variable pressures in the water supply line .
do not use wash water as a portion of the mixing water .
weigh or measure water within num percent of the required quantity .
num .
measure scm by weight .
weigh the scm within num percent of the design weight .
num .
measure dry admixtures by weight and paste or liquid admixtures by weight or volume .
dispense admixtures used in small quantities in proportion to the cement as airentraining admixtures with the mixing water .
adjust the quantity of admixtures used in accordance with manufacturers written instructions .
ensure admixtures used meet num .
num .
if batches must be transported to the mixer transport cement and aggregates from the batching plant to the mixer in batch boxes vehicle bodies or other containers of adequate capacity and construction to properly carry the volume required .
d. mixing and delivery .
num .
mix and deliver concrete by any of the following means a .
central mixed concrete .
mixed completely in a stationary mixer and the mixed concrete transported to the point of delivery in agitating equipment or in approved nonagitating equipment .
b .
transit mixed concrete .
mixed completely in a truck mixer at the batching plant or while in transit .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. truck mixed concrete .
mixed completely in a truck mixer at the point of delivery following the addition of mixing water .
d. shrink mixed concrete .
mixed partially in a stationary mixer and the mixing completed in a truck mixer .
e. mixed in an approved mixer that volumetrically measures the concrete ingredients and continuously produces concrete that meets astm cnum .
num .
operate truck mixers and truck agitators within the rated capacity and at a speed of rotation for mixing or agitating as designated by the equipment manufacturer .
num .
the minimum mixing time for mixers of num cubic yards or less is num seconds for central mixed concrete .
mixing time for mixers of more than num cubic yards capacity requires approval .
measure mixing time from when the cement and aggregates are in the drum .
charge the batch into the mixer so some water will enter before cement and aggregates and all water is in the drum by the end of the first ¼ of the specified mixing time .
num .
for shrinkmixed concrete the contractor may reduce mixing time in the stationary mixer to at least num seconds .
complete mixing in a truck mixer with num to num revolutions of the drum or blades at mixing speed .
do not exceed a batch volume of num percent of the drum gross volume .
num .
when a truck mixer is used for complete mixing mix each batch of concrete with num to num revolutions of the drum or blades at mixing speed .
use agitating speed for additional mixing .
num .
when a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete that has been completely mixed in a stationary mixer use agitating speed for mixing during transport .
num .
when a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete apply the following a .
deliver the concrete and complete discharge within num hours after the introduction of the cement to the aggregates or before the drum has revolved num revolutions whichever comes first .
b .
in hot weather or under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete a time less than num hours may be directed .
c. begin mixing operation within num minutes after the cement has been intermingled with the aggregates when a truck mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete .
d. if additional mixing water is approved at least num additional revolutions of the truck mixer drum at mixing speed are required before discharge of concrete .
the engineer may allow additional mixing water num time during the discharge of the concrete .
e. the engineer may require tests for consistency at approximately the beginning the midpoint and the end of the load .
if the results vary by more than the tolerance specified in table num do not use the mixer or agitator until the condition is corrected .
table num load slump variance when average slump is tolerance num inches or less num inch more than num inches num inches num .
transport central mixed concrete in suitable nonagitating equipment .
provide covers when required .
equip bodies with smooth mortartight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a controlled rate without segregation .
completely discharge concrete within num minutes after the introduction of the cement to the aggregates .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
do not use aluminum pipe to convey concrete .
num .
provide concrete at a temperature between num f and num f at the time of placing .
e. falsework and forms .
num .
general .
submit to the engineer working drawings loading assumptions allowable material stresses used in design and final design calculations for proposed falsework and formwork .
working drawings and approval for footings or walls are not required unless either is more than num feet high .
the engineer will measure the wall height from the top of footing .
ensure the working drawings and design calculations are sealed and signed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
submit plan sheets to the railroad for review and approval showing railroad falsework clearances if required .
when falsework crosses or is adjacent to traffic the department requires the design to include a positive barrier between the construction and traffic to prevent the possibility of dropping construction items into the roadway .
the approval of the falsework or formwork working drawings or engineer inspections will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the falsework and forms .
do not start the construction of falsework or formwork until the drawings for that unit are reviewed and approved .
fieldverify ground elevations at the proposed falsework footing locations for falsework design .
num .
plans .
submit falsework or formwork drawings and design calculations in pdf format .
include on each drawing and calculation sheet the key number and contract drawing number .
ensure working drawings identify materials used including grades of lumber in sufficient detail to permit accurate checking .
the contractor may revise the working drawings provided at least num weeks are allowed for engineer review before construction is started on the revised portions .
the department requires working drawings to include a placing diagram showing the concrete placing sequence rate of pour and construction joint locations .
when a schedule for placing concrete is specified deviations will not be permitted .
submit with the working drawings the manufacturers catalog data listing the weight of construction equipment that will be supported by the falsework .
when footing type foundations are to be used determine the bearing value of the soil and show the values assumed in the falsework design on the falsework drawings .
show assumed values for wet and dry soil conditions .
show anticipated total settlements andor deflections of falsework and forms on the working drawings including falsework footing settlement joint take up and deflection of beams or girders .
settlement and deflection of falsework greater than num inch will not be accepted .
design falsework and forms supporting deck slab and overhangs on girder bridges so there is no differential settlement between the girders and the deck forms during of deck concrete placement .
num .
design .
a .
general .
design falsework and formwork that meets aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works and incorporate the following exceptions num if in conflict with the contract specifications the contract specifications will govern .
num where other codes and standards are referenced in the guide use the most current edition of that code or standard .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num show the falsework and formwork design calculations for the stresses and deflections of load supporting members .
num design provide and install camber strips to account for beam deflection vertical alignment and anticipated structure deflection if necessary .
num falsework and forms supporting concrete work on steel structures .
a loading of girder webs .
construct falsework and forms supporting the concrete work on steel structures so loads applied to girder webs are within num inches of a flange or stiffener and distributed so no local distortion is produced .
b lateral loading of girder flanges .
provide temporary struts and ties as necessary to resist lateral loads applied to the girder flanges and to prevent relative vertical movement num inch maximum between the edge of deck form and the adjacent steel girder .
num add the following procedure for determining the lateral pressure of fluid concrete if pozzolans or admixtures are used in the concrete mix for concrete made with pozzolans or admixtures and placed with normal internal vibration to a depth of num feet or less formwork can be designed for a lateral pressure as follows p lateral pressure psf r rate of placement foothour t temperature of concrete during placing f cc chemistry coefficient num for cement type i and iii with a retarder num for blends containing fly ash without a retarder num for blends containing fly ash with a retarder where retarders include admixtures that delay setting of concrete .
for columns p cc num num r t with a p between num and a maximum of numcc psf at least num psf but in no case greater than w x h where w is density of concrete times in pound per cubic foot and h is total height of concrete placement in foot .
for walls p cc num num t num r t with a p between num and a maximum of numcc psf at least num psf but in no case greater than w x h where w is density of concrete in pound per cubic foot and h is total height of concrete placement in foot .
for applying the lateral pressure formulas columns are defined as elements with no plan dimension exceeding num feet .
walls are defined as vertical elements with at least num plan dimension greater than num feet .
note this specification is a modification of the manual of concrete section num subsection num lateral pressure of concrete published by aci .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b .
permanent metal concrete forms .
do not use permanent metal forms for decks .
ensure materials meet num .
design permanent metal forms to meet the following criteria and the loads specified in this subsection .
num the unit working stress in the steel sheet is num or less of the specified minimum yield strength of the material provided but not to exceed num psi .
num the maximum deflection under the weight of the forms plastic concrete and reinforcement or a load of num pounds per square foot whichever is greater will not exceed num of the form span or ½ inch whichever is less .
num ensure the form span for computation of stress and deflection is at least the clear span of the corrugated form material plus num inches .
num compute physical design properties in accordance with the edition of aisi specifications for the design of cold formed steel structural members published at bid opening .
num ensure reinforcement has a minimum concrete cover of num inch .
center bars in the bottom layer of the main reinforcement over the valleys of the forms when necessary to achieve the minimum numinch concrete cover .
num provide positive lateral support by the use of concrete haunches formed against the top flanges of steel beams or girders except where shear connectors are provided .
num do not locate longitudinal deck construction joints between stringers where permanent metal forms are used .
num cut off support angle legs extending into the deck concrete in excess of ½ inch .
install forms in accordance with approved detailed fabrication plans .
ensure the fabrication plans meet num.e.num and include the grade of steel used and the moment of inertia calculations for the form .
do not rest form sheets directly on the tops of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
securely fasten sheets to form supports and provide a minimum bearing length of num inch at each end .
place form supports in direct contact with the stringer flange or floor beam .
attachments are to be made by bolts clips or other approved means .
submit the method of attachment for approval with the fabrication plan .
thoroughly clean wire brush and then paint damaged galvanized coating on exposed form metal with num coats of zinc oxide zinc dust primer federal specification ttpnumld type ii .
locate transverse construction joints at the bottom of a flute with ¼ inch weep holes field drilled at least num inches on center along the line of the joint .
remove at least num section of the forms at a location and time selected for each concrete placement on each span as directed .
remove forms for inspection as soon after placing the concrete as practical to provide visual evidence the concrete mix and the contractors procedures are obtaining the desired results .
remove an additional section each time the concrete mix or the contractors procedures are changed if directed .
after the deck concrete has been in place for at least num calendar days test the concrete for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer .
if areas of doubtful soundness are disclosed remove the forms from such areas for visual inspection after the concrete has attained adequate strength at no additional cost to the department .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num at locations where sections of the forms are removed the department will not require replacement of forms but will require repair of the adjacent metal forms and supports to present a neat appearance and ensure their satisfactory retention .
remove unsatisfactory concrete or repair as directed .
num .
construction .
a .
general .
provide telltales attached to the soffit forms that are readable from the ground in enough systematically placed locations to determine the total settlement of the entire portion of the structure where concrete is being placed .
if unanticipated events occur including settlements that deviate more than plus or minus num inch from those shown on the falsework drawings stop placing concrete until corrective measures are provided .
when directed to suspend placing concrete construct a temporary bulkhead at a location determined by the engineer .
remove unacceptable concrete at no additional cost to the department .
b. bracing .
provide temporary bracing as necessary to withstand imposed loads during erection construction and removal of falsework whose height exceeds its clear distance to the edge of sidewalk or shoulder of roadway open to the public .
show provisions on the falsework drawing for temporary bracing or methods to be used to meet this requirement during each phase of erection and removal .
include wind loads in the design of temporary bracing methods .
set the falsework to give the finished structure the camber specified .
in addition to the specified camber make allowance for settlement of the falsework using num inch for each contact of timbers .
c. expansion joints .
at the ends of bridge deck expansion joints securely fasten joint material or the armor angles of compression seals to the overhang forms to prevent relative movement during concrete placement .
on deck rehabilitation work the department may require shimming andor tack welding new steel joint elements to existing armor angles or parts .
d. bridge rail curbs and parapets .
cast the concrete portions of bridge rails curbs and parapets in place using conventional fixed formwork .
e. form fasteners .
use form fasteners consisting of form bolts clamps or other devices as necessary to prevent spreading of the forms during concrete placement .
do not use ties consisting of twisted wire loops to hold forms in position .
f. anchor devices .
the contractor may use anchor devices cast into concrete for supporting forms or for lifting precast members .
do not use driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form supports to concrete .
use the type of form fasteners and anchors that can be removed without chipping spalling heating or otherwise damaging the concrete surface .
remove form bolts metal ties or anchors or other metal placed for the contractors convenience to a depth of at least num inch below the surface of the concrete .
clean and fill the resulting holes or depressions with mortar .
remove form bolts projecting into the cells of box girders flush with the surface of the concrete .
g. mortar .
provide and place mortar in recesses and holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations as specified .
provide mortar composed of portland cement sand and water .
use a num to num ratio for the proportion of cement to sand measured by volume .
provide material that meets num .
ensure the maximum size of sand is not larger than ½ the size of the recess hole or space where the mortar is to be placed .
use only enough water in the mortar to permit placing and packing .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction clean concrete areas to be in contact with the mortar of loose or foreign material that would prevent bond between the mortar and the concrete surfaces .
flush with water and allow to dry to a surface dry condition immediately before placing the mortar .
completely fill and tightly pack the mortar into recesses holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations as specified .
after placing cure surfaces of mortar by the water method as specified in num.j for at least num days .
ensure keyways spaces between structural members holes spaces under structural members and other locations where mortar could escape are mortar tight before placing mortar .
do not allow loads on mortar within num hours .
remove improperly cured or defective mortar and replace at no additional cost to the department .
for exposed surfaces add white cement to the mortar in a quantity sufficient to result in a patch that matches the surrounding concrete when dry .
h. forms .
clean the forms inside surfaces of dirt mortar and foreign material .
thoroughly coat forms which will later be removed with form oil before use .
use commercial quality form oil or other equivalent coating that will permit the ready release of the forms and not discolor the concrete .
ensure concrete forms are mortar tight true to the dimensions lines and grades of the structure and of sufficient strength to prevent deflection during the placing of the concrete .
do not discharge concrete into the forms until work connected with constructing the forms has been completed materials required to be embedded in the concrete have been placed for the unit to be poured and the engineer has inspected the forms and materials .
this work includes the removal of dirt chips sawdust water and other foreign material from the forms .
control the rate of depositing concrete in forms to prevent deflections of the forms or form panels in excess of the deflections specified .
the department requires forms for concrete surfaces that are not completely enclosed or hidden below the permanent ground surface meet the same requirements as forms for exposed surfaces .
interior surfaces of underground drainage structures are to be completely enclosed surfaces .
form exposed surfaces of each element of a concrete structure with the same forming material or with materials that produce similar concrete surface textures color and appearance .
face forms for exposed surfaces with form panels .
a form panel is the continuous section of form facing material unbroken by joint marks against which the concrete is placed .
provide and place form panels for exposed surfaces in uniform widths of at least num feet and in uniform lengths of at least num feet except where the width of the member formed is less than num feet .
when the width of the panels is less than num feet provide and place panels that are the width of the member .
arrange panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
place panels for vertical surfaces with the long dimension horizontal and with horizontal joints level and continuous .
place panels with the long dimension parallel to the footing for walls with sloping footings which do not abut other walls .
precisely align form panels on each side of the panel joint by means of supports or fasteners common to both panels to result in a continuous unbroken concrete plane surface .
construct forms for exposed surfaces with triangular fillets at least ¾ inch by ¾ inch attached to prevent mortar runs and to produce smooth straight chamfers at sharp edges of the concrete .
do not stamp concrete e.g .
with company logo dates patterns .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
removal of falsework and forms .
do not remove forms and falsework without approval .
this approval does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the safety of the work .
remove blocks and bracing at the time the forms are removed including the wood forms left in the concrete .
include falsework removal procedures for continuous or cantilevered structures with the working drawings .
if the contractor intends to remove falsework and forms before num calendar days proportion and design the concrete mix to provide the minimum strengths required at the proposed removal time as specified .
do not remove the falsework and forms before the minimum number of days and minimum strength for the applicable structural element .
comply with num.f .
perform maturity testing in accordance with astm cnum to determine compressive strength for form removal and loading .
validate maturitystrength relationship with the first placement and every num cubic yards thereafter .
develop the maturitystrength relationship and submit maturity curves along with supporting data and field procedures for monitoring maturity for approval at least num calendar days before use .
provide equipment including thermo or maturity meters thermocouples wire and qualified personnel to monitor maturity and submit information .
ensure maturity testing represents the concrete in the most unfavorable field conditions .
when using maturity testing validate the first field placement and every num cubic yards thereafter .
cure cylinders used for validation testing using the same procedures as used in developing the initial maturity strength relationship .
when initially validating the maturity curve validate at least num points num of which must be at a period of less than num calendar days for subsequent validation .
a maturity curve will be considered valid if the validation points are within num percent of the original maturity curve .
loading of a member is defined as additional horizontal or vertical loads applied other than loads from formwork and reinforcing steel of further concrete placements .
for posttensioned concrete bridges release the falsework supports which might continue to remain engaged after structure units are prestressed to allow the concrete to accept its own weight and distribution of stresses uniformly and gradually .
sequence disengagements so fixed connections at tops of piers will not be subjected to damaging forces .
sequence falsework support disengagement as specified on falsework drawings .
the stressing operation in prestressed units must be completed and approved before removing supporting falsework .
apply a membraneforming curing compound or a water cure as specified in num.j to exposed surfaces except for construction joints if forms are removed before num calendar days have elapsed .
cure construction joints using a water cure as specified in num .
leave the forms in place for footings constructed within cofferdams or cribs if their removal would endanger the safety of the cofferdam or crib and where the forms left in place will not be exposed to view in the finished structure .
remove forms whether above or below the ground line or water level .
remove forms from the cells of box girders .
remove forms and falsework in a manner to permit the concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own mass .
the contractor may remove forms and falsework or place subsequent loads when both conditions in table num for the activity involved are met .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num form and falsework removal and loading of concrete a from the time of the last placement in the forms or falsework supports and excluding the days when the surrounding temperature is below num f for a total of num hours or more .
requirements in num.g still apply .
the contractor will monitor the temperature during curing time by continuous recording thermometers .
b do not remove forms until the concrete has sufficient strength to prevent damage to the surface or cause over stressing of the concrete .
c where continuous spans are involved the time for spans will be determined by the last concrete placed .
d except loads from formwork and reinforcing steel of further concrete placements .
e standard concrete mix designs may not achieve strength in the minimum days shown .
part num removal of forms and falsework structural element minimum days ab percent of design strength e side forms for footings abutment caps pier caps traffic and pedestrian barriers and other side forms not supporting the concrete mass num columns abutment backwalls and retaining walls num num cantilever bridge deck sidewalks num bridge decks top slabs of concrete box culverts or stifflegs num num crossbeams caps box girders tbeam girders and flat slab superstructures c num num signal luminaire and sign support foundations num num part num subsequent loading d of structural element minimum days a percent of design strength e footings and abutments num num approach slabs and bottom slabs of box girders with falsework in place num num columns and walls num num bridge decks top slabs of concrete box culverts or stifflegs and other members num num signal luminaire and sign support foundations num num erecting girders on pier caps num num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num f. placing concrete .
num .
general .
do not place concrete until forms and metal reinforcement have been inspected .
clean the forms of debris and foreign material before concrete is placed .
avoid segregation of the concrete and displacement of the reinforcement .
when placing operations involve dropping the concrete more than num feet deposit concrete through sheet metal or other approved tubes .
keep tubes full of concrete during placing and their lower ends buried in the newly placed concrete as much as practical .
control the rate of depositing concrete in forms to prevent deflections of the forms or form panels in excess of the deflections specified .
place concrete in the forms as soon as possible after mixing .
keep the concrete plastic and workable .
the concrete placement is to be continuous with no interruption longer than num minutes between adjoining layers .
fill each part of the form carefully by depositing the concrete as near the final position as possible .
place and consolidate each layer before the preceding layer takes initial set .
do not jar the forms or allow strain to be placed on the ends of projecting reinforcement after initial set of the concrete .
do not place bridge decks and other concrete flatwork when the evaporation rate is greater than num pounds per square foot per hour when tested in accordance with idaho it num .
flatwork is a surface not cured in contact with a form and that is not part of a construction joint .
surfaces essentially vertical are excluded from the definition .
use the proper mix design and combination of low shrink materials low temperature concrete proper curing techniques or other procedures necessary to eliminate or minimize the development of cracks .
the engineer will determine surface crack intensity after completion of concrete cure and before prestressing or releasing of forms or falsework .
the surface crack intensity of concrete bridge decks is determined by the number and size of cracks in the top surface of the concrete .
remove equipment and material from the deck and clean the surface as necessary for the engineer to measure the crack intensity .
fill cracks in any num square yard portion of deck when there are more than num feet of cracks whose width exceeds num inch with a num component modified methacrylate penetrating sealer or equal as approved .
fill the cracks in accordance with the penetrating sealer manufacturers written instructions at no additional cost to the department .
decks that have excessive cracking or cracking that jeopardizes the structural integrity of the deck may be determined unacceptable by the engineer and require removal .
work after the placement is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price for concrete .
num .
vibrating .
consolidate the concrete with suitable vibrators operating within the concrete .
supplement vibrating by handspading with suitable tools to ensure proper and adequate consolidation especially around obstructions .
use vibrators that operate at frequencies of at least num impulses per minute .
use vibrators in concrete containing epoxycoated reinforcement that have a resilient covering to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
vibrate deck concrete with internal vibrators turning at least num revolutions per minute in air and are fully submerged .
space the vibrator in the concrete mix approximately num to num inches measured in longitudinal and transverse directions .
work the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement embedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms with vibrators .
do not use vibrators to cause the concrete to flow or run into position instead of placing .
ensure vibration is sufficient to accomplish thorough consolidation but not prolonged to the point where segregation occurs .
the vibrators are not required for seal concrete or concrete in shell piles .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
underwater concrete .
use seal concrete in or under water .
carefully place concrete in a compact mass in its final position by means of a tremie a bottom dump bucket or other approved method to prevent segregation .
do not disturb concrete after being deposited .
do not place concrete in running water .
construct the forms for underwater concrete to provide still water inside the forms .
continuously place the concrete until the required depth is reached and keep the surface of the concrete as nearly level as possible .
comply with the following requirements for placing if a tremie is used a .
use a watertight tube having a diameter of at least num inches with a hopper at the top .
b .
provide a device that will prevent water from entering while charging the tube with concrete .
c. support the tremie to permit free movement of the discharge end over the entire top surface and to permit rapid lowering when necessary to slow down or stop the flow of concrete .
d. use a method to fill the tremie that will prevent washing of the concrete .
e. completely submerge the discharge end in concrete and maintain sufficient concrete in the tremie tube to prevent water entry .
f. when concrete is dumped into the hopper induce the flow of concrete by slightly raising the discharge end always keeping it in the deposited concrete .
num .
massive placement .
placements thicker than num feet are massive placements .
take special measures to minimize the possibility of drying shrinkage cracks developing in placements while placing and curing the concrete .
the maximum temperature difference between the top surface of a placement during placing and throughout the full numday curing period of the concrete is num f. use approved construction methods that will achieve uniformity of temperature and if these methods prove inadequate adopt different or additional measures as necessary to achieve the uniformity .
g. cold weather concreting .
num .
heating and placing concrete .
obtain approval for a coldweather concreting and curing plan detailing the methods and equipment to ensure the required concrete temperatures are maintained before placing concrete when there is a probability of air temperatures below num f during the placing and curing periods .
meet the following coldweather concreting operation requirements when the ambient temperature falls below num f a .
completely remove ice snow and frost before placing concrete .
b .
provide concrete that will have a temperature of at least num f and less than num f at the time of placing .
c. do not place concrete against material with a temperature of num f or less .
d. heat the mix water andor the aggregates when necessary before batching to produce concrete of the specified temperature .
heat in a manner that is not detrimental to the mix and does not prevent the entrainment of the required amount of air .
heat the materials uniformly .
e. do not heat aggregates directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire .
f. do not heat aggregates or water to over num f. if either is heated to over num f mix together before adding the cement so the cement does not come into contact with materials that are in excess of num f. num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
protection of concrete .
maintain a concrete temperature of at least num f for num calendar days or num f for num calendar days after placement except when steam curing is used .
when scm is used increase the time to num calendar days for num f and num calendar days for num f. maintain the temperature of uniform surfaces of concrete e.g .
decks at the temperatures and the times shown .
do not allow the water to freeze during the curing period when water cure is required for concrete as specified in num.j .
protecting and curing concrete under water is allowed provided the temperature of the water does not fall below num f and at least num inches of water is maintained over the concrete for at least num calendar days .
block up combustion heaters off the surface of the concrete and vent to the outside of the enclosure .
do not allow the maximum temperature within the enclosure to exceed num f when the concrete is protected by means other than steam .
the maximum drop in temperature of the concrete throughout the first num hours after the end of protection will be num f for protection methods other than the use of steam .
meet the requirements of num.j when steam is used in the protection of the concrete .
provide calibrated temperature recording devices with a range of num to num f for steamcured concrete and a range of num to num f for other concrete .
continuously record temperatures for at least num hours .
provide a sufficient number of recording devices to keep adequate records of temperatures .
on small quantities used in minor structures sign foundations and other nonstructural placement e.g .
sidewalks curb and gutter protect the concrete from freeze damage by covering the concrete with suitable blanketing material .
maintain protective covering for at least num calendar days .
use recording thermometers to show that concrete used in minor structures was not exposed to freezing temperatures .
h. hot weather concreting .
do not allow the temperature of concrete to exceed num f at time of placement .
take measures e.g .
erecting sunshades placing at night or early morning to slow evaporation to tolerable limits when the combination of ambient air temperature concrete temperature humidity and wind promotes rapid evaporation of moisture from the concrete surface .
ice may be used as a part of the mixing water if it has completely melted by the time mixing is completed .
ensure the temperature of the surface to be covered by concrete does not exceed num f. i. finishing concrete .
provide formed surfaces with an ordinary surface finish plus if further finishing is required a type of finish as specified .
provide a rubbed surface finish on exposed surfaces except the soffits of superstructures and the interior faces and bottoms of concrete girders .
concrete surfaces are defined as follows num .
ordinary surface finish .
remove form bolts and tie wires immediately after the forms have been removed .
if rock pockets materially affect the strength of the structure or endanger the life of the steel reinforcement the engineer may declare the concrete defective and require the removal and replacement of that portion of the structure affected .
clean thoroughly wet and fill holes and depressions with a cement mortar composed of num part of cement and num parts of sand .
the department may require an approved bonding agent .
remove fins caused by form joints and other projections above the ground line .
ensure the resulting surface is reasonably smooth and uniform in texture and color .
provide a rubbed surface finish on an ordinary surface with an unsatisfactory finish .
num .
rubbed surface finish .
thoroughly wet and rub the entire surface with a carborundum stone or other approved method after the pointing has set sufficiently .
the department may require an approved bonding agent .
spread the paste by rubbing uniformly over the surface and finish by floating or rubbing to attain a uniform color and texture .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction thoroughly clean concrete which has been discolored by the drip from the abrasive by using a dilute solution of muriatic acid and then washing thoroughly with clean water .
the engineer may waive the requirement for a rubbed surface finish if the uniformity of color and texture obtained with ordinary surface finish are essentially the equal of a rubbed surface finish when metal forms fiber forms lined forms or plywood forms in good condition are used .
grinding with powered disc grinders or light sandblasting with fine sand or other approved means may be used in conjunction with ordinary surface finish .
num .
slab finish .
finish and straightedge deck slabs and wearing surfaces as follows finish deck slabs greater than num feet in length and other wearing surfaces subject to highway traffic that are greater than num feet in length by the machine method .
finish other deck slabs and wearing surfaces using machine or hand methods .
do not use additional water on the concrete surface during machine or handfinishing operations .
straightedge the concrete surface broom finish and meet the completed surface requirements of the following in paragraphs c d and e after finishing by machine or hand methods .
a .
equipment .
use an engineerapproved powerdriven finishing machine complying with the following requirements for finishing all areas of work with a width of at least num feet .
have at least num handoperated spud type internal vibrators available at all times for use as directed .
submit equipment approval requests to the engineer at least num calendar days before the start of the work .
do not begin placing deck concrete until the screed and placing procedure is approved by the engineer .
provide a selfpropelled finishing machine capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control for placing striking off and finishing the bridge deck surface with provisions for raising screeds to clear the surface .
equip the machine with vibrating screeds designed to consolidate the modified composition .
the department requires the vibration frequency be variable with positive control between num and num vpm and the bottom face of the screeds be at least num inches wide and be metal covered .
provide screeds with positive control of the vertical position .
equip the finishing machine with one or more rollers augers and num or num vpm vibratory pans .
provide a bidwell num or equivalent finishing machine .
modification to the bidwell num or equivalent is subject to engineer approval .
texas allen or bunyan type screeds will only be permitted for small andor irregular areas if approved by the engineer .
before beginning concreting operations operate the finishing machine over the full length of the bridge segment to be finished .
make this test run with the screed adjusted to its finishing position .
check the screed rails for deflection and proper adjustment the cover on slab reinforcement and form alignment while operating the finishing machine in this test .
make necessary corrections before placing concrete .
ensure the concrete carried ahead of the screed does not cause slipping of the finishing machine wheels on the rails .
orient the transverse axis of the finishing machine parallel to the bearing centerline on prestress and steel girder spans .
ensure the concrete placement heading and the strikeoff heading are parallel so equal loads are produced on each girder .
b .
hand method .
strike the concrete off with a template or a vibrating screed after it is placed .
finish concrete to an even surface by means of longitudinal and transverse floats .
do not use a power trowel .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. straightedging .
test the surface of the concrete for trueness while the concrete is still plastic .
use an approved numfoot straightedge .
hold the straightedge in contact with the surface in successive positions parallel to the centerline and go over the whole area from num side of the slab to the other .
advance along the surface in successive stages of less than ½ the length of the straightedge .
immediately fill depressions found with freshly mixed concrete strike off consolidate and refinish .
cut down high areas and refinish .
ensure the concrete surface across joints meets the requirements for smoothness .
perform straightedging and surface correction from foot bridges resting on the side forms and spanning but not touching the concrete .
continue straightedge testing and surface corrections until the entire surface is without observable departures from the straightedge and the slab conforms to the required grade and crosssection .
d. final finish .
float the deck slab after screeding to produce a uniform surface without porosity .
give the surface a steel tine finish if necessary .
use tines num inch wide spaced at ½ to ¾ inch intervals and producing grooves num inch num inch deep .
check groove depth in accordance with idaho it num .
if more than num readings in a set of num are outside the intended depth range make adjustments to the tining operation .
minimize surface tearing or aggregate removal when tining .
tinestroke transverse to the roadway centerline and the full width of the roadway except for troweled smooth strips num inches wide along curb faces .
do not overlap adjacent strokes .
finish the surface without porous spots irregularities depressions small pockets or rough spots .
the contractor may saw cut grooves instead of the steel tine finish if approved .
use a width and spacing of the grooves num to ¼ inch .
do not perform saw cut grooving until after the curing duration .
continuously and completely remove residue from the grooving operation .
screed or float finish structures that will receive a deck membrane and asphalt overlay .
complete surface without porous spots irregularities depressions small pockets or rough spots .
e. surface smoothness .
the engineer will test the slab surface for smoothness in accordance with idaho it num at the end of the curing period .
ensure the surface does not vary more than ¼ inch in num feet from the lower edge of the straightedge and num percent of the readings do not exceed num inch in num feet .
grind concrete surfaces that do not meet surface smoothness requirements or replace as directed at no additional cost to the department .
j. curing concrete .
keep concrete surfaces completely and continuously moist until a curing method is applied .
do not apply membraneforming curing compound to concrete surfaces before the finishing has been accepted .
do not apply membraneforming curing compound to construction joints or to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
cure concrete as specified in tables num and num .
table num concrete placement type placement no .
num bridge decks including sidewalks on bridges bridge curbs or parapets .
placement no .
num sidewalks urban approaches curbs or curb and gutter .
approach slabs and concrete slope paving .
placement no .
num prestressed girders .
concrete placements e.g .
beams caps columns footings catch basins manholes median barrier median curbs box girders excluding the deck portion signal luminaries sign support foundations .
concrete guardrail sound walls num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num cure methods placement number method a water cure method b membraneforming curing compound method c form cure method d steam cure num x num x xsystem num num x xsystem num x x cure concrete by one of the following methods num .
method a water cure .
make a single application of a membraneforming curing compound immediately after surface finishing is completed on each individual portion of the placement .
apply the membrane forming curing compound under pressure at a rate of at least num gallon per num square feet .
use system num membraneforming curing compound on placement numbers num and num .
use system num membraneforming curing compound on placement number num .
start water curing after the concrete surface has set up enough so it will not be damaged but not later than num hours following application of the curing compound .
keep the concrete surfaces in placement num continuously wet for at least num calendar days .
keep the concrete surfaces in placement num and num continuously wet for at least calendar num days .
parapet finishing may be performed during the wet cure period .
the contractor may have the burlap removed for finishing small isolated areas of the parapet provided the surface of the concrete is not allowed to dry out .
keep the concrete surface wet using cotton mats rugs carpets burlap laminated moistureretaining cover or other approved coverings as a reservoir medium .
saturate the reservoir medium before placement on the concrete surface .
ensure the reservoir medium is in a saturated state drained of free water when initially placed .
add water as necessary to keep it from drying out during the curing period .
cover the reservoir medium with white plastic sheeting to reduce evaporation .
do not use plastic sheeting alone as a reservoir medium .
clear the surface of reservoir mediums at the end of the curing period .
show ability to provide the water cure as specified before placing concrete .
the engineer will immediately suspend the concrete placing operations for failure to provide sufficient cover material or sufficient water to adequately take care of water curing and other associated requirements .
num .
method b membraneforming curing compounds .
apply membraneforming curing compounds as specified in num to the finished concrete immediately after the bleed water or free water sheen leaves the surface of the finished concrete surface .
thoroughly mix membraneforming curing compounds before using and agitate it during application to prevent settling or separation .
uniformly apply the membrane .
apply the second coat of membrane at right angles to the first coat when num coats are used if possible .
immediately apply the same type of membrane material to membrane surfaces that are marred or damaged by scuffing or wearing before completion of the curing period or water cure the area for the remaining cure period .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num each manufacturers identified lot of curing compound is required to be sampled tested and approved before use .
allow num weeks for laboratory testing of the curing compound once it has been received by the central materials laboratory .
quantities of curing compound over num gallons may be inspected and sampled by the department at the manufacturers plant for acceptance testing .
request inspection from the engineer and the central materials laboratory in writing num calendar days before ordering material .
a system num aashto m num type num d class b with fugitive dye .
prepare the concrete surface before painting if system num is used .
refer to num.e .
provide num applications of the curing compound for a total coverage of num gallon per num square feet to concrete cured by this method .
apply each application of the curing compound under pressure at a rate of at least num gallon per num square feet .
if the surface under the forms has dried thoroughly wet the concrete with water and apply the curing compound just as the surface film of water disappears .
apply the first coat immediately after stripping the forms and before acceptance of the concrete finish .
apply the second application immediately after the first application has set .
keep unsprayed exposed surfaces wet with water during curing operations .
b system num aashto m num type num class b white pigmented .
apply curing compounds under pressure at a rate of at least num gallon per num square feet on surfaces .
num .
method c form method .
protect concrete with forms for at least num calendar days .
intermittently moisten and protect forms from the sun during daytime periods of hot weather .
cure exposed surfaces by water or approved membrane cure .
num .
method d steam curing .
when steam curing is used protect the concrete for a minimum numhour period when the temperature is num f to num f. following this initial period increase the temperature at a maximum rate of num f per hour to a temperature between num f and num f. continue curing at this temperature until cylinder strengths are above the release strength for prestressed reinforced concrete or above num percent of the intended numday strength whichever is greater .
cool the beam gradually by decreasing its temperature at a rate of num f per hour or less until the temperature differential between the beam and outside air is num f or less at the end of the cure cycle when ambient air temperatures are below num f. do not expose member to below freezing temperatures until at least num calendar days after fabrication or until the numday strength has been achieved .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
precast stringers prestressed stringers and concrete parapets by the foot .
num .
approach slabs by the square yard including the exposed finished surface of the concrete deadman .
num .
other concrete by the cubic yard with the dimensions specified or ordered except the volume of concrete placed under water and formed class num concrete may be based on batch design volumes .
the volume occupied by the reinforcing steel anchors conduits weep holes h piling or chamfers will not be deducted .
the volume of concrete displaced by culverts or piles other than h piling will be deducted .
num .
deck concrete by the square yard or cubic yard to the dimensions specified .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction pay item pay unit concrete class ____ cy concrete class ____ schedule no .
____ cy or sy seal concrete cy precast stringers ____ beam ft prestressed stringers ____ beam ft concrete parapet ft approach slab sy prestressed slabs w___ x d____ ft prestressed t beam w___ x d____ ft prestressed box beam w___ x d____ ft num .
concrete .
at the contract price per cubic yard or square yard for concrete of the class and schedule specified .
pay for concrete placed in the superstructure as concrete class __ schedule no .
num by plan quantity as specified in num .
num .
precast and prestressed stringers slabs and t beams .
at the contract price per foot .
the contract price includes reinforcing steel epoxy coating of steel entirely or partially embedded in the precast elements prestressing and structural steel that is cast in and included with precast elements .
payment will be made on plan quantities except for authorized additions .
num .
concrete parapet .
at the contract unit price per foot and include reinforcing steel and epoxy coating that is cast within the parapets in whole or in part .
num .
approach slabs .
at the contract unit price per square yard including site preparation e.g .
excavation or other shaping reinforcing steel joint sealers sleeper beams concrete deadman and curbs .
num .
price adjustment .
the department will adjust the contract unit prices for strength deficiency as specified in num.b .
the engineer will apply a price adjustment to the unit price of the concrete class if required for the quantity represented by the individual strength tests .
the department will apply this price adjustment provision to the contract unit price of other items of work by their respective units of measurement and payment that incorporate concrete under num .
if concrete is at incidental cost or included in the overall cost of an item the engineer will establish a value of the concrete proportional to the total contract price for purposes of establishing a price reduction on the concrete that does not meet specified strength but is allowed to remain in place .
num .
surface resistivity price adjustment .
the department will make the following price adjustment to the contract unit price for each lot of schedule no .
num concrete meeting the following surface resistivity requirements when measured using aashto t num at num calendar days .
table num surface resistivity price adjustment priceydnum surface resistivity kωcm numxnum surface resistivity kωcmnumxnum num num num num num num num num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num metal reinforcement num description .
provide and install reinforcing steel .
the metal reinforcement schedule no .
num pay item includes metal reinforcements placed in substructures .
the metal reinforcement schedule no .
num pay item includes metal reinforcement placed in superstructures .
the department will show the schedules on the plans for the structures involved .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in reinforcing steel num epoxycoated metal reinforcement num dowel bars num tie bars num accompany each shipment of reinforcing steel delivered with a completed itdnum form and a copy of the mill test report attached for each heat included in the shipment .
the engineer will obtain field samples for each heat number and bar size from material delivered .
submit proper identification with each shipment delivered to allow the department to readily identify each bar size by heat number .
the engineer will reject reinforcing steel delivered that can not be identified by heat number .
replace rejected material at no cost to the department .
order additional bars to account for the field sampling .
do not cut and splice bars to obtain samples .
complete fabricated bars are to be sampled and replaced .
if the bar configuration is such that two numinch long test specimens can be cut from num bar then only num such bar constitutes a field sample .
otherwise num complete fabricated bars constitute a single field sample .
provide reinforcing steel spirals with additional length to accommodate sampling .
do not cut and splice material to obtain samples .
replace bar from failing heat numbers at no additional cost to the department .
num construction requirements .
a .
bar list and bending schedule .
the plans will show the bar list and bending schedule to arrive at an estimate of quantities .
verify the quantity size and shape of the bar reinforcement against the structure drawings and make necessary corrections before ordering .
the department will not adjust the contract unit price because of errors in the bar list and bending schedule .
b .
protection of material .
protect steel reinforcement from damage .
when placed ensure the steel reinforcement does not have dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substance .
do not store epoxy coated reinforcing steel outdoors for more than num months .
when stored outdoors cover the bars to protect them against the elements and against condensation forming on the bars .
c. bending .
field bend reinforcing bars only when the bars conflict with prestressing ducts are within anchorage recesses or as specified .
do not field bend num .
bar sizes larger than no .
num .
num .
when the application of heat is required and the ambient temperature is lower than num f and wind velocity at the bending site exceeds num mph .
num .
by means of hammer blows or other impact loading .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction do the following when field bending steel reinforcing bars num .
make the bend gradually .
num .
apply heat in bending bars sizes no .
num and no .
num or in bending bar sizes no .
num and smaller when those bars have been previously bent .
previously unbent bars of sizes no .
num and smaller may be bent without heating .
num .
use a bending tool equipped with a bend inside diameter bar diameter ratio of num .
num .
limit bends to a maximum of num degrees .
num .
straighten by moving a hickey bar if used progressively around the bend .
do the following in applying heat for field bending steel reinforcing bars num .
use only rosebud type torch tips designed to give a diffused flame .
num .
insulate concrete within num inches of the heated bar area .
num .
ensure by means of temperature indicating crayons or other suitable means the steel temperature at the end of a heating operation will be as follows num f to num f for bar size no .
num num f to num f for bar sizes no .
num and no .
num num f to num f for bar size no .
num num .
heat the entire length of the bend plus a num inches additional length on each side of the bend .
num .
maintain the steel temperature within the required range shown above during the entire bending process .
num .
bend the bar immediately after the required temperature has been reached .
num .
never cool bars artificially with water forced air or by placing them on the ground or a concrete floor or other means .
num .
transport or install hot bent bars after they have reached the ambient temperature .
submit a field bending plan for approval including a description of the proposed methods tools materials and handling of the field bent reinforcement before bending bars in the field .
d. placing and fastening .
firmly hold reinforcing steel in the position specified while placing concrete .
maintain reinforcement position by means of stays blocks ties hangers or other approved supports .
do not space the supports for metal reinforcement more than num feet apart transversally or longitudinally .
if concrete blocks are used embed the appropriate tie wires or coated tie wires during their forming stage and tie each block to the reinforcing bar it supports to hold the block in place .
ensure concrete blocks have approximately the same strength quality as the concrete placed around them .
the department requires plasticcoated tie wire and plasticcoated metal bar supports whenever they will be in direct contact with epoxycoated reinforcing .
do not use pebbles pieces of broken stone broken concrete metal pipe or wooden blocks .
tie down top layers or mats of metal reinforcement in bridge decks to stirrups or shear studs .
locate tie downs so there is at least num tie down per num square feet of deck surface .
provide tie downs strong enough to prevent upward movement of reinforcement .
do not deviate more than plus or minus num inch in the vertical direction from the position specified for concrete deck reinforcing steel .
do not place concrete until the engineer has inspected the reinforcement .
repair damage to epoxy coating of reinforcing steel occurring during installation before placing .
remove rust and contaminants from the steel surface and adjacent coating by wire brushing immediately before applying patching material .
use a patching material certified to meet astm anum and apply it in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num tie reinforcing bars at intersections unless spacing is less than num foot in each direction then tie the alternate intersections .
where bundled bars are shown on plans tightly tie bundles at intervals not exceeding num feet with no .
num or larger black or plasticcoated steel wire .
do not weld reinforcing steel unless shown on plans or approval has been obtained .
weld in accordance with aws dnum structural welding code reinforcing steel .
the contractor may weld reinforcing steel assemblies if approved for precast items instead of tying as follows num .
weld at locations shown on the approved shop drawings .
num .
do not weld at the casting bed when prestress reinforcement is on the bed .
num .
the contractor may tack weld design bars as specified to extra no .
num bars for positioning .
do not exceed num inch weld length tack welds and locate only at the very ends of design bars .
show the extra bars on the shop drawings and identify as bars whose only function is to position the design bars .
extra bars and design bars have the same concrete cover requirement .
locate extra bars to not interfere with prestress reinforcement or other design details .
the contractor may weld positioning bars to each other .
num .
epoxy coat the positioning bars if epoxycoated bars are specified .
clean welds and welddamaged coating with wire brush and coat with a patching compound recommended by the epoxy supplier .
e. splices .
provide reinforcement in the full length specified except for column spirals .
do not splice bars except where specified and in the column spirals .
rigidly clamp or wire bars at splices in a manner approved .
do not field splice column spirals in the lower ¼ or the upper ¼ of the spiral .
at other locations in the column the contractor may provide welded splices in column spirals that meet aws dnum or provide approved mechanical splices for field splices in column spirals .
form mechanical splices for epoxy and nonepoxycoated bars with an approved system using mechanical couplers that comply with this section at locations where mechanical splices are required .
do not weld splices .
epoxy coat or protect exposed splice components used for the epoxycoated bars from corrosion by other approved means .
submit the following information for each shipment of splice material before splicing num .
the type of series identification and heat treatment lot number for threadedsleeve splices .
num .
the grade and size of the bar to be spliced .
num .
a manufacturers catalog with complete data on material and procedures .
num .
a written statement from the contractor the system and materials will be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and requirements of this section .
make num tension test specimen splice to represent each lot of bars spliced at the project site .
a lot consists of every num epoxycoated or every num nonepoxycoated bars spliced at the project site of one size and by one operator .
tension test each specimen to destruction or to the specified ultimate strength whichever is less .
perform tests in a qualified laboratory .
submit reports promptly to the engineer .
cut out num production splices from the lot represented by the specimen and test for tensile strength requirements .
the engineer will accept the splices in a lot if both retests meet tensile requirements .
the engineer will reject the splices in the lot if num or both retests fail to meet the requirements .
remove test and replace at no additional cost to the department .
ensure mechanical splices meet the following criteria num .
develops at least num percent of the yield tensile strength specified for the unspliced bar .
the ultimate tensile strength of the sleeve exceeds that of the other parts of the completed splice .
num .
slippage for aashto m num grade num bars within a splice sleeve is limited to a maximum of num inch .
measure the slippage between gauge points clear of the splice sleeve .
take measurements at initial load num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction of num psi and again after loading to num percent of the minimum specified yield strength for the unspliced bar and then relaxed to num psi .
payment .
the department will not provide separate payment for the cost of providing and installing mechanical splices or for testing where required .
these costs are incidental and included in the contract unit prices for metal reinforcement .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the pound based on the theoretical pound unit weight .
the engineer will measure epoxycoated metal reinforcement by the pound of reinforcing steel before coating based on the theoretical unit weight .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit metal reinforcement lb metal reinforcement schedule no .
____ lb epoxycoated metal reinforcement lb no allowance will be made for clips wire or other material used for fastening reinforcement in place .
no allowance will be made for plasticcoated wires supports or other material used for fastening epoxycoated reinforcement .
the department will include the weight of the splice bars for which payment is made if the splice bars are specified or as directed .
the department will not pay for bars installed for the contractors convenience .
the department will pay for schedule num metal reinforcement using plan quantities as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num structural metals num description .
a .
general .
provide fabricate erect and paint structural metals .
b. fabricator certification .
fabricators of structural components for vehicular bridges other than unspliced rolled beam bridges are to be certified under the aisc quality certification program intermediate or advanced steel bridge categories .
fabricators of structural components for unspliced rolled beam vehicular bridges and steel pedestrian bridges are to be certified under the aisc quality certification program simple steel bridge structures category .
fabricators of fracture critical members are to hold a fracture critical endorsement in addition to the above requirements .
this does not apply to incidental subassemblies e.g .
drainage components expansion joints handrails lighting supports .
c. notice of rolling and fabrication .
give a numday notice before beginning work at the mill or shop so the department can prepare for inspection .
do not manufacture material or perform work in the shop before the engineer has been notified .
d. inspection .
the department will inspect structural steel at the fabrication site .
submit electronic copies of mill orders certified mill test reports and shipping statements .
on mill test reports show the chemical analysis and physical test results for each heat of steel used in the work .
submit certificates of compliance instead of mill test reports for material that normally is not supplied with mill test reports and for some items e.g .
fills minor gusset plates quantities are small and the material is taken from stock .
submit certified mill test reports for steels with specified impact values that include in addition to other test results the results of charpy vnotch impact tests .
when fine grain practice is specified include confirmation the material was so produced .
submit copies of mill orders at the time orders are placed with the manufacturer .
submit certified mill test reports and certificates of compliance before starting material fabrication covered by these reports .
submit the certificate of compliance signed by the manufacturer certifying the material is in compliance with the specifications to which it has been manufactured .
make available to the engineer material to be used so each piece can be examined .
provide the engineer with safe access to the fabrication site where the material is stored or where work on the material is being performed .
e. quality control inspection .
be responsible for quality control inspection and testing .
perform inspection and testing at least to the extent specified and in accordance with the ansi aashto aws dnum bridge welding code inspection .
include nondestructive testing in addition to visual inspection testing to base metal production welds weld repairs procedure qualification test weldments and welder welding operator and tacker qualification test weldments .
this work is incidental and the costs are to be included in the contract unit prices for the structural steel .
provide facilities to inspect material and work .
f. shop plans .
submit working drawings for fabricating the steel in pdf format .
include on each drawing and calculation sheet the project name as shown on the plans districtcountyroute bridge number contract number contract drawing number and key number .
submit welding procedures in pdf format for approval with shop drawings .
include the type of equipment and electrode to be used preheat requirements base materials and joint details .
when the procedures are not prequalified by aws or aashto submit evidence of qualification tests .
the department accepts only the nature and scope of the details without validating dimensions in approving working drawings .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction do not make changes in drawings after approval .
submit asbuilt shop drawings in pdf format .
g. erection plans .
submit the proposed erection plan for approval .
the department requires the erection procedure be reviewed by the steel fabricator before being submitted .
include in the submittal maximum stress calculations that each member will be subjected to during erection .
use these calculations to determine the necessity of using strongbacks or erecting the girders in pairs with cross frames installed to prevent the possibility of buckling the compression flange during girder erection .
sign and seal the calculations and plans by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
ensure falsework or temporary structures meet the requirements of num.e .
supplement the erection procedure with necessary drawings to clearly describe the method proposed .
include details of falsework bents bracing guys temporary anchors lifting devices attachments to the bridge members sequence of erection location of lifting points on the bridge members and weights of the members .
submit the plan and drawings in detail for anticipated phases and conditions during erection .
submit plans of temporary members or devices which affect stresses in the permanent members of the structure .
remove temporary or extra material .
the department will not pay for extra material required due to the contractors erection procedures or method or for material required in the permanent structure due to the contractors erection scheme .
be responsible for the practicality and safety of the erection schemes used and carrying out the work as specified .
be responsible for material ordered or shop drawings prepared before the engineer reviews the erection scheme .
submit the plan and drawings for approval as specified in num.e.num .
h. camber diagram .
submit a camber diagram from the fabricator showing the camber at each panel point of trusses or arch ribs and at the location of field splices and tenth points of span length of continuous beam and girder or rigid frames .
show calculated cambers to be used in preassembly of field connections on the camber diagram .
num materials .
a .
structural metals .
meet the requirements shown on the plans and as specified in num .
meet the additional fabrication inspection and certificate requirements of the current aashto guide specifications for fracture critical nonredundant steel bridge members and current interim specifications for members identified on the plans as fracture critical members .
do not use universal mill plates for flange plates in designated tension stress or stress reversal areas .
use structural steel classified as num .
structural carbon steel use wherever the plans do not specify another classification .
meet aashto m num grade num .
num .
structural low alloy steel .
meet aashto m num grade num and numw .
num .
structural highstrength steel .
meet aashto m num grade numw .
the department classifies the following as structural carbon steel num .
shims ladders stairways anchor bolts and sleeves pipe fittings and fastening used in handrails and other metal parts even if made of other materials for which payment is not specified .
b. painting .
when required on the plans paint the structural steel as specified in num .
provide paint as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. handling storing and shipping of materials .
apply markings at the mill to distinguish structural low alloy steel from structural carbon steel .
keep the num classes of steel separated .
protect material from rust dirt oil and other foreign matter .
the engineer will not accept rustpitted material .
ensure structural steel arrives in good condition .
the engineer may require thorough cleaning by high pressure water flushing steel damaged by saltwater shipment chemical cleaning or sandblasting and repainting with the specified shop coat .
prevent rust and loss of small parts when storing material .
do not rest piled material on the ground or in water .
use skids or platforms .
conduct the loading transporting unloading and piling of the structural steel material so the metal is kept clean and not injured from rough handling .
keep girders and beams upright after fabrication during shipment handling and storage unless otherwise approved in writing .
support long members e.g .
columns chords on skids placed near enough together to prevent damage from deflection .
use methods and equipment not likely to twist bend deform or otherwise injure the metal in field assembly of structural parts .
correct any member slightly bent or twisted before it is placed .
the engineer may reject members that are damaged .
repair scratches and gouge marks caused by handling and lifting and located in tension or stress reversal regions by grinding to a surface finish of ansi num or better and inspect by the dye penetrant or magnetic particle method .
if the marks are located in an area where they will be covered or partly covered by a structural weld grind and test before welding .
handle girder sections to prevent damage .
laterally support girders during shipment by blocking removable flange bracing bolting in pairs or other approved method .
show the method of lateral support for the girders on the shop drawings .
mark the weight on members weighing more than num pounds and remove after erection is completed .
d. castings .
the specifications for structural steel including painting requirements also apply to castings .
provide castings that are num .
true to pattern in form and dimensions .
num .
without pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in places that would affect strength appearance or value .
num .
clean and uniform in appearance .
num .
filleted boldly at angles .
num .
formed with sharp and perfect arises .
anneal iron steel castings and forgings before matching .
num construction requirements .
a .
identification of steels during fabrication .
submit for approval a written plan for visibly marking the material so it can be traced .
ensure these marks remain visible at least through the fitup of the main loadcarrying tension members .
provide a marking method that allows the engineer to verify num .
material specification designation .
num .
heat number .
num .
material test reports to meet special requirements .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction include the heat numbers on the reproducible copies of the asbuilt shop plans for steel in main loadcarrying tension members and in tension components of flexural members .
b .
edge finishing .
finish rolled sheared and flamecut edges true to line and without rough corners and projections .
round corners along exposed edges to a radius of num inch or greater .
plane mill grind or thermal cut to a depth of num inch sheared edges on material more than num inch thick .
do not exceed num microinches as defined by ansi specifications for surface roughness of flange plates in designated tension stress or stress reversal areas rolled sheared and flamecut edges .
the contractor may obtain this roughness on flamecut edges after cutting by grinding or other approved methods .
do not exceed num microinches surface roughness of other rolled sheared and flamecut edges .
c. thermal cutting .
take steps to ensure the flamecut edges of main material are not hardened by the cutting process .
the contractor may achieve this by preheating post heating or control of the burning process .
edge hardness for aashto m num grade num and numw plates after flame cutting found to have a rockwell hardness value of cnum or greater will be considered unacceptable .
determine hardness in accordance with aashto t num .
test plate edges at least once for each fabrication piece .
remove unacceptably hard surfaces by grinding machining or heat treating procedures as approved .
preheat to the following temperatures when flame cutting aashto m num grade numw and above or other high strength low alloy steels as shown in table num .
table num preheat temperature thickness t of thickest part at point of cutting in temperature f t num num num t num num num t num num t num num preheat the plate so the required temperature is obtained through the full thickness of the plate ahead of and laterally from the cut a distance of num inches or the plate thickness whichever is greater .
show preheat temperatures on the shop drawings .
d. fit and bearing .
mill ends of columns that bear on base and cap plates to true surfaces and accurate bevels .
when assembled ensure caps and base plates of columns and the sole plates of girders and trusses have full contact .
heat straighten plane or correct the plates in some other way to produce accurate even contact if plates are warped or deformed .
if necessary for proper contact plane or mill bearing surfaces that will contact other metal surfaces .
rough finish surfaces of warped or deformed base and sole plates that will contact masonry .
on the surface of expansion bearings ensure the cut of the planer is in the direction of expansion .
face abutting ends of compression members accurately so they bear evenly in the structure .
on builtup members face or mill the end after fabrication .
rough finish ends of tension members at splices to produce neat close joints .
the department does not require a contact fit .
ensure floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles are flush with each other and set accurately in relationship to the position and length of the member .
unless the plans require it do not finish end connection angles .
if faulty assembly requires them to be milled do not reduce milling thickness by more than num inch .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num ensure the various pieces forming num built member are straight and closefitting true to detailed dimensions and without twists bends open joints or other defects .
do not exceed num inch clearance between web plates for fieldbolted splices .
mill bearing stiffeners so they will bear evenly against the flange .
fit intermediate stiffeners tightly enough to exclude water after painting .
e. grinding .
grind plates so the direction of grinding is parallel with the direction of tensile or compressive stress .
show the direction of grinding on the shop plans .
f. camber .
do not camber in the plane parallel to the strong axis of the girder by the use of heat or mechanical bending .
for plate girders cut the web to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for shrinkage due to cutting welding and heat curving .
g. curvature .
produce girder curvature in an axis parallel to the girder web as specified by fabrication methods that meet aashto specifications for highway bridges division iiconstruction .
h. pins and rollers .
make pins and rollers of the class of forged steel specified .
turn accurately to detailed dimensions smooth straight and flawless .
produce the final surface by a finishing cut .
forge and anneal pins and rollers more than num inches in diameter .
the contractor may coldfinish or forge and anneal carbon steel shafting pins and rollers num inches or less in diameter .
in pins larger than num inches in diameter bore a hole at least num inches in diameter full length along the axis after the forging has been allowed to cool to a temperature below the critical range and before being annealed .
cool under conditions which will prevent damage by cooling too rapidly .
bore pin holes true to detailed dimensions smooth and straight and at right angles to the axis of the member .
ensure holes are parallel with each other .
always make a finishing cut .
do not vary from detailed dimensions the distance between holes by more than num inch .
measure the distance in tension members from outside to outside of holes and in compression members inside to inside .
ensure each pin is num inch smaller in diameter than its hole .
number pins after being fitted into their holes in the assembled member .
magnetic particle test pins in accordance with astm anum using an independent testing laboratory .
the engineer will reject pins with inner defects .
provide num pilot and num driving nuts for each size of pin .
i .
machine finished surfaces .
as soon as possible and before they leave the shop cover machinefinished surfaces on abutting chord splices column splices and column bases with grease .
after erection clean and paint the steel as specified .
paint surfaces of iron and steel castings milled to smooth with the primer called for in the specified paint system .
while still in the shop ensure machinefinished surfaces and inaccessible surfaces of rocker or pintype bearings receive the full paint system .
do not paint surfaces of pins and holes machinefinished to specific tolerances .
coat with grease as soon as possible .
j. highstrength bolt holes .
num .
general .
the contractor may punch or subpunch and ream drill or subdrill and ream or form by numerically controlled drilling operations holes subject to the condition described in this section .
ensure the hole for each highstrength bolt is num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt and less than num inch in diameter and num inch larger for bolts with diameters greater than num inch .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the fabricator may drill holes full size from the solid with every thickness of material assembled in proper position in forming any connection .
if the fabricator chooses not to use this method then the following methods apply a. subpunch or subdrill holes then ream full size after assembly in connections and splices in the main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents towers plate girders box girders and rigid frames .
b .
drill holes full size unassembled to a steel template for splices of rolled beam stringers that continue over floor beams or cross frames .
c. subpunch and ream holes full size to a steel template or reamed full size while assembled for end connections of rolled beam stringers and floor beams or cross frames .
if steel templates are used to ream or drill fullsize connection holes position and angle the templates with extreme care and bolt firmly in place .
use duplicate templates for reaming matching members or the opposite faces of one member .
locate templates for connections on like parts or members with such accuracy that matchmarks are not needed .
the contractor may punch or drill bolt holes full size in cross frames gussets lateral braces and other secondary members from the solid while assembled .
num .
punched holes .
for punched holes ensure the die diameter does not exceed punch diameter by more than num inch .
ream holes requiring enlargement to fit the bolt .
cut holes clean with no torn or ragged edges .
the engineer will reject components having poorly matched holes .
ensure after shop assembly and before reaming punched subpunched and subdrilled holes meet the following standard of accuracy a .
at least num percent of the holes in each connection permit the passage of a cylindrical pin num inch smaller in diameter than nominal hole size .
b .
the pin passes through at right angles to the face of the member without drifting .
c. holes permit passage of a pin num inch smaller in diameter than nominal hole size .
the engineer will reject pieces that fail to meet these standards .
num .
reamed and drilled holes .
use drills for reaming and drilling producing cylindrical holes perpendicular to the member .
reamers and drills are to be directed mechanically not handheld .
assemble connecting parts that require reamed or drilled holes and hold securely as the holes are formed then matchmarked before disassembly .
submit a diagram showing these matchmarks .
the engineer will reject components having poorly matched holes .
remove burrs on outside surfaces and mating surfaces .
disassemble parts to remove burrs .
ensure at least num percent of holes in a connection of reamed or drilled holes show offsets of num inch or less between adjacent thicknesses of metal with no hole having an offset greater than num inch .
inscribe centerlines from the connection on the template and locate holes from these centerlines .
use centerlines for accurately locating the template relative to the milled or scribed ends of the members .
insert templates with hardened steel bushings into each hole .
the fabricator may omit these bushings if the template will be used less than num times and use will not produce template wear .
ensure each template is at least ½ inch thick .
if necessary use thicker templates to prevent buckling and misalignment as holes are formed .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
numerically controlled nc drilled connections .
the fabricator may use nc drilling or punching equipment in forming holes described in this subsection if it meets the following requirements submit for approval a detailed outline of proposed nc procedures including a .
steps from initial drilling or punching through check assembly .
b .
the specific members of the structure to be drilled or punched hole sizes locations of the common index and other reference points makeup of check assemblies and other information needed to describe the process fully .
the fabricator may drill or punch to size through individual pieces or through a combination of tightly clamped pieces .
show the nc procedures consistently produce holes and connections meeting these specifications when required .
num .
fitting for bolting .
well pin and draw firmly together parts of a member before drilling reaming and bolting begins .
if necessary take assembled pieces apart to permit removal of burrs or shavings produced as the holes are formed .
ensure the member is without twists bends and other deformation .
blast clean contacting metal surfaces in shopbolted connections before assembly .
blast in accordance with the society for protective coatings sspc sspcspnum .
ensure drifting done during assembly does no more than enough to bring the parts into place and that drifting does not enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
k. assembly .
num .
progressive truss or girder assembly .
use progressive truss or girder assembly methods described as follows a .
obtain approval of the shop assembly and the erection methods before work begins .
b .
assemble each truss or girder in stages over the full length of the superstructure .
c. for trusses include at least num contiguous panels in the first stage .
d. for girders include at least num contiguous shop sections in the first stage .
after stage one has been completed assemble each next stage to include at least num panel or shop section of the previous stage repositioned if necessary and pinned to ensure accurate alignment and add num or more panels or shop sections at the advancing end .
if the bridge is longer than num feet ensure each stage is at least num feet long regardless of the length of individual continuous panels or shop sections .
perform the assembly sequence in the same order the structure will be assembled in the field .
num .
check of shop assembly .
check each assembly for alignment accuracy of holes fit of milled joints and other assembly techniques .
do not begin drilling or reaming until approved .
if the contractor uses nc drilling obtain approval before the assembly or stage is dismantled .
num .
blasting cleaning .
for painted structures after fabrication blast clean structural steel except machine finished surfaces to a near white finish in accordance with sspcspnum .
the near white surface is shown in the pictorial standards of sspcvis numt as a sa num and c sc num .
after blasting and before painting remove loose dust and dirt that remains on the steel .
do not use acid to remove scale or stains .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction for unpainted weathering steel structures after fabrication blast clean steel surfaces in the shop except those to be embedded in concrete in accordance with sspcspnum .
provide a blasted appearance that is equal to or better than bsanum as shown in the pictorial standards of sspcvis num .
blast clean after erection as specified in num.n.num.b .
blast clean faying surfaces as specified in num.l and num.j.num .
comply with num.n.num .
l. bolted connections .
num .
general .
highstrength bolted connections are slip critical .
type num or type num bolts are required for painted structures and type num bolts for unpainted structures .
type num weathering steel is required for direct tension indicators dtis .
provide bolts nuts hardened washers and dtis as specified in num .
clean metal surfaces before fitting and bolting of the connection .
ensure assembled joint surfaces including surfaces adjacent to the bolt head and nut are free of dirt road oil and other foreign material .
when splices are designated class b slipcritical on the plans field inspect the contact surfaces of splices immediately before assembly to ensure the surfaces are free of mill scale dirt road oil and other foreign material .
remove burrs that would prevent solid seating of the connected parts in the snugtight condition .
do not paint the faying surfaces of slipcritical connections .
protect areas closer than num bolt diameter but at least num inch from the edge of a hole and areas within bolt pattern from paint including inadvertent overspray .
provide steel material within the grip of the bolt with no compressible material e.g .
gaskets insulation within the grip .
ensure bolted steel parts fit solidly together .
bolted steel parts may be coated or uncoated .
ensure the slope of the surfaces of parts in contact with the bolt head or nut does not exceed num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
protect fasteners from dirt and moisture at the project site .
take only as many fasteners as are anticipated to be installed and tightened during a work shift from protected storage .
return fasteners not used to the protected storage at the end of the shift .
do not clean fasteners of lubricant that is present in asdelivered condition .
clean and relubricate fasteners for slipcritical connections which accumulate rust or dirt resulting from project site conditions before installation .
use an approved tension measuring device e.g .
skidmorewilhelm calibrator where bolts in slipcritical joints or connections subject to direct tension are being installed and tightened .
use the tension measuring device to confirm a .
the suitability to satisfy the requirements in table num of the complete fastener assembly including lubrication if required to be used in the work .
b. calibration of the wrenches .
c. the understanding and proper use of the method to be used by the bolting crew .
confirm the accuracy of the tensionmeasuring device through calibration by an approved testing agency at least annually in accordance with aashto t numastm enum .
calibrate wrenches daily in accordance with idaho ir num .
the engineer will inspect bolting and testing operations to determine the approved installation procedure is used and the correct tension has been achieved .
the engineer may reject testing operations completed .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num store highstrength bolts nuts washers and dtis under cover to protect them from adverse conditions and ensure the identification of heat number or production lot number remain with each type of bolting parts .
the engineer will not accept bolting parts that are rusty dirty or have damaged threads .
before bolts are installed in the field or at the shop subject the bolts to a rotationalcapacity test .
perform the rotationalcapacity test on each rotationalcapacity lot .
hardened steel washers are required as part of the test although they may not be required in the actual installation procedure .
provide bolt nut washer and when required dti combinations as installed from the same rotational capacity lot .
perform the rotationalcapacity test as specified in num.b.num .
locate nuts wherever practical on the side of the member that will not be visible from the traveled way .
locate nuts for bolts that will be partially embedded in concrete on the side of the member that will be encased in concrete .
turn the nut tight while the bolt is prevented from rotating .
provide each bolt with a hardened washer under the nut .
an m num bolt may be reused num time if approved .
the department does not consider re tightening a bolt loosened by the tightening of nearby bolts as reuse .
to begin bolting connections install and tighten to snugtight enough bolts to bring parts into full contact with each other .
after this initial tightening install and bring to snugtight remaining bolts in the connection .
then beginning with bolts in the most rigid part of the joint and working out to its free edges systematically tighten bolts to specified tension .
when bolts in a joint are tight ensure each bolt carries at least the proof load in table num .
table num bolt tension minimum bolt tension lb bolt size inches grade anum grade anum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
tightening methods .
tighten using the dti method as specified .
a .
direct tension indicator dti tightening .
num installation .
locate the dti at the opposite end of the bolt from the part being tightened where possible .
when the dti is used next to a slotted or oversized hole place a hardened flat washer between the dti and the part being tightened do not reuse the dti after tension has been applied to the bolt .
num bolt tension .
meet the following a verify dti performance before the start of installation of bolts in the bridge .
test in accordance with the procedure for verification and installation of highstrength bolts with dtis .
this procedure is in appendix anum of report no .
fhwasanum num dated may num revised april num. b ensure the measured gap for dtis is at num inch or less .
refusal of the feeler gauge in slots is defined as a nil gap and may be cause for rejection by the engineer .
the engineer may require bolts with nil gap to be removed from the work and the bolt thread examined at no additional cost to the department .
if no necking of the bolt thread is observed and the nut can run down the full length of the thread then the bolt may be reinstalled with new dtis .
b. turnofnut method .
after bolts in the joint have been brought to snugtightness further tighten the nuts by the amount of rotation in table num .
before final tightening and after snugtightening matchmark with crayon or paint the outer face of each nut and the protruding part of the bolt .
to ensure this tightening method is followed the engineer will num observe as the contractor installs and tightens bolts .
num inspect each matchmark .
place num bolts of the same grade size and condition as those under inspections individually in a device calibrated to measure bolt tension .
perform this calibration at least once each inspection day .
provide a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt if washers are used on the structure .
if washers are not used on the structure provide material abutting for the part turned that is the same as specified for use on the structure .
in the calibrated device tighten each bolt to the specified tension .
apply the inspecting wrench to the tightened bolt to determine the torque required to turn the nut or head num degrees or approximately num inch at a numinch radius in the tightening direction .
take the average of the torque for the num bolts as the jobinspection torque .
in the engineers presence inspect the tightened bolt using an inspection torque wrench .
select num percent or at least num of the tightened bolts on the structure represented by the test bolts at random in each connection .
apply the jobinspection torque to each with the inspecting wrench turned in the tightening direction .
if this torque turns no bolt head or nut the engineer will accept the connection as being properly tightened but if the torque turns num or more bolt heads or nuts apply the job inspection torque to bolts in the connection .
tighten and reinspect bolts whose head or nut turns at this stage .
the contractor may retighten the bolts in the connection and resubmit for inspection .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num turnofnut tightening method nut rotationa from snugtight condition bolt length abc measured from underside of head to extreme end of point both faces at right angles to bolt axis one face at right angle to bolt axis once face sloped no more than num without bevel washer both faces sloped no more than num from right angle to bolt axis without bevel washer numd num or num turn num or num turn num or num turn numd to numd num or num turn num or num turn num or num turn numd to numd num or num turn num or num turn num or num turn a nut rotation is relative to the bolt regardless of which element nut or bolt is being turned .
tolerances permitted plus or minus num for final turns of num num turn or less .
plus or minus num for final turns of num num turn or more .
b d nominal bolt diameter of bolt being tightened .
c when bolt length exceeds numd determine the rotation by actual tests that a suitable tension device simulates actual conditions .
m. welding .
num .
general .
the department requires weld fabrication to meet ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code and interim revisions published by aashto as of the bid opening date except as modified in the rest of this subsection or as specified .
weld tubular members in accordance with the current edition at the time of bid opening of aws dnum structural welding codesteel .
weld sheet steel not exceeding num inch in thickness in accordance with current addition at the time of bid opening of aws dnum structural welding codesteel .
weld aluminum in accordance with to the current edition at the time of bid opening of aws dnum structural welding codealuminum .
weld structural steel only to the extent specified .
do not weld including tack and temporary welds in the shop or field unless the location of the welds is shown on the approved shop drawings or approved in writing .
obtain approval of shop plans before welding as specified in num .
include in the shop plans procedures for welding assembly and heatstraightening or heatcurving .
num .
preheating .
comply with the preheat and interpass minimum temperatures in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code section num .
show preheat temperatures on the shop drawings .
preheat web and flange plates bearing stiffeners bearing plates and heavy sections restrained when welded to at least num f. num .
welding procedures .
perform welding on main members and attachments using only shielded metal arc submerged arc or stud welding .
weld butt splices and flange to web welds using the automatic submerged arc process with uninterrupted continuous passes .
the contractor may request approval to substitute flux core welding in areas where automatic submerged arc welding is not feasible .
the engineer may approve complete joint penetration groove welds made by flux cored arc welding only after submittal of performance of the joint qualification tested in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code sections num and num .
perform joint qualification tests and submit on each individual project .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction submit the test coupons to an independent testing laboratory for testing .
the work associated with the making of the test coupons is incidental and the costs included in the contract unit prices for other contract items .
use lowhydrogen electrodes in shielded metalarc welding .
ovendry flux for submergedarc welding at num f for at least num hours then store in ovens held at num f or more .
if not used within num hours after removal from a drying or storage oven redry the flux before use .
do not a. weld with gas metal arc electrogas or electroslag methods .
b. weld when ambient temperature is below num f. c. use coped holes in the web for welding butt splices in the flanges .
place tack welds so they are incorporated into the final weld .
the same quality requirements apply for tack welds as the final welds except the discontinuities e.g .
undercut unfilled craters porosity do not need to be removed before the final submerged arc welds .
make tack welds with electrodes meeting the requirements of the final welds and clean thoroughly .
provide multiplepass tack welds with cascaded ends .
if groove welds webtoweb or flangetoflange have been rejected by the engineer they may be repaired twice .
if a third failure occurs trim the members at least ½ inch if the engineer approves or replace the members at no cost to the department .
end welds at the end of the joint so sound welds are ensured .
whenever possible do this by using extension bars and runoff plates configured to duplicate the joint detail being welded .
remove extension bars and runoff plates on completion and cooling of the weld and grind the ends of the welds smooth and flush to minimum surface finish of ansi num .
inspect num percent of the groove welds ends using dye penetrant or magnetic particle testing techniques and include splices in individual flanges and webs transverse and longitudinal stiffeners floor beams and stringers .
the engineer may reject a member if there are arc strikes outside the weld joint or on metal not incorporated in a weld joint .
report arc strikes on surfaces carrying tensile or reversal stress in writing and submit report .
do not repair arc strikes on surfaces carrying tensile or reversal stress without written authorization .
accomplish repair of arc strikes by grinding the area containing the arc strike to a minimum surface finish of ansi num .
inspect the ground area by the magneticparticle test yoke method and test for heataffectedzone hardness .
if the testing specified reveals cracking andor hardness in excess of rockwell cnum weld repair the area in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num .
fillers .
for multipass welds of unpainted aashto m num grade numw bridge steel use filler metal meeting the requirements in the current aws specifications table num .
when a bolted splice is used to join plates of differing thickness do not weld filler plates used to account for the thickness difference into place unless otherwise approved in writing .
num .
shear connectors .
weld shear connectors using automatically timed stud welding equipment unless otherwise approved in writing .
for a welded shear connector longer than num inches the contractor may join num shorter shear connectors with fullpenetration welds .
num .
welding inspection .
comply with current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code for welding inspection procedures techniques and inspector qualification except as modified in this subsection or as specified .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num use certified welding inspectors to inspect welds as follows a .
visual inspection .
inspect num percent of welds .
b. radiographic inspection .
inspect num percent of fullpenetration groove welds subject to tension or reversal using radiographic inspection .
include those in the tension area of webs inspect the greater of these two distances num inches from the tension flange or num of the web depth from the tension flange .
c. magnetic particle inspection .
inspect fillet welds and longitudinal butt welds in webs .
test using the yoke method only .
num flangetoweb connections .
inspect num percent of fillet welds in flangetoweb connections of builtup members until the engineer accepts the contractors record of quality control .
after acceptance inspect num percent of each weld with num percent of this inspection occurring at each end of the welds length .
the remaining num percent will be randomly selected by the engineer .
num boxed members of trusses .
inspect num percent of each fillet weld in boxed members of trusses .
num end and intermediate pier diaphragms .
inspect num percent of each fillet weld in end and intermediate pier diaphragms .
num longitudinal butt weld in web .
inspect each longitudinal butt weld in the web as specified for flangetoweb connections .
num stiffeners and connection plates .
inspect num percent of each fillet weld in transverse and longitudinal web stiffeners and connection plates with num percent occurring at each end of the weld .
inspect the remaining num percent randomly at points selected by the engineer .
num miscellaneous weldments .
inspect num percent of each fillet weld in miscellaneous weldments e.g .
bridge bearing assemblies .
d. ultrasonic inspection .
inspect fullpenetration groove welds ultrasonically .
num transverse flange and web splices .
inspect num percent of each transverse groove weld .
num end and intermediate pier diaphragms .
inspect num percent of each groove weld .
num other weldments .
inspect num percent of each groove weld in other weldments .
e. dyepenetrant or magneticparticle inspection .
inspect num percent of the end of each groove weld at plate edges .
f. other inspection .
perform additional testing as specified or as directed .
n. erection .
num .
erection marks .
the contractor may paint erection marks on surfaces to permit identification of members in the field that are to be painted in the field .
for unpainted aashto m num grade numw stamp erection marks with low stress intermittent dot steel die stamp in an area visible after completion of the structure .
ensure the maximum depth of the impression does not exceed num inch and the tool meets the requirements in table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num tool specification character size inch minimum character face radius inch num num num num num num ensure impressions are not near the edge of tensilestressed plate members .
num .
alignment and camber .
before beginning field bolting a .
adjust the structure to correct grade and alignment .
b .
regulate elevations of panel points ends of floor beams .
c. delay bolting at compression joints until adjusting the blocking to provide full and even bearing over the whole joint .
on truss spans the engineer will allow a slight excess camber as the bottom chords are bolted .
correct camber and relative elevations of panel points before the top chord joints top lateral system and sway braces are bolted .
submit a diagram for each truss that shows camber at each panel point and display actual measurements taken as the truss is being assembled .
do not place forms steel reinforcing bars or concrete on steel spans until the girders in spans for a given stage of construction are completely erected with girder splices complete cross frames installed and temporary shoring released .
after shoring is released and masonry plates have been grouted and before subsequent loading of the spans measure the elevations along the tops of girders and floor beams at each tenth point of the spans .
determine and make the adjustment to the topofweb to topofdeck dimensions as necessary to meet the requirements of the plans and submit the adjustments and elevations for approval .
num .
field assembling and bolting .
to begin bolting a field connection or splice install and tighten to snugtight enough bolts to bring parts into full contact with each other before tightening these bolts to the specified minimum tension .
complete bolting a field connection using one of the following methods a .
method a .
as erection proceeds securely drift pin and bolt field connections and splices for each member as specified before the mass of the member can be released or the next member is added .
specify on field erection drawings pinning and bolting requirements that meet or exceed the following minimums num joints in normal structures .
fill num percent of the holes in a single field connection and num percent of the holes on each side of a single joint in a splice plate with drift pins and bolts .
pin num percent of the filled holes .
bolt and tighten num percent of the filled holes to snug tight .
once these bolts are snugtight systematically tighten each bolt to the specified minimum tension .
systematically tightened means beginning with bolts in the most rigid part which is usually the center of the joint and working out to its free edges .
locate the fully tensioned bolts near the middle of a single field connection or a single splice plate .
num joints in cantilevered structures .
fill num percent of the holes in a single field connection and num percent of the holes on each side of a single joint in a splice plate with drift pins num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num and bolts .
pin num percent of the filled holes .
bolt and tighten num percent of the filled holes to snugtight .
once these bolts are snugtight systematically tighten each bolt to the specified minimum tension .
locate the fully tensioned bolts near the middle of a single field connection or a single splice plate .
a joint in a cantilevered structure is defined as to be a field connection or splice that is on the unsupported or cantilevered side of a support .
joints that fit this description whether in final position or temporary position e.g .
during erection are considered joints in cantilevered structures .
place drift pins throughout each field connection and each field joint with the greatest concentration in the outer edges of a splice plate or member being bolted .
to complete a joint fill remaining holes of the field connection or splice plate with bolts and tighten to snugtight .
once these bolts are snugtight systematically tighten each bolt to the specified minimum tension .
after these bolts are tightened to the specified minimum tension replace the drift pins with bolts tightened to the specified minimum tension .
b .
method b .
the contractor may complete a fieldbolted connection or splice in a continuous operation before releasing the mass of the member or adding the next member .
use drift pins to align the connection .
for alignment drift pins fill between num and num percent of the holes in a single field connection and between num and num percent of the holes on each side of a single joint in a splice plate .
once the alignment drift pins are in place fill remaining holes with bolts and tightened to snugtight starting from near the middle and proceeding toward the outer gauge lines .
once these bolts are snugtight systematically tighten these bolts to the specified minimum tension and then replace the drift pins with bolts .
tighten each of these bolts to the specified minimum tension .
place bolts with heads toward the outside and underside of the bridge .
install and tighten high strength bolts before the falsework is removed .
the contractor may erect metal railings as erection proceeds but do not bolt or adjust permanently until the falsework is released and the deck placed .
do not begin painting until the engineer has inspected and accepted field bolting .
num .
surface condition .
as the structure is erected keep steel surfaces clean and without dirt concrete mortar oil paint grease and other stainproducing foreign matter .
clean surfaces that have become stained as follows a .
clean painted steel surfaces by methods required for the type of staining .
submit the method to be used for engineer approval .
b. weathering steel surfaces .
after the deck is placed remove concrete stains and other foreign matter from the exposed surfaces of structural steel members by power cleaning or other approved method that will provide a surface for the formation of patina oxide coating .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
structural metals will be by the pound foot or on a lump sum basis .
where payment is on a weight basis the engineer will compute the weights of rolled shapes and of structural steel plates on the basis of their nominal weights and dimensions .
num .
steel forgings will be by the pound based on the plan dimensions and the theoretical weight of num pounds per cubic inch plan quantity .
num .
structural steel handrail numtube curb mount rail pedestrianbicycle railing and combination pedestrianbicycle railing will be by the foot .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit steel bridge ls structural steel lb or ls steel forgings lb structural steel handrail ft numtube curb mount rail ft pedestrianbicycle railing ft combination pedestrianbicycle and traffic railing ft the department will pay using plan quantities as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num piling num description .
provide and drive piles including test piles .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in concrete num steel hpiles num steel shell piles num timber piles num num construction requirements .
a .
general .
provide pile type and size as shown on the bridge plans .
drive test piles with the same pile driving hammer make model and size as will be used for production pile driving .
do not drive test piles with a vibratory hammer unless specified in the contract or as directed .
notify the engineer at least num calendar days before driving each test pile .
the engineer will need up to num business days after receiving each test pile record and associated pile dynamic test results to evaluate each test pile result and determine the required production pile length .
drive test piles as shown in the bridge plans or as directed .
if the required bearing capacity is not achieved when the test pile is driven as shown in the bridge plans continue driving the test pile until the required bearing capacity has been achieved as determined by the engineer .
complete the foundation excavation before driving piles .
drive production piles as shown in the bridge plans or as directed .
if the required highest pile tip elevations or minimum penetrations can not be achieved using a hammer with higher energy then removing and replacing the pile driving an adjacent pile or predrilling may be required .
pile restriking may be required if the pile does not have the design capacity at the end of initial driving .
restrike piles for num inches of penetration or as directed with the hammer that has been warmed up by applying a minimum of num blows to another pile or to a timber mat placed on the ground .
provide a suitable light for shell pile inspection .
b. helmet assembly .
use a helmet assembly with a suitable hammer cushion for driving piles .
fit the helmet assembly closely to the pile tops .
provide a helmet assembly design that has been proven satisfactory and is properly sized for driving the piles .
c. hammer cushion .
remove the hammer cushion from the helmet and inspect in the engineers presence before beginning pile driving at each structure or after each num hours of pile driving .
if there is any damage to the cushion or a hammer cushion thickness reduction of num percent or more of the original thickness replace the hammer cushion before continuing the pile driving .
d. pile tips and cutting shoes .
fit the piles with pile tip protectors or cutting shoes as shown on the plans or as directed .
carefully shape the pile toe to provide uniform even bearing on the tip or shoe .
use aws certified welders to install pile tips or shoes in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
e. steam air diesel or hydraulic hammers .
provide steam air diesel or hydraulic hammers as specified .
submit the hammer type and hammer operation specifications for review at least num calendar days before pile driving begins .
operate pile driving hammers in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
ensure the hammer operators manual is available onsite during pile driving .
operate and maintain airsteam hammers within the manufacturers specified ranges .
equip the plant and equipment with accurate pressure gauges which are easily accessible by the engineer .
for closedend double num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction acting diesel hammers provide a bounce chamber pressure gauge near the ground level that can be easily read by the engineer .
for hydraulic hammers provide a power plant with sufficient capacity to maintain at the hammer under working conditions the volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer .
equip the plant and equipment with accurate pressure gauges which are easily accessible to the engineer .
f. vibratory hammers .
if specified or approved use vibratory hammers to drive production piles at the beginning of the driving but finish the pile driving with impact hammers so the pile bearing capacities can be determined .
the engineer will determine the penetration depth for piles driven by vibratory hammers .
g. pile bearing capacity .
to confirm the pile capacity during driving the engineer will develop the piledriving criteria as the required blow count per foot or inch of pile penetration using a wave equation analysis .
the engineer will use the following pile driving dynamic formula to determine the pile capacity when a wave equation analysis is unavailable .
ru num e numlognumni num where ru ultimate pile capacity kips e w x h hammer energy footpounds at the field observed ram stroke which equals field ram stroke h feet multiplied by ram weight w pounds ni number of hammer blows per inch of pile penetration the required number of hammer blows per foot of driving nf for pile to achieve the ultimate pile capacity can be determined as follows nf num numa where a 𝑅𝑢num num𝐸 use of the pile driving dynamic formula instead of piledriving criteria developed using a wave equation analysis will normally require piles to be driven to a higher capacity .
the engineer will obtain the revised ultimate pile capacity from the bridge designer of record when the pile driving dynamic formula is used .
h. splicing .
num .
timber piles .
do not splice timber piles .
num .
steel piles .
use aws certified welders to make splices when splices are required for steel piles or as directed .
do not make more than two field splices on any individual pile before driving .
the minimum pile section length for pile splicing is num feet .
prefabricated splicers can be used as specified in the bridge plans .
i .
followers .
use followers only when approved .
j. loading tests .
determine pile capacities by static loading tests when required .
perform these tests in accordance with astm dnum .
k. pile dynamic tests .
perform pile dynamic tests on test piles in accordance with astm dnum when required .
l. pile storage and handling .
store and handle piles so as to avoid damaging the piles .
take special care to avoid breaking the surface of treated timber piles .
m. cutting piles .
for steel piles neatly cut the piles on a horizontal plane at the cutoff elevations shown in the bridge plans after the piles have been driven to the required capacity inspected and accepted .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num n. concreting .
completely fill shell piles with concrete after the cutoff has been removed unless otherwise shown in the bridge plans .
before placing concrete in shell piles remove debris and water from inside the pile .
do not place concrete in shell piles until all piles within a pier or abutment have been driven to the required capacity .
o. alignment location and orientation .
drive piles with a variation in plumbness of not more than ¼ inch per foot from the vertical or from the batter shown in the bridge plans .
drive piles for trestle bents so the bent cap may be placed without inducing excessive stresses in the piles as determined by the engineer .
the engineer will determine excessive stresses based on the loading conditions pile type and unsupported length .
ensure pile locations at cutoff are within num inches num inches for trestle bents of plan location .
ensure the asdriven centroid for trestle bents is within num percent of the plan centroid location as measured from any pile cap edge .
ensure hpile orientation is within num degrees of that shown in the bridge plans .
if the location or alignment tolerances specified in this paragraph are exceeded and if in the judgment of the engineer corrective measures are necessary design and construct suitable measures at no additional cost or time to the department .
p. heaved piles .
check pile heave immediately after completing installation and periodically thereafter until the engineer determines checking is no longer required .
take level readings referenced to a fixed datum immediately after the pile has been driven to the required capacity and again after all piles within a numfoot radius have been driven .
redrive piles that have heaved vertically more than ¼ inch to the required pile capacity at no additional cost to the department .
q .
installation sequence .
start driving individual piles in pile groups from the center of the group and proceed outwards in both directions or start at an outside row and proceed progressively across the group .
r. defective piles .
do not subject piles to excessive and undue abuse that may result in pile damage .
correct piles that have been damaged during driving driven out of plan location or driven below the pile cutoff elevation at no additional cost to the department .
make corrections to the damaged or out of position piles by one of the following methods and as approved num .
remove and replace the pile with a new pile and if necessary a longer pile .
num .
drive a new pile adjacent to the defective pile at a minimum numfoot separation from the defective pile or as directed .
num .
splice or build up the pile or widen a sufficient portion of the footing including redesign of steel reinforcement if necessary to properly embed the pile .
other corrective methods may also be used if approved .
s. driving pile next to concrete less than num days old .
do not drive piles closer to green concrete than the distance determined from the following formula d c x enum where d distance foot e rated energy of pile driving hammer footpounds c coefficient shown in table num based on the number of days of curing time num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num curing time coefficient curing time days coefficient c curing time days coefficient c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
provide and drive piles and test piles will be by the foot of pile below the cutoff elevation .
num .
pile shoes or tips and pile splices will be by the each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit provide drive timber piles ft provide drive steel shell piles ____ o.d .
ft provide drive steel hpiles ____ x ____ ft provide drive test piles ft provide install pile shoes or tips each splice steel pile before driving each splice steel pile during driving each for splice steel pile before driving the department will pay for num splice per pile if the pile lengths shown in the plans are longer than num feet .
for splice steel pile during driving the department will pay up to num splices per pile if the plan pile length is less than num feet and up to num splices per pile if the plan pile length is longer than num feet .
for pile cutoffs and leftovers the department will pay num percent of the material purchase cost as shown on the sellers invoice including freight charges and sales or use taxes .
the department will determine cutoff and left over lengths based on the required pile lengths determined after test piles are driven .
pile cutoffs and leftovers are the contractors property and must be removed from the site .
piledriving criteria developed by wave equation analyses steel reinforcement and concrete for steel shell piles are incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num prestressing concrete num description .
provide place and tension prestressing steel in precast or castinplace concrete .
prestressing includes the providing and installation of appurtenant items necessary for the particular prestressing system to be used including ducts anchorage assemblies and grout used for pressure grouting ducts .
for castinplace prestressed concrete the term member means the concrete which is to be prestressed .
perform prestressing using pretensioning or posttensioning methods unless the plans show only pretensioning details .
if the plans show only pretensioning details the contractor may use a posttensioning system only if complete modification details are approved .
num materials .
provide prestressing reinforcement that meets num .
the engineer will reject members with failing strand or steel .
grout and mortar num num construction requirements .
a .
general .
submit in pdf format complete shop drawings detailing the method materials and equipment proposed for use in the prestressing operations including additions or rearrangement of reinforcing steel or prestress reinforcing strands .
outline the method and sequence of stressing and include complete specifications and details of the prestressing steel and anchoring devices working stresses anchoring stresses types of ducts and other data pertaining to the prestressing operation including the proposed arrangement of the prestressing steel in the members pressure grouting materials and equipment .
submit elongation calculations based on the sequence of stressing .
do not cast members to be prestressed before shop detail drawings are approved .
submit asbuilt shop drawings in pdf format .
precast prestressed concrete manufacturing plants are required to be certified by the prestressed concrete institute plant certification program in category bnum prestressed miscellaneous bridge products bnum prestressed straight strand bridge members or bnum prestressed draped strand bridge members corresponding to the products specified .
submit proof of current certification to the engineer before beginning production .
for the fabrication of precast and prestressed members use the provisions in the current edition at the time of bid opening manual for quality control for plants and production of precast prestressed concrete products published by the prestressed concrete institute with the following exceptions num .
the contract specifications govern where there are conflicts .
num .
if a wire in a pretensioning strand fails the engineer will reject .
num .
if a wire in a posttensioning tendon fails the engineer may reject .
retain a professional engineer who is experienced in posttensioning operations and registered in at least num state of the united states .
the contractors professional engineer is to be in charge of posttensioning operations and be present during tensioning and grouting operations .
two weeks before the start of the posttensioning operations submit in writing the name of the professional engineer the states in which the professional engineer is registered including registration numbers and the date and place of posttensioning .
b .
sampling and testing .
sample and test in accordance with astm anum and astm anum and as specified in this subsection .
submit samples from each size and each heat of prestressing bars each manufactured reel of prestressing steel strand each coil of prestressing wire and each lot of bar couplers to be used for testing .
with each sample of prestressing steel wires bars or strands provided for testing submit a certification stating the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the sample .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction provide materials for testing at no cost to the department .
the department will not provide additional pay or contract time if the contractors work is delayed while waiting for approval of the materials .
assign an individual lot number to each bar size from each mill heat from each wire coil and each manufactured reel of strand to be shipped to the site and tag so each lot can be accurately identified .
likewise identify each lot of anchorage assemblies and bar couplers to be installed .
the engineer will reject unidentified prestressing steel anchorage assemblies or bar couplers received .
submit the following samples of materials and tendons selected by the engineer from the prestressing steel at the plant or project site well before anticipated use num .
for wire strand or bars one numfoot long sample and two numfoot long samples .
provide samples of each size for each heat or reel .
num .
if the prestressing tendon is a bar provide one numfoot length .
if couplers are used with the bars provide two numfoot lengths of bar equipped with one coupler and fabricated to fit the coupler .
submit a calibration of the posttensioning jacking system and provide the appropriate display settings for the departments electrohydraulic pressure cell system .
prepare a graph showing the gauge pressure in pounds per square inch and force in thousands of pounds plotted through the whole range of the posttensioning calibration .
the engineer will require recalibration of the jacking system at intervals not exceeding num months or when it appears the equipment is producing erratic results .
for each calibration submit a new set of charts from the calibration .
the specified regular interval for recalibration of equipment may be extended at the discretion of the engineer on conclusive evidence there is no substantial change in the performance .
however in no case will the intervals exceed num months .
the approval of material does not prevent subsequent rejection if the material is damaged in transit or later damaged and found to be defective .
c. shipment and rust protection .
protect prestressing steel against physical damage rust and other results of corrosion from manufacture to grouting or encasing in concrete .
the engineer will reject prestressing steel with sustained physical damage .
the engineer may reject prestressing steel if visible rust or other results of corrosion develop .
package prestressing steel in containers or other shipping forms for the protection of the steel against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
place a corrosion inhibitor which prevents rust or other results of corrosion in the package or form and apply directly to the steel .
the department requires the corrosion inhibitor to have no deleterious effect on the steel or concrete or bond strength of steel to concrete .
immediately replace or restore damaged packaging or forms .
the contractor may elect to use a corrosion inhibitor carriertype packaging material meeting the united states department of defense specification milprfnumh .
clearly mark the shipping package or form with a statement the package contains highstrength prestressing steel the care to be used in handling the type kind and quantity of corrosion inhibitor used including the date when placed and safety orders and instructions for use .
if directed submit the following for the corrosion inhibitor num .
a sample a list of chemicals and their proportions and instructions for use .
num .
evidence the prestressing steel will be protected from rust and other results of corrosion .
num .
a certificate of materials as specified in num .
if steam curing is used do not install prestressing steel for posttensioning until the steam curing is completed .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num where prestressing steel for posttensioning is approved for installation in the ducts after completion of concrete curing and if stressing and grouting are completed within num calendar days after the installation of the prestressing steel the engineer will not reject steel because of rust which may form during said num calendar days .
the engineer will not require the use of a corrosion inhibitor in the duct following installation of the prestressing steel if it was installed tensioned and grouted in this manner within num calendar days .
prestressing steel installed this way but not grouted within num calendar days is subject to the requirements in this subsection pertaining to corrosion protection and rejection due to rust .
when prestressing steel for pretensioning is placed in the stressing bed and is exposed to the elements for more than num hours before encasement in concrete take adequate measures to protect steel from contamination or corrosion .
do not weld or ground the welding equipment on the forms or on the steel in the member after the prestressing steel has been installed .
clean and paint the exposed ends of pretensioned members that will not be encased in concrete .
cover the surfaces with num thick applications of zincrich paint that meets milpnum .
recess the anchoring devices so the ends of the prestressing steel and parts of the anchoring devices will be at least num inches inside the end surface of the members .
abrasive blast clean the surfaces of concrete against which concrete encasement over anchorage assemblies is to be placed .
clean any aggregate exposed after grouting the ducts .
fill the recesses with concrete and finish flush .
provide concrete that is the same as that specified for superstructure concrete .
d. allowable stresses and losses .
the department requires the average working stress in the prestressing steel not to exceed num percent of the yield point stress of the prestressing steel and the maximum temporary tensile stress jacking stress in prestressing steel to not exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
anchor the prestressing steel at stresses initial stress that will result in the ultimate retention of working forces specified .
the department requires the initial stress at the anchor to not exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
the working force and working stress are defined as the force and stress remaining in the prestressing steel after all losses have taken place including creep and shrinkage of concrete elastic compression of concrete creep of steel losses in posttensioned prestressing steel due to sequence of stressing friction and takeup of anchorage and other losses peculiar to the method or system of prestressing have been provided for or have taken place .
ensure the stress loss in posttensioned prestressing steel due to elastic shortening shrinkage and creep of concrete and relaxation of prestressing steel matches the plan details .
use the following formula and friction coefficients to calculate friction losses in tendons tnum tx e ua kl where tnum steel stress at jacking end tx steel stress at point x e num base of naperian logarithms u friction curvature coefficient see table num a total angular change of prestressing steel profile in radians from jacking end to point x k friction wobble coefficient see table num l length of prestressing steel from jacking end to point x num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num steel coefficient type of steel type of duct k u wire or strand galvanizedrigid num num plain bars galvanized num num deformed bars galvanized num num e. equipment .
tension prestressing steel using hydraulic jacks to meet specifications .
the contractor may equip each jack to stress tendons with a pressure gauge or a load cell for determining the jacking stress .
provide a pressure gauge with an accurately reading dial at least num inches in diameter .
provide a load cell with an indicator that can determine the prestressing force in the tendon .
ensure the indicators range is not in the lower num percent of the manufacturers capacity when determining the jacking stress .
f. preparation and stressing .
for pretensioning accurately hold in position the prestressing elements during stressing .
the contractor may cast in num continuous line several units and stress at num time .
do not transfer bond stress to the concrete until the concrete has attained the compressive strength specified .
cut and release the elements in an order that minimizes lateral eccentricity of stress .
before placing forms for closing slabs of box girder cells the engineer must verify that ducts are unobstructed .
for posttensioning install the prestressing steel after the concrete has been placed .
the engineer must verify the ducts are without water and debris immediately before installation of the prestressing steel .
during installation ensure the prestressing steel is laid out in an orderly manner corresponding with its final positioning in the ducts without overlaps and kinks .
after installation and before posttensioning a member the engineer must verify the prestressing steel is free and unbonded in the duct .
do not prestress castinplace concrete until at least num calendar days after the last concrete has been placed in the member to be prestressed .
additionally ensure the compressive strength of the last placed concrete has reached the strength specified for the concrete at the time of stressing .
conduct the tensioning process so tension being applied and the elongation of the prestressing steel may be measured .
keep a record of gauge pressure and elongations and submit for approval .
for prestressing tendons in continuous posttensioned members tension by jacking at each end of the tendon .
the contractor does not need to jack both ends simultaneously .
retension the unit before grout is placed if slippage of prestressing steel after tensioning is greater than num inch of the amount assumed in elongation calculations in a unit .
for posttensioning do not stress more than ½ of the prestressing force in a girder before an equal force is stressed in the adjacent girders .
during the stressing operations do not apply more than num of the total prestressing force eccentrically about the centerline of the structure .
distribute the prestressing force with an approximately equal value in each girder and place symmetrically about the centerline of the structure .
in slabs uniformly distribute the prestressing force across the slab .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num g. ducts .
num .
size .
a .
provide ducts for tendons made up of multiple wires bars or strands that require an area of at least twice the net area of the prestressing steel .
b .
provide ducts for prestressing bars with a minimum inside diameter num inch larger than the diameter of the bars to be used .
num .
placement .
accurately place ducts as specified or approved and securely fasten at close enough intervals to avoid displacement during concreting .
after installation in the forms cover the ends of ducts as necessary to prevent the entry of water or debris .
num .
grout openings .
vent ducts for continuous structures over each intermediate support .
use a ½ inch minimum diameter standard pipe and connect to ducts .
seal vents mortartight and tape as necessary .
remove the ends of vents num inch below the roadway surface after grouting has been completed .
install mechanical shutoff valves capable of withstanding grout pumping pressure at vents and the inlet and outlet of the ducts .
num .
forming .
use rigid galvanized ferrous metal ducts .
the contractor does not need to galvanize duct transition couplings connecting to anchoring devices .
the contractor may fabricate rigid ducts with welded or interlocked seams .
galvanizing the welded seam is not required .
provide rigid ducts that have sufficient strength to maintain their correct alignment during placing of concrete .
provide joints between sections of rigid duct that are positive metallic connections that do not result in angle changes at the joints .
use waterproof tape at the connections .
h. anchorage devices .
secure posttensioned prestressing steel at the ends by means of approved permanent type anchoring devices .
do not deviate from the equivalent anchor set more than plus num inch .
use anchorage devices for posttensioning that hold the prestressing steel at a load producing a stress of at least num percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
distribute the load from the anchoring device to the concrete by means of approved devices that will effectively distribute the load to the concrete .
use devices that meet aashto standard specification for highway bridges division idesign article num and division iiconstruction section num .
i. grouting .
num .
equipment .
provide grouting equipment capable of continuous mechanical mixing that will produce a grout without lumps and undispersed cement and be able to pump the mixed grout that complies with provisions of this recommended practice .
provide accessory equipment e.g .
scales liquid measures to accurately batch materials and a pump able to produce an outlet gauge pressure of at least num psi with seals adequate to prevent introduction of oil air or other foreign substances into the grout and to prevent loss of grout or water .
place a pressure gauge readable in num psi increments having a fullscale reading of not more than num psi at some point in the grout line between the pump outlet and the duct inlet .
provide the system with an effective manual or automatic control to limit the buildup of excessive pressure .
provide grouting equipment containing a screen having clear openings of num inch maximum size to screen the grout before its introduction into the grout pump .
make the screen easily accessible for inspection and cleaning .
use gravity feed to the grouting equipment pump inlet .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction provide grouting equipment capable of continuously grouting the largest tendon in num minutes or less under normal conditions .
provide standby water flushing equipment separate from the grouting equipment that uses a different power source than the grouting equipment is capable of developing a gauge pressure of at least num psi and has sufficient capacity to flush out partially grouted enclosures due to blockage breakdown of grouting equipment or inability to maintain oneway grout flow .
num .
preparation of ducts .
clean ducts and ensure the ducts are without water and deleterious materials that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
use water for flushing ducts that contains quick lime calcium oxide or slaked lime calcium hydroxide at num pounds per gallon .
ensure compressed air used to blow out ducts is oil free .
num .
injection of the grout .
fill the entire void space between the duct and the tendon with grout .
pump the grout through the ducts by pumping continuously from one end of the duct .
ensure valves are open when pumping starts .
after a continuous stream of grout emerges close the valve at the first vent first .
close the remaining vents in sequence in the same manner .
pump grout through the duct and continuously waste at the outlet until no visible slugs or other evidence of water or air are ejected and the efflux time of ejected grout is at least num seconds .
close the outlet pipe hold the pumping pressure momentarily and then close the valve at the inlet while maintaining this pressure .
do not remove or open valves until the grout has set .
num .
cold weather .
keep ducts free of water to avoid damage due to freezing .
concrete temperature do not grout unless the temperature of the concrete is num f or higher and maintained at this temperature until jobcured num inch cubes reach a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
grout temperature ensure grout temperature is less than num f during mixing or pumping .
j .
transportation and storage .
transport precast prestressed stringers in an upright position and ensure points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the stringer are approximately the same during transportation and storage as when the stringer is in its final position .
k. camber .
check and record the vertical deflection camber of each girder .
girder camber is the measured variation between the girder center elevation and a straight line between the girder end elevations .
check and record the camber within num hours after transfer of the prestressing force and within a numweek period before shipment but no less than num calendar days before shipment .
perform and record each camber check when the alignment of the girder is not influenced by temporary differences in surface temperature .
compare the actual camber measured with the required camber values and the permissible tolerances .
the following are allowable tolerances from the design camber num .
plus or minus num inch for up to num feet in length .
num .
plus or minus num inch for over num feet in length .
meet the specified girder camber values in the contract documents within the allowable tolerances when girders are erected .
make provisions to control the camber growth .
control the vertical deflection of prestressed concrete girders by scheduling fabrication or other means .
use a method to control the vertical deflection that does not cause damage to the girders or over stress when checked in accordance with aashto specifications .
show the method of controlling the vertical deflection on the shop drawings .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the department may reject girders not meeting these minimum requirements as specified in num .
make data from intermittent camber checks the contractor performs available to the engineer on request .
ensure the recorded measurements of the girder camber accompany the girder to the project site to document the girder complies with the specifications .
control girder deflection at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed prestressing of castinplace concrete by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit prestressing castinplace concrete ls providing and placing additional deformed bar reinforcing steel required by the particular system used ducts anchoring devices distribution plates or assemblies incidental parts for providing samples for testing working drawings and for pressure grouting ducts is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
when there are no contract pay items for prestressing precast concrete the department considers prestressing concrete members as incidental and the costs included in the contract unit price for providing precast members as specified in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num corrugated plate pipe num description .
provide and install a steel or aluminum corrugated plate pipe arch structure as detailed in the plans or as specified .
the structure must be designed per current edition of aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
a .
design computations and shop drawings .
submit the manufacturers shop drawings and design computations in accordance with num for engineer approval before fabrication .
ensure the shop drawings and design computations are signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
ensure shop drawings include a plate layout showing installation offsets and sequence from a common reference point for all stages of construction .
for single pipe arch structures with a span length equal to or greater than num feet measured along the centerline of roadway or a combination of pipe arches with a total out to out length equal to or greater than num feet measured along centerline of roadway and the distance between centerlines of pipes less than onehalf the span length of the smaller pipe arch the structure must be designed at strength ii for a standard gauge tridem axle load of num kips num kips per axle with num foot spacing between axles .
b .
initial load rating .
for all pipe arch structures requiring strength ii design for tridem axel as defined in num.a the supplier is required to prepare a load and resistance factor rating lrfr per the idaho manual for bridge evaluation and provide a load rating summary lrs form for approval by the department at the same time as shop drawing submittal .
num materials .
num .
provide material as specified in num .
num .
meet minimum thickness for all steel plates as shown in the bridge plans .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
curve each plate to the required radius and punch the bolt holes so the sections except the end plates are interchangeable in the erection process .
fabricate bolt holes in accordance with aashto m num section num .
when the completed structure is to be a fullcircle pipe curve the plates so when they are bolted together they form true circles of the required diameter .
when the completed structure is to be a multicentered pipe or arch curve the plates to the required radii .
cut plates for forming skewed or sloped ends to give the angle of skew or slope specified on the plans .
ensure burnt edges do not have oxide or burrs and present a wellmade finish .
install the structure in accordance with the project plans and specifications and the manufacturers written instructions .
b .
assembly .
assemble the pipe in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
steel structural plate .
apply at least num footpounds but no more than num footpounds of torque to num inch diameter high strength steel bolts astm anum .
aluminum structural plate .
apply at least num footpounds but no more than num footpounds torque to num inch diameter aluminum bolts astm fnum or standard strength steel bolt astm anum exercise care in the use of drift pins or pry bars to prevent chipping or injury to the galvanized coating .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. backfill .
place backfill materials in symmetrical lifts on each side of the structure .
ensure the differential between the lifts on either side does not exceed num inches .
place each layer of soil in num to numinch loose lifts and compact to a minimum of num percent of the maximum dry density as determined by idaho t num andor aashto t num and aashto t num method b .
select equipment and methods to provide the specified backfill density without excessive movement or deformation of the structure .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
when the ends of a corrugated plate structure are cut on a skew or slope the length of the structure will be the bottom length measured along the structure centerline and grade .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit ____ corrugated plate pipe culvert ___ thickness ft ____ corrugated plate pipe arch ___thickness ft ____ corrugated plate arch ___ thickness ft num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num nonstructural concrete num description .
provide nonstructural portland cement concrete .
nonstructural portland cement concrete is concrete used in curb sidewalk gutter small sign post foundations or other applications where long term structural durability is not critical .
submit a proposed mix design for approval .
use the concrete class as specified .
a .
classification .
provide the following classes of concrete in table num where required on the plans .
a numerical part of class designation is the specified compressive strength when tested as specified in the applicable test listed in num. b cement plus secondary cementitious materials if used .
c ensure concrete designated as num .
class a the air content of num plus or minus num percent .
num .
class c has a maximum water cement ratio of num water reducer required and air content of num plus or minus num percent .
use scm for concrete use when designated with an f. this designation shows a mix containing scm and meeting the requirements for an a or c mix as specified when used with the above designations .
meet requirements of num .
if fly ash is used do not exceed num percent of the total cementitious material fly ash cement .
if ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs is used do not exceed num percent of the total cementitious materials .
if a combination of ggbfs and fly ash is used ensure the combination is at least num percent or more than num percent of the total cementitious materials .
provide class num concrete and use size nos .
numa or numb coarse aggregate in any class of concrete .
ensure the slump does not vary more than num inch from the average during placement .
if an increase in slump is desirable for the concrete as batched maintain the weight ratio of water to cement by either making proportional increases of cement with increases in water or by reducing the total weight of aggregates incorporated in the mixture .
b .
acceptance .
submit certification for concrete classes of concrete required to meet num from qualified aggregate material supplies .
for each concrete mix design regardless of the pay item in the contract test the first load then again before reaching num cubic yards .
test again before reaching num cubic yards and again within every num cubic yards thereafter .
test for slump unit weight air content and compressive strength for acceptance .
acceptable concrete is based on compliance with parameters specified for the given concrete class .
the engineer will determine acceptable strength from the results of numday compressive strength tests performed on cylinders made from samples of the concrete being placed as specified in num .
the average strength from num companion cylinders is num test .
table num basic mix design parameters concrete class in num psi num daya maximum water to cement ratiob air content percent num and greater c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num if the numday strength falls below the specified minimum strength the engineer may reject the concrete represented by the test or require a price adjustment if allowed to remain in place .
concrete subject to rejection or price adjustment is represented by the test that falls below the specified strength .
replace unacceptable concrete at no additional cost to the department .
if the concrete does not meet the intended strength or air content and the engineer allows the concrete to remain in place the price will be adjusted as follows percent of specified strength pay factor above num to num num num subject to rejectiona a if allowed to remain in place as determined by the engineer the pay factor will be num .
above or below specified air content pay factor less than num num num to num to num num above num subject to rejectiona a if allowed to remain in place as determined by the engineer the pay factor will be num .
acceptable quantities will be paid at the contract unit price multiplied by the pay factor as determined above .
the department will apply the larger price adjustment if air content and strength do not meet requirements .
if concrete used in the work fails to meet the specifications make corrective changes in the materials mix portions concrete fabrication procedures or other corrective action before continuing at no additional cost to the department .
obtain approval to make corrective changes if the numday strength test results are low or show a downward trend predicting concrete may not meet the requirements .
manufacturers providing precast concrete products must hold current certification under the npca plant certification program the acpa qcast plant certification program or the pci plant certification program .
num materials .
provide materials requirements as specified in num and num and test as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
ensure proportioning equipment handling measuring batching mixing delivery forming placing finishing and curing of concrete are as specified in num except as modified by this subsection .
a. proportioning .
for aggregates with an aashto t num expansion less than num percent low alkali cement is adequate for alkali silica reactivity asr mitigation .
for aggregates having an aashto t num expansion between num and num percent a mix containing at least num percent fly ash meeting the requirements for fly ash as a mineral admixture as specified in num is adequate for asr mitigation .
for aggregates with an aashto t num expansion greater than num percent do one of the following num .
test in accordance with astm cnum aashto tp num or crd c num using the cement fly ash and other mitigative additives proposed for use in the mix design .
determine the lithium nitrate dosage in accordance with crd c num when using lithium nitrate for asr mitigation .
do not allow expansion of num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction mortar bars to exceed num percent with the addition of fly ash slag or other additives when tested in accordance with astm cnum or crd c num .
do not allow the miniature concrete prisms to exceed num percent at num calendar days or num percent expansion at num calendar days when tested in accordance with aashto tp num .
the contractor may test the coarse and fine aggregates together or separately .
if testing is performed on the coarse and fine aggregates together report the blend percentage on the test and be within num percent of the blend percentage used in the mix design .
when tested separately base mitigation actions on the aggregate requiring the most mitigation .
num .
use a concrete mix containing num percent class f fly ash approved for use in mitigating asr .
class num and class num concrete will not require asr mitigation measures .
b .
discharge .
if a set stabilizer meeting astm cnum is used the contractor may extend discharge time to num hours but not exceed num total revolutions .
c. temperature .
provide concrete with a temperature of at least num f and not more than num f at the time of placement .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed concrete work by the cubic yard or by the square yard using the dimensions specified or as directed .
the volume occupied by the reinforcing steel anchors conduits weep holes h piling or chamfers will not be deducted .
the volume of concrete displaced by culverts or piles other than h piling will be deducted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit nonstructural concrete class ____ cy or sy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num concrete overlay num description .
provide and place a latexmodified concrete or a silica concrete overlay .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in aggregate num portland cement num water for concrete num airentraining admixtures num waterreducing admixtures num silica fume num fly ash num a .
certification .
provide certification of the silica fume or latex modifier taken during production or transfer stating the test results made on the material samples meet this specification .
submit certification and test reports indicating typical values before use of the material .
b .
sampling and testing .
the engineer will sample the material proposed .
the engineer will test concrete as specified in num .
c. acceptance .
the engineer will reject portland cement latex modifier or silica that does not meet this specification .
the engineer will report the rejection to the contractor promptly .
in cases of dissatisfaction with the test results the engineer will allow the contractor additional sampling and retesting .
the engineers acceptance of the concrete overlay will be based on compliance with parameters specified .
the engineer will determine acceptance of strength from the results of numday compressive strength tests performed in compliance with num on cylinders made from samples of the concrete being placed .
the average strength from num companion cylinders is num test .
if the numday strength falls below the specified minimum strength the engineer may reject the concrete represented by the test or require a price adjustment if allowed to remain in place .
the engineer will base acceptance on an evaluation of the necessary durability requirements of the concrete overlay .
the engineer may accept concrete which does not meet the specified minimum strength at a reduced price if the strength is not more than num percent below the specified minimum strength .
the engineer will reject concrete represented by tests falling more than num percent below the specified minimum strength .
remove rejected concrete at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will adjust the price for the concrete overlay which does not meet the specified strength but is allowed to remain in place as presented in table num .
table num price adjustment percent of specified strength pay factor num to num num num to num num the department will pay for the quantity of acceptable concrete overlay at the contract unit price multiplied by the pay factor .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction d. storage .
store the material to permit easy access for proper inspection and identification of each shipment .
allow the engineer to access every facility at the source and at the project site for sampling and inspection .
protect material from freezing and from prolonged exposure to temperatures in excess of num f. cover containers stored at the bridge site completely with suitable insulating blanket material to avoid excessive temperatures .
e. packaging .
when material is delivered plainly mark the name and brand of the manufacturer and the material weight on each container .
identify shipments by source and lot number .
only num manufacturing source is acceptable .
submit similar information on the shipping invoices accompanying the material shipment .
ensure containers are in good condition at the time of inspection .
provide size no .
num coarse aggregate for latexmodified concrete .
ensure the latex modifier contains at least num percent solids .
determine the percent solids by tests using idaho it num .
submit certification from the producer indicating the material provided is identical to that provided to the fhwa fairbanks highway research station .
provide latexmodified concrete that meets the following properties mix design item requirement cement content num lbydnum latex emulsion admixture num galydnum approx .
added watera including free moisture in the fa ca num lbydnum air content percent of plastic mix num num slumpb num num in percent fine aggregate as percent of total aggregate by weight rounded ca num num percent fine aggregate as percent of total aggregate by weight crushed ca num num weight ratio of cementfaca rounded cac num dry basis weight ratio of cementfaca crushed cac num dry basis numday compressive strength minimum num psi a this is in addition to the latex .
adjust the water added to control the slump and to produce net watercement ratios of num to num by weight .
b measure the slump num to num minutes after discharge from the mixer or immediately ahead of the finisher .
c the contractor may adjust the dryweight ratios within limits as approved .
the contractor may increase the fa ratio by as much as num if the ca is reduced by an equivalent amount .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide silica fume concrete with the following properties mix design item requirement cement content minimum num lbydnum watercement silica fume ratio maximum num course aggregates size no .
num slump num in plus or minus num in air content num plus or minus num highrange water reducers rounded ca astm cnum numday compressive strength minimuma num psi numday compressive strength minimuma num psi percent silica fume by weight of cement num minimum percent fly ash if used of total cementitious num minimum fibrillated fibers astm cnum num lbcy minimum a overdesign is limited to a maximum num psi when produced in a laboratory .
cementitious material content may be reduced to meet the overdesign limits .
the engineer will waive the overdesign if the contractor reduces the cementitious materials content by at least num percent .
provide the silica fume admixture as a densified powder .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
the department will require the contractor and a technical representative from the silica fumelatex modified concrete supplier to meet with the engineer for a preplacement conference at a time mutually agreed upon .
at or before this conference present the mix design and methods of accomplishing the concrete overlay work .
allow the engineer num calendar days to review the mix design .
ensure technical representatives from the latex admixture manufacturersilica fume supplier and highrange water reducer are present during the proportioning mixing placing and finishing of the concrete overlay .
one person may perform both of these functions .
ensure this technical representative has expertise in the proper installation of the materials and is available to the engineer for consultation .
adhere at no cost to the department to the written instructions andor recommendations made by the technical representative and as approved .
the services of these technical representatives are incidental and the cost included in the unit price of contract items .
before placement prepare place and cure a trial batch of at least num cubic yards to verify the mix design show ability to perform curing operations and check quality control .
make additional trial batches as necessary to verify changes in design or procedure at no additional cost to the department .
provide rails for the finishing machine to travel on that are sufficiently rigid so they do not deflect under the weight of the machine .
attach the rails to the surface so they may be removed without damage to the edge of the new overlayment .
provide rails that are vertically adjustable not shimmed and adjust using a level and level rod to ensure proper depth and matching of joints .
set the screed control to obtain the nominal overlay thickness specified as well as finished surface smoothness requirements .
verify the thickness before the placement of the concrete by attaching a filler block to the bottom of num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the screed .
with the screed guides in place pass the finishing machine over the surface to be overlaid .
after the overlay thickness has been verified adjust the profile grade as directed or approved .
do not change the finish machine elevation controls .
b .
equipment .
use an approved powerdriven finishing machine for finishing areas with a width equal to or greater than num feet complying with the following requirements num .
have at least num handoperated spud type internal vibrators available for use as directed .
submit a request for approval of the specific equipment to be used at least num calendar days before the start of work .
do not begin placing deck concrete until the screed and placing procedure is approved .
num .
provide a selfpropelled finishing machine capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control for placing striking off and finishing the bridge deck surface with provisions for raising screeds to clear the surface .
equip the machine with vibrating screeds designed to consolidate the modified composition .
the department requires the vibration frequency be variable with positive control between num and num vibrations per minute and the bottom face of the screeds be at least num inches wide and be metal covered .
provide screeds with positive control of the vertical position .
equip the finishing machine with num or more rollers augers and num or num vibration per minute vibratory pans .
provide a bidwell num or equivalent finishing machine .
modification to the bidwell num or equivalent is subject to approval .
num .
texas allen or bunyon type screeds will not be permitted unless otherwise approved for small andor irregular areas .
c. deck preparation .
remove the concrete deck surface as specified in num before placing the concrete overlays .
use approved temporary bridge drain plugs during preparation and placement to prevent waste materials from entering drainage systems .
protect expansion joints and barrier curbs by approved means from damage due to construction operations .
remove the concrete deck by hydrodemolition .
not more than num hours before placing the overlay clean surfaces the overlay is to bond to including exposed reinforcing and structural steel the work face of the previously placed material and the faces of curbs and barriers up to a height of at least num inch above the proposed overlay surface by abrasive blasting or an approved method of waterblasting with num psi minimum pressure .
blow the deck with compressed air to remove excess water and debris .
after the deck has been airblasted cover the deck with unused num mil plastic sheeting .
clean steel surfaces to meet the requirements of num .
ensure concrete surfaces are made without spalls laitance and contaminants detrimental to achieving adequate bond .
provide water and oil traps on the compressors .
after the surface is properly prepared do not allow vehicular traffic other than equipment required to place the overlay .
do not exceed construction loads of numpound wheel load or numpound axle load .
combination of axles placed closer than num feet centertocenter is evaluated as num axle .
operate equipment required on the deck for placing the overlay on plastic sheeting or diaper the equipment to prevent dripping fluids from contaminating the prepared surface .
d. mixing .
num .
latexmodified concrete .
use continuousmixing type mixers complying with the following a .
the mixer carries sufficient cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate latex modifier and water to produce at least num cubic yards of concrete .
b .
the mixer is capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the mix .
a visible recording meter equipped with a ticket printout to show the quantity accurately is required .
c. the mixer provides positive control of the flow of water and latex emulsion into the mixing chamber .
water flow is shown by flow meter and is readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num d. the mixer is calibrated to automatically proportion and blend components of shown composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation and discharges mixed material directly in front of the finishing machine .
e. at least num mixers are used for each placement if the total volume of concrete to be placed exceeds the material storage capacity of a single mixer .
the engineer may require additional mixers if conditions require materials be stockpiled away from the project site .
have sufficient mixers on hand to ensure a consistent and uniform delivery and placement of concrete .
f. the mixer is equipped with a bypass valve to enable calibration of the water valves or flow meters .
g. verify the fine aggregate bin vibrators are operating satisfactorily .
calibrate mixers to accurately proportion the specified mix .
the engineer will accept certification of the calibration by an approved testing authority as evidence of this accuracy if the yield is shown to be true within a tolerance of num percent using the following test a .
with the cement meter set on zero and controls set for the desired mix activate the mixer discharging mixed material into a num cubic yard container .
b .
when the container is levelstruck full making provision for settling the material into corners the department requires the cement meter to show a discharge of num sacks of cement for latex modified concrete num sacks per cubic yard .
ensure the concrete discharged from the mixer is uniform in composition and consistency .
provide mixing capability so that finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace with final finishing completed before the formation of the plastic surface film .
num .
silica fume .
calibrate mixers to accurately proportion the specified mixture .
provide a visible recording meter equipped with a ticket printout to show the quantity accurately .
ensure the silica fume manufacturers technical representative advises the engineer in writing of proper batching sequence mixing time mixing speed and other handling procedures necessary for a uniform homogeneous mixture meeting the requirements of this subsection .
include procedures relating to the highrange water reducer .
follow the written instructions .
do not exceed num cubic yards of silica fume concrete in the truck mixer .
if a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting silica fume concrete complete discharge within num hour and num minutes or before the drum has revolved more than num revolutions whichever comes first after introduction of cement and water .
obtain approval to use a set stabilizer if haul times exceed num hour and num minutes .
if a set stabilizer is used the mixing revolutions may be increased to num revolutions and discharge time increased to num hours .
if a slurry is used adjust mix water to account for the water in the silica fume slurry and store the product in a tank with an agitator so the product can be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
if placement is done during cold weather insulate or protect the tank against freezing .
e. placing and finishing .
during placement of the overlay ensure the surface of base concrete is in a saturated surface dry condition .
achieve this by thoroughly wetting the surface at least num hours before placement and maintaining it in a moist condition until placement .
maintain a moist condition by covering with visqueen andor using fog spray or soaker hoses provided that complete moisture coverage is attained .
blow out standing water in depressions holes or low areas with compressed air before the application of the bonding coat .
promptly deliver and deposit on the deck a bonding coat consisting of a portion of the overlay mix on the deck then scrub by brooming onto the wetted prepared surface .
do not use separately mixed bonding coats .
exercise care to ensure vertical and horizontal surfaces receive a thorough even coating .
limit the rate of progress to no more than num feet ahead of the screed so the brushed material does not become dry before it is covered with the finish num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction course .
dispose of materials intended for brushing that have started initial set dried or show evidence of loss of paste from the sand .
dispose of coarse aggregate remaining after the brushing operation .
manipulate the material and strike off to approximately num inch above final grade .
consolidate the material and finish at final grade with the vibrating screeds .
handfinish with a wood float along the edge of the pour or on small areas of repair .
in areas requiring hand finishing and areas adjacent to curbs and joint bulkheads use vibrators to ensure proper consolidation .
install a construction dam or bulkhead in case of major delay in the placement operation .
during minor delays of num hour or less protect the end of the placement from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
construct longitudinal joints at or within num foot of lane lines .
when concrete is to be placed against concrete in a previously placed lane or strip saw the previously placed concrete back the necessary distance to provide a straight and vertical edge .
the contractor may omit sawing of the joint if bulkhead produces a straight smooth and vertical surface .
sandblast clean and apply a bonding coat before placing new concrete .
do not place concrete against the edge of an adjacent lane or strip that is less than num hours old .
take adequate precautions to protect freshly placed material from sudden or unexpected rain .
the engineer may order removal of material damaged by rainfall .
do not place the concrete overlay when the evaporation rate is greater than num pounds per square foot per hour when tested in accordance with idaho it num unless the contractor can show by reducing the spread width or by other means that a satisfactory surface finish can be obtained .
do not place the concrete overlay at ambient temperatures lower than num f or higher than num f. when a tight uniform surface has been achieved texture the surface of the concrete perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the structure with an approved grooving tool .
ensure nominal groove width is num in with spacing of num to ¾ inch and the depth of tined grooves is of num inch plus or minus num inch deep .
check groove depth in accordance with idaho it num .
if more than num readings in a set of num are outside the intended depth range make adjustments to the tining operation .
the contractor may apply an approved wire tine texture providing it leaves a finish comparable to the groove depth and spacing specified and causes only minimal surface tearing or aggregate removal .
finish the surface adjacent to the curb to a smoothtroweled texture approximately num foot from the face of the curb .
f. curing .
promptly cover the surface with a single layer of clean wet burlap .
exercise care so the burlap is not dragged or dropped on the fresh surface .
ensure the burlap is drained free of water and that it is placed as soon as the surface will support the covering without deformation .
do not wait until the surface will support foot traffic .
the concrete overlay forms a plastic film at the surface on drying usually within num minutes in hot dry weather .
protect the plastic film from overdrying and cracking by promptly covering with the wet burlap .
maintain the burlap in a wet condition throughout the duration of the wet cure .
unplug the deck drains to allow drainage to pass through .
place a layer of num mils polyethylene pe film on the wet burlap for the required wetcure period within ½ hour of covering with wet burlap .
the contractor may substitute approved burlappe sheets for the pe film .
wetcure the latexmodified concrete for at least num hours .
remove the curing material for an additional numhour drycure period .
extend the dry curing period in case of rainfall or dampness to ensure the surface of the concrete has a total of num hours of dry curing .
wetcure the silica fume concrete for at least num calendar days .
use a work bridge to place the burlap and pe .
do not walk on the overlay during placement of these items .
do not allow traffic on the silica fume concrete surface until the numday wet cure is complete and the silica fume has a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
do not allow traffic on the latex concrete surface until completion of the drycure period .
the engineer may require a longer curing period at temperatures below num f. num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num on completion of the wet cure of the last section overlaid immediately treat visible cracking with a numcomponent modified methacrylate penetrating sealer .
spread sand over areas on surface where sealer has puddled in an amount to ensure adequate skid resistance .
the sikapronto num and transpo sealate tnumx are acceptable sealers or others as approved .
meet the smoothness requirements specified in num for the finished concrete overlay surface .
after the concrete overlay has cured the engineer will use a chain drag or other appropriate tool or device to determine if delaminations exist between the new overlay and the mating concrete surface .
remove and replace delaminated areas .
the department will require vertical edges and rectangularshaped patching if removal is necessary .
when smoothness grinding is enforced seal the ground areas with an approved sealer .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard as recorded on approved batch tickets .
the engineer will reject batch tickets for unacceptable material or excessive waste quantities .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit concrete overlay cy if the volume used exceeds the neat line volume by more than num percent the department will pay for the volume exceeding num percent of the neat line volume at num percent of the contract unit price .
the department will pay for concrete overlay that does not meet the specified minimum strength and is allowed to stay in place by the engineer as specified in num .
the engineer will deduct from the contract unit price of the concrete overlay and apply the adjusted contract unit price to the quantity of concrete overlay represented by the individual strength test .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num concrete waterproofing systems num description .
provide concrete waterproofing systems and install on bridge decks or other designated surfaces .
a .
system types .
use one of the following system types num .
type c penetrating water system .
sealant that penetrates the bridge deck surface and forms a water repellant layer within the concrete .
num .
type d precoated preformed membrane sheet system .
prefabricated sheets that are selfadhesive or require a separate bonding agent .
num .
type e sprayapplied waterproofing system .
suitable for concrete or miscellaneous metal surfaces to prevent corrosion from soluble salts on the bridge deck and approach slabs that are to be overlaid with asphalt .
b .
qualifications .
num .
manufacturer representative .
provide the services of a manufacturers representative authorized to observe the installation of each membrane system including the asphalt concrete wearing course .
the manufacturers representative must be an employee of the membrane system manufacturer .
do not begin membrane work until the manufacturers representative is onsite and authorizes the work to begin .
follow the manufacturers written instructions when installing the spray membrane system as provided in this specification .
instruct the manufacturers representative to alert the contractor and the engineer of anything that could affect the performance of the spray waterproofing membrane or the warranty .
submit a daily written report that has been prepared by the manufacturers representative and details all membranerelated activities test results observations repairs postspray survey results tack coat timing issues and contaminated tack repairs .
submit the daily written report by the end of each day until the work is complete .
num .
applicator qualifications .
provide a manufacturerauthorized applicator .
applicators must be recertified annually by the manufacturer .
num .
submittals .
begin work no earlier than num week after the following items are approved a .
the manufacturer must provide independent laboratory test illustrating each components conformance to the physical property requirements listed in tables num num and num .
all testing must be current i.e .
conducted within the past num years .
b .
the manufacturers safety data sheet sds for each of the components .
c. the manufacturers current product data sheets and installation details for the product .
provide all membranes and primers from the same manufacturer .
d. two sample coupons numxnum that are representative of the finished membrane surface texture and color .
approved samples will serve as a basis for acceptance of the work for the duration of the contract .
e. service record showing that the membrane has a satisfactory record of at least num years before the date of submission for similar applications with names of specific structures and owner contact information .
f. list of projects similar in nature and complexity completed in the last num years .
num materials .
provide materials that meet the following requirements num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num precoated preformed membrane sheet type d system tapecoat mnum phillips petrotac polyguard nwnum or paveprep geotac penetrating water repellent type c system as follows a. precoated preformed membrane sheet type d. sand membrane protection blanket see num.b num .
tapecoat mnum .
num .
phillips petrotac .
num .
polyguard nwnum .
num .
paveprep geotac .
b. penetrating water repellent type c system .
provide penetrating water repellent that is an emulsion solution of silane siloxane or approved generic equivalent that when applied does not stain discolor darken the concrete surface or form a coating on concrete surfaces .
ensure the repellent material complies with the following minimum testing requirements num .
maximum water absorption .
a .
water immersion astm cnum .
b .
duration num hours .
c. maximum absorption num percent by weight .
num .
percent reduction of water weight gain .
a .
water immersionnum nacl nchrp rep. num series ii .
b .
duration num days .
c. minimum percent reduction of water weight gain versus control num percent .
num .
chloride ion penetration .
a .
test no .
num .
num chloride ion absorbed at num inch depth nchrp rep. numseries ii .
num duration num days .
num minimum percent reduction based on untreated num percent .
b .
test no .
num num chloride ion absorbed num inch depth nchrp rep num series iv .
num duration num weeks .
num minimum percent reduction based on untreated num percent .
num .
penetration depth department test num inch minimum .
num .
alberta transportation waterproofing test btnum .
a. waterproofing before sandblast num percent minimum .
b. waterproofing after sandblast num percent minimum .
use an independent testing laboratory for tests num num and num at no cost to the department .
submit certified laboratory reports for tests num num and num at least num calendar days before intended product application .
submit num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction a certification statement the sealer used has the same formulation as the material previously tested by laboratory reports .
tests num and num are the departments responsibility and may be waived based on previous testing or product acceptance by other states .
project samples may be taken to verify the certification .
c. sprayapplied waterproofing system type e system .
the coating system must be a sprayapplied num solids fastcure highbuild polymer system .
primer is required .
the membrane must pass astm cnum .
astm cnum must be conducted on the neat membrane and aggregated top coat .
num .
base membrane .
the thickness to be tested must be a minimum of num mils or the minimum thickness required to pass astm cnum .
the thickness used to pass the test must be the minimum thickness required for all field base membrane application .
num .
composite base membrane and aggregated top coat .
in addition to the base membrane the complete composite base membrane and aggregated top coat system must be subjected to astm cnum .
use part num above to determine minimum thickness of the base membrane .
the top coat material must be num to num mils with aggregate broadcast at a rate of num to num pounds per square foot to achieve a minimum num percent coverage rate .
num .
primer .
provide a multicomponent polymer primer that is fastsetting with the material properties shown in table num .
table num multicomponent primer physical property test method value gel time num minutes tackfree time max numf num hours mixing ratio per manufacturers written instructions adhesion to concrete astm dnum num psi num .
sprayapplied waterproofing membrane base coat .
provide a sprayapplied base membrane that is solventless fastsetting and num percent solids coating formulated to be used for applications requiring a seamless flexible waterproof abrasion and impact resistant surface that may be applied on multiple substrates in low temperature and high humidity .
the membrane must have the material properties specified in table num .
table num sprayapplied waterproofing membrane base membrane physical property test method value solids content num gel time num seconds cure time num seconds tackfree time num minutes shore hardness astm dnum numd water vapor transmission astm enum num perms wet cup adhesion to concrete astm dnum num psi tensile strength astm dnum num psi elongation at break astm dnum num crack bridging ability astm cnum pass num cycles num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num sprayapplied waterproofing membrane base membrane physical property test method value num mils neat num opening numf num cycles num .
sprayapplied waterproofing membrane aggregated top coat provide a sprayapplied top coat membrane that is num percent solids rapid curing and specially formulated to accept and hold broadcast aggregate with the material properties specified in table num .
table num sprayapplied waterproofing membrane aggregated top coat membrane physical property test method value solids content num gel time num seconds tackfree time num minutes open to traffic num hour shore hardness astm dnum numd tensile strength astm dnum num psi tear strength pli die c astm dnum num elongation at break astm dnum num at break crack bridging ability num mils neat num mils with aggregate num opening numf num cycles astm cnum pass num cycles num .
tack coat .
a. emulsified tack coat .
provide a tack coat that is a polymer modified emulsion that is a crsnump product .
b. manufacturerrecommended tack coat .
waterproofing manufacturer may recommend an alternative tack coat .
if an alternative tack coat is recommended waterproofing manufacturer must also provide test results from an independent aashtoaccredited laboratory illustrating that the proposed tack coat provides adequate shear and tensile adhesion between the waterproofing membrane and asphalt overlay .
num construction requirements .
a .
surface preparation .
for new construction clean dry fully cure and finish the concrete surface as specified in num.i.num .
sandblast new concrete surfaces where penetrating water repellent is to be applied .
the contractor may clean the surface with a hydroblast unit using water with a minimum nozzle pressure of num psi as an alternative to sandblasting .
for rehabilitation of a structure ensure the concrete surface to receive the membrane application is free from foreign materials sharp concrete edges are corrected to the engineers satisfaction and repairs and patches are fully cured .
sandblast the entire surface and the sides of curbs for a height of num inch above the thickness of the overlay before application of the membrane .
b .
system application requirements .
num .
type c application of penetrating water repellent system .
type c penetrating water repellent consists of a sealant which penetrates the deck surface and forms a water repellent layer within the concrete .
uniformly apply the penetrating water repellent material over surfaces to receive this treatment .
apply the penetrating water repellent compound on a completely cleaned and sandblasted surface .
ensure concrete moisture is as recommended by the manufacturer of the water repellent material .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction apply the repellent using equipment and application pressure recommended by the manufacturer .
treat bridge deck and horizontal surfaces using a spray bar system approved by the manufacturer .
apply and use the sealing penetrant in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions except do not apply the material when ambient or surface temperature is below num or above num f or when wind exceeds num mph .
on surfaces exposed to foot or vehicle traffic ensure the application rate is not lighter than that used to pass the alberta sandblast test .
on other surfaces the contractor may use the manufacturers normal recommended application rate .
num .
type d application of precoated preformed membrane sheet system .
type d precoated preformed membrane consists of prefabricated sheets which may be selfadhesive or may require a separate bonding agent .
apply precoated preformed membrane sheets to the surface receiving the membrane .
ensure application surface preparation and if required primer is in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
lap joints between sheets of the membrane at least num inches .
ensure the membrane sheet system does not have wrinkles .
num .
type e sprayapplied waterproofing system .
type e sprayapplied waterproofing system suitable for concrete or miscellaneous metal surfaces to prevent corrosion from soluble salts on the bridge deck and approach slabs that are to be overlaid with asphalt .
the manufacturers representative must be on the project site at all times and upon consultation with the engineer may suspend any item of work that does not meet this specification .
resume work only after the manufacturers representative and the engineer are satisfied that appropriate remedial action has been completed .
a .
quality assurance .
num provide membranes primers and under coats from the approved manufacturer supplying the principal materials for the work .
num before commencing the installation with engineers approval install a mutually agreed upon sample mockup to show final color and texture .
this mockup will serve as a work standard for the final installation .
b .
material delivery and storage .
store sufficient quantities of materials at the project site to perform the entire application before starting the deck surface preparation .
deliver materials to the project site in the manufacturers original unopened containers bearing manufacturers name product color and batch numbers .
include a sds with each product shipment .
store materials in a clean dry weatherprotected storage facility .
ensure the storage facility has a recording thermometer .
replace the materials at no cost to the department if the temperature exceeds the range of num f to num f. protect from damage moisture and direct sunlight .
do not store drums directly on the concrete substrate .
c. surface conditions and preparation .
ensure the environmental and project site conditions are suitable for application and curing of the waterproofing system .
ensure the temperature of the surface meets the temperature required by the manufacturer for all components of the waterproofing system to properly cure .
the surface temperature should be num f above the dew point temperature of the air and rising .
check dew point in accordance with astm enum or by num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num using an approved digital instrument .
inspect surfaces for contamination and other critical factors at the time of installation .
surfaces to receive the waterproofing system must be structurally sound and thoroughly dry .
do not proceed with installation until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected .
shot blast surfaces in accordance to astm dnum using selfcontained recirculating blast equipment .
clean surfaces must be free of any visible oil grease curing compounds or other surface contaminants .
if required perform cleaning process in accordance with astm dnum .
remove all unsound concrete .
patch holes or spalled areas with five star structural concrete rapid set dot mix or as recommended by the waterproofing manufacturer .
clean and repair the entire concrete deck approach slabs and sides of curbs for a height of num inches above the finished asphalt grade line .
d. installation .
the manufacturers representative must be on the project site at all times and upon consultation with the engineer may suspend any item of work that does not meet this specification .
resume work only after the manufacturers representative and the engineer are satisfied that appropriate remedial action has been taken .
concrete surfaces must be dry .
test surfaces to receive coating system using a concrete moisture meter .
moisture content of the concrete surface must be num percent or less .
spray squeegee brush or roll primer at num to num square feet per gallon or at the manufacturers written coverage rate over surfaces to receive coating system .
if an adequate chemical bond between the primer and membrane systems can not be achieved small size aggregate may be lightly broadcasted onto the primer to promote interlayer adhesion in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
allow primer to become tack free before spraying base waterproofing membrane .
reapply primer if allowed to set for more than num hours .
after becoming tack free test primed surface using elcometer adhesion testing in accordance with astm dnum .
minimum pull strength is num psi or failure in the concrete substrate .
apply the base membrane in accordance with the suppliers instructions and detail drawings to a total thickness of at least num mils num square feet per gallon or the thickness used to pass the astm cnum .
mechanical application equipment mae that makes automated spray passes and is proven for use with plural component deck membranes may be used .
if used mae must num be capable of installing membrane in a monolithic single layer .
num be capable of containing overspray when applicable .
num be capable of installing at least a num footwide pass .
num install the lap areas no greater than num percent of the diameter of the spray pattern .
num be capable of spraying num square feet an hour .
spray additional base coats to achieve the specified thickness .
retouch as required .
spray a second top coat membrane on top of the base coat at a thickness of num to num mils and immediately broadcast basalt aggregate at a rate of num to num pounds per square foot to achieve at least num percent coverage .
apply tack coat as directed by the manufacturers representative in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction place required asphalt overlay surfacing after membrane and tack coat have cured according to manufacturers written instructions .
deposit spread and roll asphalt material so the membrane is not damaged or compromised .
remove and dispose of waste materials rubbish and debris in accordance with local regulations .
clean adjacent surfaces of spillage or overspray if any .
leave work area in a clean condition .
e. field quality control .
the field quality control work will be completed by the waterproofing manufacturers onsite representative .
the representative must record all readings and test results .
complete a quality control daily report form and submit a copy to the engineer .
record environmental conditions readings at least once every num hours when ambient conditions significantly change or immediately before the contractor performs new tasks e.g .
before installing primer before installing base membrane whichever is more frequent .
perform dry film thickness tests of base membrane in accordance with sspcpanum or sspcpanum .
destructive or strokepergallon methods are also suitable methods of thickness assurance on most projects if approved by the engineer .
num if the onsite representative uses magnetic test equipment testing must be performed in accordance with sspcpanum .
num if onsite representative uses ultrasonic test equipment testing must be performed in accordance with sspcpanum .
num spray equipment is calibrated and tested to a stroke count per gallon of product sprayed .
this is suitable for thickness assurance on most projects if approved by the engineer .
num ultrasonic testing is usually accurate to within num percent .
num repair destructive areas by respraying or filling with special numcomponent gun grade material provided by manufacturer .
other system components may be tested for thickness using wet film or stroke per gallon methods .
perform tensile adhesion bond testing of the primer and base membrane in accordance with astm dnum .
on concrete surfaces the minimum adhesion value is num psi .
for the concrete on metal surfaces the minimum adhesion value is num psi .
the manufacturers onsite representative will perform visual inspections throughout the installation process .
holidays or other defects in the waterproofing membrane must be marked and repaired .
maintain spray and other installation equipment in proper operating condition throughout the installation .
provide reserve equipment as required .
f. manufacturer quality control .
spray two num inch by num inch samples of base membrane and top coat membranes once at the beginning of the day and once at the end of the day .
record the time and date product batch numbers and equipment processing settings .
samples must be sent to the manufacturers laboratory or a third party laboratory for physical property testing .
the physical properties of field samples must be in accordance with the material properties listed in table num and table num .
the manufacturer must submit a physical properties report to the engineer upon completion .
the manufacturer must provide certificates of analysis coa and infrared spectroscopy scans of all materials used .
the coas must illustrate conformance of each batch of liquid material to known manufacturing standards .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num g. limitation of operations .
obtain the engineers approval before performing work .
unless otherwise approved the following conditions govern work on each portion of a structure num ensure the environmental and project site conditions are suitable for application and curing of the waterproofing system .
num temperature of the surface should be at least num f above the dew point temperature of the air and rising .
check dew point in accordance with astm enum or by using an approved digital instrument .
num inspect surfaces for contamination and other critical factors at time of installation .
surfaces to receive waterproofing system must be structurally sound and thoroughly dry .
do not proceed with application until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected .
h. repair procedure .
if cores are taken to test the asphalt overlay and the membrane is damaged the following repair procedure must be followed num expose additional sound and wellbonded membrane up to a perimeter width of at least num inches beyond the periphery of the damaged area removing contaminates .
a if using a numinch hole saw to take the asphalt core use at least a numinch hole saw to expand the area of exposed membrane .
b if using a numinch hole saw to take the asphalt core use a numinch hole saw to expand the area of exposed membrane .
c when drilling a secondary core i .
measure the depth of the asphalt in at least num areas around the initial core .
ii .
drill the secondary core ¼ inch less than the lowest reading .
d remove the asphalt between the primary and secondary core using hand tools taking care not to damage the waterproofing membrane .
if using a chipping hammer exercise extreme caution .
num in the event the membrane becomes delaminated the area must be cut back to sound wellbonded materials .
num the surface of the exposed membrane must be cleaned of all loose dirt dust debris contaminates andor other deleterious material that could interfere with the adhesion of the repair membrane .
num existing asphalt tack coat and other difficult to remove contaminates must be completely removed using dry abrasive blast equipment hand tools or power tools .
num any exposed substrate must be prepared in accordance with sspcspnumnace no .
num for cementitious substrates or sspcspnum for steel substrates .
num wipe the exposed membrane with acetone using clean lintfree rags .
allow acetone to flash off .
num wipe the exposed membrane with a single component cleaner and surface activator specifically designed to reactivate the surface of bridge deck membranes using clean lint free rags .
num apply a waterproofing membrane patch coat or waterproofing membrane material in a continuous layer over the prepared substrate with at least a numinch overlap onto the existing sound membrane .
the final thickness of the repair material must be at least num mils .
allow to dry to the touch .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num apply an additional waterproofing membrane patch coat or waterproofing membrane top coat in a continuous layer over the newly installed membrane at a minimum thickness of num mils .
num immediately broadcast aggregate into the wet material to a final coverage rate of num percent .
num ensure the repair material is only applied to the prepared substrate and existing prepared membrane .
do not apply any repair material to the inside face of the asphalt .
num clean out any excess aggregate loosely adhered asphalt dirt dust debris or other deleterious material .
num the asphalt may be repaired using asphalt or other departmentapproved materials num hour after installation of the final coat .
num submit a repair procedure and proposed materials for approval before performing the work .
all required repairs must be performed by the waterproofing membrane installers .
c. protection and overlaying .
only use rubbertired vehicles necessary for construction of overlays on the completed membrane system .
do not allow public traffic .
the contractor may place a thin dusting coat of portland cement by hand to prevent paver or truck tires from sticking to the membrane during overlay work .
uniformly place num to num inches of sand over the membrane surface if a base aggregate or borrow course is to be placed on the waterproof membrane .
construct plant mix overlays as soon as practical after completing the membrane and as specified in num except the minimum plant mix temperature when compaction begins is num f. roll using steelwheel rollers with no vibration .
use special compactors or rollers to achieve adequate compaction adjacent to curbs or deck drains .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptable work by the square yard in place as determined from the plans and include horizontal and vertical surfaces .
the engineer will measure the placement of pavement overlays under their respective contract pay items .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit concrete waterproof system sy the department will pay for the placement of pavement overlays under their respective contract pay items .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num gabion structure num description .
construct gabion structure consisting of rockfilled wire gabion baskets .
gabion structure can be a concept design or a plan detailed design .
a .
concept design .
submit a detailed design of the gabion structure based on the information provided in the concept design .
submit a design in accordance with the latest version at the time of design of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications which is signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
construct as specified in the design .
num materials .
provide gabion materials as specified in num .
provide ripraperosion control geotextile as specified in num .
provide granular borrow as specified in num.b .
num construction requirements .
a .
preparation of foundation .
excavate the foundation materials for gabion structure to the lines and grades as specified .
where soft yielding material is encountered remove the material below the structure foundation to a depth of at least num feet or as directed .
ensure the width of the excavation is at least num foot greater than the bottom width of the gabion structure .
backfill the excavated area below the structure bottom with granular borrow and compact in layers not to exceed num inches in uncompacted depth to form a uniform and stable foundation .
repair slipouts caused by the contractors operations to the engineers satisfaction and at no additional cost to the department .
b .
assembly erection and filling gabion baskets .
submit a detailed stepbystep construction procedure prepared by the gabion structure manufacturer for approval num calendar days before the construction begins .
do not start the gabion structure construction until the submitted procedure is approved in writing .
c. backfilling the gabion structure .
backfill the area behind the gabion structure with granular borrow .
spread ripraperosion control geotextile uniformly at the bottom and over the back of the gabion structure if required .
overlap joining edges of the geotextile at least num foot and anchor in position with approved anchoring devices .
place the backfill material so the geotextile does not tear puncture or shift .
place the granular borrow backfill material in layers and compact until a uniform density of at least num percent of the maximum density is attained as determined by aashto t num method c. do not exceed num foot thickness before compaction .
decrease this lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard based on plan quantity .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit gabion structure cy the engineer will measure and the department will pay for structure excavation and compacting backfill as specified in num .
the engineer will measure and the department will pay for geotextile when used as specified in num .
backfill for the gabion structure is incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num predrilling for piling num description .
drill and backfill holes in soil and rock to allow piles to be driven to the highest pile tip elevations and minimum bearing capacities specified or as directed .
num materials .
provide temporary steel casings of sufficient strength to resist damage and deformation during installation extraction and all soil pressures on the casing .
coarse aggregate for concrete size no .
num num.c .
num construction requirements .
submit a work plan for predrilling at least num weeks before pile driving .
the work plan must include descriptions of the following num .
equipment .
num .
materials .
num .
sequence of operations including a .
removal or replacement of piles that do not reach the required penetration .
b .
measures to ensure stability during excavation and backfilling e.g .
prevention of caving and bottom heave .
c. hole cleanout methods .
d. coarse aggregate placement .
e. pulling temporary casing .
do not perform this work without approval of the work plan .
drill holes into soil or rock to the highest pile tip elevations specified and with a diameter that is at least num inches greater than the pile diagonal dimension of steel hpile or outside diameter of steel shell pile .
after drilling fill the hole to the top with coarse aggregate to make it ready for pile driving .
remove the temporary casing in accordance with the approved work plan during coarse aggregate placement maintaining the coarse aggregate top above the casing bottom .
fill any remaining voids with coarse aggregate after completing pile driving .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted work as follows pay item pay unit predrilling for piling in soil ft predrilling for piling in rock ft the department will not pay for predrilling that extends below the depth specified .
casing is incidental to this item .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num dynamic pile testing and capwap analysis num description .
retain a preapproved consultant to perform dynamic pile testing and signal matching analyses using the case pile wave analysis program capwap program as specified or as directed .
the engineer will use this information to confirm or modify piledriving criteria developed by the wave equation analysis for the planned hammerpilesoil combination .
num materials .
provide equipment for dynamic pile testing in accordance with the following high strain dynamic testing of piles astm dnum provide access to the pile in the leads with a personnel lift or basket that can be raised to the pile top or by other safe methods to attach instrumentation .
for access to the test pile on the ground provide at least num feet of clear access to opposite faces of the pile to allow drilling holes for instrumentation .
provide sufficient time for installing instrumentation on the pile in the leads .
short interruptions during driving may be necessary due to instrument malfunction .
num construction requirements testing .
a .
general .
perform dynamic pile testing on each test pile as specified or as directed .
if the required bearing capacity is not achieved during initial driving restrike the test pile as directed .
perform dynamic pile testing during the pile restrike .
perform a capwap analysis on the pile restrike data or as directed .
an additional dynamic pile test and capwap analysis will be required for each pile restrike performed .
b .
testing and reporting .
after each test the engineer will provide the following information to the contractors consultant num .
blows per foot of pile penetration .
num .
stroke heights for single acting hammers or blows per minute for other hammer types .
num .
preconstruction wave equation analyses results upon request .
the consultant will monitor the pile driving from the beginning to the end or as directed .
in addition the consultant will continuously monitor the test piles for potential damage and for the occurrence of nonaxial driving and inform the engineer and the contractor immediately if there is any indication that pile damage has occurred during driving .
the consultant will submit preliminary test results to the engineer and the contractor within num hours of the dynamic testing completion for each test pile and before leaving the project site .
the consultant will include the following information with the preliminary test results num .
energy transfer from the piledriving hammer to the pile emx or enthru and rated transfer efficiency .
num .
peak force fmx and stress csx at the pile dynamic analyzer pda sensor location near the pile top .
num .
ultimate pile bearing capacity computed in the field with a suitable case method calculation and preliminary test results using capwap analysis .
the consultant will sign and submit a final capwap analysis report containing the required information and the capwap analysis results to the engineer and the contractor within num working days after the tests completion for each project site visit .
the report must include information on the test pile soil conditions pile driving hammer field test results including hammer stroke and blow counts and capwap analysis with any comments that the consultant may have on the results .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction before submitting the report the consultant will send the engineer and the contractor the capwap analysis results by telephone fax or email as soon as possible .
the engineer may request more than num capwap analysis per dynamic pile test .
schedule additional site visits for dynamic pile testing as requested by the engineer .
retain only the following department preapproved consultants for performing the dynamic pile testing and capwap analyses preapproved consultant information company address phone number pda engineering po box num salt lake city ut num num grl engineers inc. num se numth st maple valley wa num num geodesign inc. num sw sequoia pkwy ste num portland or num num sk geotechnical num gabel rd billings mt num num intermountain geoenvironmental services iges inc. num commerce dr salt lake city ut num num strata num w hackamore dr boise id num num garrett way ste c pocatello id num w num prairie ave ste num coeur dalene id num num num num lachel associates num christensen rd ste num tukwila wa num num gerhart cole inc. num e. num s ste num draper ut num num robert miner dynamic testing inc. po box num num colchester dr east manchester wa num num num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by each test and each capwap analysis .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit dynamic pile testing each capwap analysis each the department considers standby time for consultants contractor personnel or equipment due to scheduling errors instrument malfunction or equipment breakdowns to be incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num controlled density fill cdf num description .
furnish all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to provide load haul place and consolidate the controlled density fill cdf to the lines and grades specified .
num materials .
provide cdf using concrete aggregates fly ash cement and water .
guideline mix proportions are presented below portland cement astm c num or aashto m num fly ash class f or class c aggregates astm c num water potable admixtures aashto m num or astm c num or astm c num ensure cdf mixture meets the acceptable properties in table num .
table num cdf mixture properties cdf mix property minimum numday compressive strength psi num maximum numday compressive strength psi num maximum gallons of mixing water per cubic yard num pounds of cement per cubic yard approximate num pounds of fly ash per cubic yard approximate num pounds of dry aggregate per cubic yard approximate an assumed specific gravity of num num slump inches num num submit the cdf mix design with the backup data for approval .
do not install cdf until after the cdf mix design has been approved .
provide a mix design from an approved laboratory .
provide cdf verification test results from num compressive strength testing cylinders .
num construction requirements .
batch transport and place cdf as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
cdf will be measured by the cubic yard .
measurement will be based upon batch delivery tickets submitted at the time of placement .
num basis of payment .
payment for the accepted work will be as follows pay item pay unit controlled density fill cy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num polyester polymer concrete ppc overlay num description .
a .
general .
provide a polyester polymer concrete ppc overlay system on the prepared concrete surface as specified .
the overlay system is defined as the furnished material necessary to complete the ppc overlay including high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm resin primer ppc resin binder combined aggregate and abrasive finish sand .
prepare the surface by shot blasting .
b. submittals .
do not begin the deck preparation operations or begin placing ppc until receiving engineer approval .
submit the following items for approval num .
overlay placement plan .
submit an overlay placement plan that includes the following a .
schedule of overlay work and testing for each bridge .
b .
anticipated concrete deck repair locations and repair method .
c. staging plan describing overlay placement sequence including num construction joint locations .
construct longitudinal joints between passes along the centerline or edge of travel lanes .
num sequence of placement .
num placement widths .
num anticipated placement lengths .
num placement direction .
num joint work .
num location of proposed trial overlays .
d. description of equipment and method for num surface preparation including grinding andor shot blasting .
num the method and materials used to blow contain collect and dispose of concrete debris generated by the deck preparation process including provisions for protecting adjacent traffic from flying debris .
num mixing and applying hmwm resin primer .
num measuring mixing placing and finishing the ppc .
num applying surface finish sand .
e. the method and materials used to contain hmwm resin and ppc components within the deck area receiving the overlay including protecting and finishing inlets bridge drains and expansion joints .
f. the method materials and equipment used to protect clean isolate and replace expansion joints .
g. method for measuring and maintaining overlay thickness and profile .
h. cure time for ppc .
i .
storage and handling of hmwm resin and ppc components .
j .
procedure for disposal of excess hmwm resin ppc and containers .
k. procedure for cleanup of mixing and placement equipment .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
overlay system .
submit copies of the system providers material and polyester mix design information written installation instructions safety data sheets independent test results and certificate of compliance for approval .
num .
system provider qualifications .
install an overlay system with all components provided through a single system provider with documented experience successfully supplying at least num ppc overlay projects of similar size and scope within the past num years .
submit documentation of the system providers project experience including the following a .
the name of the system provider of the ppc overlay system materials including the name and phone number of the system providers technical representative .
b .
project location .
c. owner agency .
d. project construction dates .
e. overlay quantities .
num .
contractor qualifications .
see num.b for contractor qualification requirements .
num .
mixing equipment .
submit documentation verifying the mixing equipment is calibrated caltrans california test ct num or similar accepted .
num materials .
a. primer .
apply a waxfree low odor hmwm prime coat consisting of a resin initiator and promoter to the prepared surface .
ensure hmwm resin complies with the following requirements table num property requirement test method volatile content a num maximum astm dnum viscositya num pas numcps maximum brookfield rvt with ul adaptor num rpm at num f num rpm astm dnum specific gravity a num minimum at num f astm dnum flash point a num f minimum astm dnum vapor pressure a num mm hg maximum at num f astm dnum tackfree time num minutes maximum at num f astm cnum a perform test before adding initiator .
ensure the prime coat promoterinitiator system for the methacrylate resin consists of a metal drier and peroxide .
if supplied separately from the resin do not mix the metal drier with the peroxide directly or a violent exothermic reaction will occur .
do not store contaminated materials e.g .
containers measuring devices rags in a manner that allows leakage spillage or other contact of these materials with the other .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b. polyester resin binder .
the polyester concrete consists of polyester resin binder and dry aggregate .
ensure the resin is an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer and complies with the following requirements table num property requirement test method viscosity a num to num pas num to num cps rvt no .
num spindle num rpm at num f astm dnum specific gravity a num to num at num f astm dnum elongation num minimum type i at nummin .
thickness num num astm dnum sample conditioning num hoursnumfnum num hoursnum f astm dnum tensile strength num psi minimum type i at nummin .
thickness num num astm dnum sample conditioning num hoursnumfnum num hoursnum f astm dnum styrene content a num to num by weight astm dnum silane coupler num minimum by weight of polyesterstyrene resin nmr a perform test before adding initiator .
the silane coupler must be an organosilane ester gammamethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane .
the promoter must be compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide mekp and cumene hydroperoxide chp initiators .
c. combined aggregate .
ensure the aggregate for polyester concrete complies with one of the following combined aggregate gradings table num sieve size percent passing ⅜ max .
no .
num max .
½ num num ⅜ num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num ensure that aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve has a maximum of num percent crushed particles when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the mohs scale hardness is at least num and fine aggregate consists of natural sand only .
ensure that the combined aggregate absorption does not exceed num percent as determined by aashto t num and t num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction at the time of mixing with the polyester resin binder ensure that the moisture content of the aggregate as determined by aashto t num does not exceed ½ of the aggregate absorption .
d. ppc composite .
testing must be performed by an independent testing laboratory .
the following tests are required to verify ppc composite properties .
table num property requirement test method ssd bond strengtha with a hmwm primed surface num psi minimum at num hours and num f california test num ssd bond strengtha with an unprimed surface num psi minimum at num hours and num f california test num abrasion resistance num grams weight loss maximum california test num a perform test at num resin content .
for ssd bond strength test num sample each of the composite material with and without prime coat to be used during overlay construction .
submit a representative sample to the testing laboratory and submit test results to the engineer at least num calendar days before work begins .
this requirement may be waived if historical laboratory data shows consistency of testing results from the same mix design .
e. sand for abrasive finish .
the sand for abrasive finish must comply with the following gradation table num sieve size percent passing no .
num num num no .
num num num ensure that the sand for abrasive finish is commercialquality blast sand .
ensure that absorption does not exceed num percent as determined by aashto t num and t num .
f. certification of materials .
submit from the system provider a certificate of compliance stating that the materials meet the requirements listed in tables num num num num num .
ensure the system providers certificate of compliance states that the hmwm resin is compatible with the polyester resin binder .
submit test reports from the independent testing laboratory verifying that the test requirements in table num have been met .
submit the certificate of compliance and test reports at the time of the mix design review .
g. storing and handling .
deliver materials in their original containers bearing the system providers label specifying date of manufacturing batch number trade name brand quantity and mixing ratio .
accompany each shipment of polyester resin binder and hmwm resin with a sds .
store the material to prevent damage by the weather and to ensure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
keep the storage space clean and dry and provide a highlow thermometer .
the temperatures of the storage space must not fall below or rise above the system provider written instructions .
take every precaution to avoid contact with flame .
inspect stored materials before use and ensure compliance with these requirements at the time of use .
immediately replace rejected material at no cost to the department .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num store a sufficient amount of material to perform the entire ppc overlay application at each location before starting any deck preparation to avoid delay in procuring the materials for each days application .
issue appropriate protection equipment to personnel working with the polyester concrete .
appropriate impermeable protective garments must be used by workers who may contact the resin or initiators .
immediately wash off the resins or initiators if skin contact occurs .
immediately remove clothing that becomes saturated with resin .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
the polyester overlay system provider must have a representative on the project site at all times to consult with the engineer and the contractor regarding work that does not meet this specification .
the engineer may suspend any item of work that does not meet this specification .
resume suspended work only after the engineer is satisfied that appropriate remedial action has been completed .
work will not be allowed to proceed and materials will not be accepted if the system providers technical representative is not onsite .
the system provider of the ppc overlay resin binder and hmwm resin will furnish technical service relating to the application of material and health and safety training for personnel who are to handle the ppc overlay and the hmwm resin prime coat .
hold a preplacement conference before any overlay operations begin .
attendees must include representatives from all parties involved in the work .
if necessary teleconferencing of attendees may be approved .
b .
contractor qualification and trial overlay .
the ppc overlay company must meet one of the two requirements below num .
experience .
the ppc overlay company must provide a project reference list of at least num successful ppc overlay projects with a num cubic yards minimum ppc quantity completed within the last num years and that use the same ppc overlay system and materials as specified in this contract .
provide the name and location of each project quantity of overlay placed the project contracting agency and the name and current phone number of the contracting agencys contact person .
onsite supervisors and personnel operating the mobile mixer and finishing machines must have equivalent work experience in mixing and placing ppc overlay as the contractor .
provide documentation of project experience with ppc overlay including the name and location of the project the project contracting agency the quantity of overlay placed and the name and current phone number of the contracting agencys contact person .
the engineer may suspend the overlay work if the contractor substitutes unapproved personnel .
additional costs resulting from suspension of work due to the changing of personnel is the contractors responsibility and adjustment in contract time will not be allowed .
a .
trial overlay .
place a trial overlay of ppc using engineerapproved equipment and procedures .
follow the construction requirements sections as specified in num.a through num.g .
notify the engineer of the time and location of the trial overlay at least num calendar days before the scheduled trial overlay .
select a location and place the trial overlay on a previously cast and cured concrete pad i.e .
not on the bridge receiving the ppc overlay .
the minimum plan dimensions of the concrete pad and the trial overlay are num feet in width and num feet in length .
provide a trial overlay at the same thickness as the project overlay .
perform num pulloff tests on the trial overlay in accordance with astm cnum .
the pulloff tests must have minimum tensile bond strength of num psi or a failure area at a depth of ⅛ inch or more into the base concrete of no greater than num percent of the test area .
record the pulloff test results num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction and failure value into the base concrete and provide written documentation of the test results .
the engineer will designate the location of the pulloff tests .
the engineer will accept the trial overlay after completing the following num specified surface preparation .
num proper sequence of ppc overlay placement .
num submittal of mixing readouts at proper mix ratios at required intervals .
num passing values for all specified tests .
after receiving approval of the completed trial overlay the concrete pad and trial overlay becomes the contractors property .
remove and dispose of material as specified in num .
the engineer must approve the completed trial overlay before beginning any surface preparation operations at the project site .
num .
no experience .
if the ppc overlay company does not have the required previous ppc overlay experience outlined in num.b.num they must demonstrate competence with the process and material with a trial overlay as described below .
a .
trial overlay .
meet all the requirements for a trial overlay given in num.b.num and the following additional requirements num prepare the concrete surface and demonstrate to the engineer that the final surface texture of the trial overlay meets the international concrete repair institute icri concrete surface profile numbers num through num .
num record the aggregate and resin volumes at no greater than numminute intervals during the trial overlay placement .
after placing the trial overlay submit to the engineer a printout of the recordings .
num test num sample of the trial ppc overlay for compressive strength .
follow the testing requirements for compressive strength in aashto t num .
num test num sample of the trial ppc overlay for consolidation to a relative compaction of at least num percent .
follow the testing requirements in california test num .
num demonstrate to the engineer how the minimum overlay thickness has been achieved and maintained through the length of the trial overlay .
num demonstrate to the engineer how the finish sand is applied and how the specified application rate is achieved .
num demonstrate to the engineer how a minimum of num psi compressive strength of the trial overlay has been verified using the rebound number determined in accordance with astm cnum .
num perform num pulloff tests on the trial overlay in accordance with the requirements of num.b.num .
num the engineer will accept the trial overlay after completing the following a specified surface preparation .
b proper sequence of ppc overlay placement .
c submittal of mixing readouts at proper mix ratios at required intervals .
d passing values for all specified tests .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num after receiving approval of the completed trial overlay the concrete pad and trial overlay becomes the contractors property .
remove and dispose of material as specified in num .
the engineer must approve the completed trial overlay before beginning any surface preparation operations at the project site .
c. equipment .
num .
shot blasting machine .
use a shot blasting machine to obtain the specified surface texture on the concrete surfaces receiving the ppc overlay .
the use of a rotary milling or hydrodemolition machines will not be allowed .
provide a shot blasting machine that consists of a selfcontained mobile unit using steel abrasive to texture the sound concrete to achieve the specified surface profile .
provide a machine that is capable of blasting a minimum width of num feet per pass .
the shot blasting machine must vacuum and store all material removed from the blasted concrete surface into a selfcontained unit .
num .
mobile mixer for ppc .
mix polyester concrete in a continuous volumetric mixer with an auger screwchute device .
calibrate the mixer to automatically proportion and blend components of the specified mix on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation and discharge mixed material directly into the finishing machine .
equip the continuous mixer with a metering device that automatically measures and records the aggregate volumes and the corresponding resin volumes .
ensure that the metering device has a readout display gauge visible at all times and can print the recorded volumes for each material .
num .
finishing machine .
furnish slipform finishing equipment for the placement of ppc overlay with an automatic grade control device to strike off the ppc mixture to the established grade and crosssection .
fit the finishing equipment with vibrators or other means of consolidating the ppc .
the slip form finisher must be able to move forward and backward under its own control e.g .
an allen slip form paver which is controlled by string line or ski .
any ppc overlay placement method that can not use a slip form paver must be addressed in the overlay placement plan and be approved .
d. surface preparation .
repair minor potholes and delamination in the deck surface by removing the damaged concrete and patching with an engineerapproved patching material before installation of the overlay .
strike off patches so they are level with the existing deck using common concretefinishing tools .
ppc is an approved patching material .
all cementitious substrates require submittal and approval before use .
cementitious patching materials require a minimum curing period of num days before application of the overlay .
before placing the overlay obliterate all pavement markings and thoroughly texture the entire concrete deck by steel shot blasting to ensure proper bonding between the overlay and the concrete substrate .
achieve final surface texture meeting concrete surface profile numbers num through num as defined in icri guideline no .
num and as shown by surface profile samples available from icri or astm enum pavement macrotexture depth of num to num inch .
shot blasting is meant to expose the coarse aggregate .
the prepared surface must be free of asphalt material oil dirt rubber curing compounds paint carbonation laitance weak surface mortar and other potentially detrimental material which may interfere with the bonding or curing of the overlay .
remove and repair loosely bonded patches .
thoroughly clean the concrete surface and expansion joints of dust and debris adhering to it by blowing off with moisture and oilfree compressed air .
after completion of the initial compressed air removal blow the surface again to remove any residual dust .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction e. mixing ppc .
mix ppc in mobile mixers as specified and in accordance with the approved mix design .
use calibration checks on the aggregate resin and initiator to verify the mix will produce ratios and be placed within the ranges established in the mix design .
the polyester resin binder in the ppc must be num percent plus or minus num percent by weight of the dry aggregate .
provide a sufficient amount of initiator used in polyester concrete to produce an initial set time between num and num minutes .
the set time can be determined in the field when the inplace ppc overlay can not be deformed by pressing with a finger indicating that the resin binder is no longer in a liquid state .
if the initial set time is not within num to num minutes remove and replace the material .
accelerators or inhibitors may be required to achieve proper set times and will be used as recommended by the polyester resin binder system provider and as approved .
record the aggregate and resin volumes at no greater than numminute intervals along with the date of each recording .
print out the recordings along with the dimensions of placed ppc overlay at the end of each work shift .
prevent cleaning chemicals from reaching the polyester concrete mix during mixing operations .
f. placement of ppc .
do not begin applying the hmwm prime coat and the ppc overlay if rain is expected .
the prime coat area must be dry and received no rain for at least num hours .
immediately before applying the prime coat blow the receiving surface according to num.d .
the concrete bridge deck surface temperature must be between num f and num f and the relative humidity must be less than num percent when the prime coat is applied .
the prepared concrete surface will receive num coat of hmwm resin primer .
saturate the deck surface with promotedinitiated hmwm and push excess resin primer forward to ensure uniform primer coverage and penetration of the area to receiving the polyester concrete .
if the primed surface becomes contaminated remove the contaminated area by abrasive blasting and reprime at no additional cost to the department .
cure the prime coat for at least num minutes before placing the ppc overlay .
cover the hmwm prime coat with the ppc overlay within num hours of placing the prime coat .
place ppc before gelling and within num minutes following initiation whichever occurs first .
discard ppc that is not placed within this time .
if the ppc is not placed over the prime coat within num hours suspend work and propose remedial action .
under no circumstances will any hmwm resin primer or ppc be allowed to run into drains and expansion joints or otherwise escape the collection and containment system .
isolate andor blockout expansion joints before placing the overlay as specified or directed .
the surface temperature of the area receiving the ppc overlay and the relative humidity must be the same as specified for the hmwm prime coat .
consolidate the ppc overlay to a relative compaction of no less than num percent in conformance with california test num .
g. finishing ppc .
using the engineerapproved finishing machine strike off the ppc to the established grade and crosssection and consolidate to the required compaction .
as the finishing machine progresses along the pour give the surface a final finish by texturing with a comb of spring steel tines pulled parallel to the centerline of the bridge .
the texture may be applied by finishing machinemounted tines or manually .
if machineapplied mount the tines to the machine at a point immediately behind the extruded overlay .
equip the comb so that it is adjustable to ensure proper depth longitudinally and transversely .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the comb must consist of a single row of metal tines capable of producing ⅛ inch wide striations approximately num inch in depth at approximately num inch spacing .
perform this operation in a manner that will minimize the displacement of the aggregate particles .
terminate the texture within num feet of the curb line .
ensure that the ppc overlay receives an abrasive sand finish .
apply the sand finish before gelling occurs before hand tining or immediately after pavermounted tining .
uniformly broadcast at approximately num pounds per square yard of sand onto the surface .
some areas may require finishing by hand tools e.g .
termination edges .
follow hand finishing with surface texturing and broadcast sand finish while the overlay is still wet .
the engineer will determine acceptable surface smoothness in accordance with idaho t num immediately after the overlay has hardened .
acceptable surface will not vary more than ¼ inch num feet from the lower edge of the straightedge and num percent of the readings must not exceed num inch in num feet .
grind unaccepted surfaces at no additional cost to the department .
grind surfaces until smoothness requirements are met and according to the following requirements num .
grind the specified bridge deck areas in the longitudinal direction .
equip the grinding equipment with diamondtipped saw blades mounted on a powerdriven selfpropelled machine that is specifically designed to texture concrete surfaces .
num .
equip the grinding equipment with a blade spacing that provides grooves as close as possible to match the spacing provided by the texturing comb .
provide grooves that are between num and num inches wide .
num .
ensure that the grinding procedure does not damage the existing bridge deck .
rotary milling machines are not allowed .
num .
demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction the method and equipment for grinding the ppc overlay are adequate for the intended purpose and will provide satisfactory results .
num .
do not commence removal without approval of the grinding equipment .
contain collect and dispose of debris generated by the grinding operation .
before opening the overlay area to vehicular traffic power sweep the finished overlay to remove excess or loose aggregate and abrasive sand .
demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction the power broom equipment will not damage the finished overlay .
repair any damage to the finished overlay caused by the power broom at no additional cost to the department .
h. testing ppc .
testing for compressive strength bond pullout strength and relative compaction must be performed by an independent testing laboratory .
test the placed ppc overlay as described below .
polyester concrete composite testing property requirement test method cure compressive strength for opening to traffic num psi min before opening to traffic astm cnum compressive strength num by num or num by num cylinders are acceptable every num cy placed num psi at num days aashto t num bond pullout strength every num cy placed num psi min or substrate failure whichever occurs first astm cnum relative compaction num per days placement num min california test num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
cure .
traffic and equipment is not permitted on the ppc overlay for at least num hours after finishing and not until the overlay has reached a minimum compressive strength of num psi as verified by the rebound number in accordance with astm cnum .
protect the ppc overlay from moisture until traffic and equipment is permitted .
cure time depends upon the ambient and deck temperatures as well as initiatoraccelerator levels .
remove and replace areas in the polyester concrete that do not fully cure or that fail to attain the minimum compressive strength as verified by the rebound number in num hours with new ppc overlay material at no additional cost to the department .
num .
compressive strength .
test num sample for each num cubic yards of ppc overlay placed during overlay construction .
record the date and location for each num cubic yards represented .
num .
bond pullout strength .
test num location corresponding to each num cubic yards of ppc overlay placed during overlay construction .
record the date and location for each num cubic yards represented .
num .
relative compaction .
test num sample for each shifts placement of ppc overlay construction .
record the date or and location for each shift represented .
num .
remove and replace .
remove and replace areas in the ppc overlay that correspond to failed test for compressive strength bond pullout strength and relative compaction at no additional cost to the department .
i .
checking ppc for bond .
after the requirements for curing have been met use a chain drag or other appropriate tool or device in the engineers presence to determine if any unbonded areas exist between the new overlay and the mating concrete surface .
remove and replace ppc in unbonded areas with ppc at no additional cost to the department .
j .
checking ppc for thickness .
the department may perform random checks of ppc overlay thickness .
remove and replace areas found deficient at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure accepted prepare and place ppc overlay work by the square yard .
the engineer will measure accepted furnished ppc overlay material by the cubic yard as recorded by ppc proportioning printouts .
the engineer will correct proportioning printout quantities for unacceptable material or excess waste .
all surface preparation is considered incidental .
the trial overlay is considered incidental .
expect minor surface irregularities on the prepared deck surface to receive ppc overlay .
ensure a minimum ¾ inch overlay depth .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit prepared placed ppc overlay sy furnished ppc overlay material cy payment for prepared and placed ppc overlay will be made on plan quantity as specified in numb .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num payment for furnished ppc overlay material will be calculated on a per shift basis from the contractorsubmitted ppc proportioning printouts and placement dimensions .
any ppc overlay material placed exceeding the contract quantity will be paid for at ½ the unit price for furnished ppc overlay material .
obliteration of pavement markings is incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num epoxy overlay num description .
prepare and apply an epoxy and aggregate overlay on the concrete bridge deck surface area between the curb faces and from the beginning to the end of the bridge as specified .
submit the following a .
submit the name and phone number of the epoxy material manufacturers technical representative at the preconstruction meeting .
b .
at least num calendar days before the epoxy overlay placement submit num .
the epoxy materials manufacturers written mixing instructions safety data sheets independent test results and a certificate of compliance stating the epoxy materials meet the requirements listed in table num .
num .
independent test results and a certificate of compliance stating the aggregates meet the requirements listed below in tables num and num and that it is compatible with the epoxy material .
num materials .
provide an epoxy resin base and hardener that is a modified type iii twocomponent system that meets the requirements of astm cnum grade num classes b and c. store the epoxy in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
ensure epoxy properties meet table num table num epoxy requirements property requirement test method gel time num to num astm cnum paragraph num modified tensile strength neat num psi to num psi at num days astm dnum tensile elongation neat num to num at num days astm dnum viscosity num to num poises astm dnum brookfield rvt spindle no .
num at num rpm minimum compressive strength at num hours num psi at num f astm cnum modified with plastic inserts mixed with aggregate minimum compressive strength at num hours num psi at num f astm cnum modified with plastic inserts mixed with aggregate minimum adhesion strength at num hours num psi at num f aci numr appendix a vtm num permeability to chloride ion at num days num coulombs maximum aashto t num pack materials in puncture rupture and leak proof containers .
label each container as part a or part b and clearly mark the name and address of the manufacturer name of the product mixing proportions and instructions lot and batch numbers date of manufacture and quantity .
provide aggregate topping that is clean dry and free from deleterious matter .
ensure the aggregate is compatible with the epoxy material .
furnish aggregates in appropriate packaging that is clearly labeled i.e .
showing the name of the manufacturer and location of processing and protects the aggregate from contaminates rain and other moisture .
provide aggregate that meet the requirements of tables num and num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num aggregate requirements properties test method specifications color buff or grey surface friction using british pendulum tester aashto t num or astm enum num bpn minimum resistance to degradation la abrasion test aashto t num num maximum aashto t num c grading on parent aggregate num maximum moisture content aashto t num num maximum aluminum oxide astm cnum num minimum mohs scale hardness num minimum table num aggregate gradation aashto t num sieve size total percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num construction requirements .
ensure the epoxy overlay manufacturers representative is on the project site at all times and who upon consultation with the engineer may suspend work items that do not meet specification requirements .
work may resume only after taking appropriate remedial action to satisfy the manufacturers representative and the engineer .
plan and perform the work to allocate the specified minimum curing periods or other longer curing periods prescribed by the manufacturer before opening to public or construction traffic .
a .
equipment .
for mechanical applications provide equipment with a minimum of an epoxy distribution system aggregate spreader application squeegee moisture and oilfree compressed air and a source of lighting if work will be performed at night .
ensure the epoxy distribution system accurately blends the epoxy materials in accordance with the manufacturers written specifications and distributes epoxy at the specified application rates to cover num percent of the work area .
propel aggregate spreader to uniformly and accurately apply the aggregate .
for manual applications provide equipment with calibrated containers for measuring epoxy volumes a paddletype mixer squeegees shovels and brooms that are suitable for mixing the epoxy and applying the epoxy and aggregate at the specified application rates .
b .
preparation of concrete surfaces .
repair minor potholes and delamination in the deck surface by removing the damaged concrete and patching with an engineerapproved cementitious patching material before installation of the overlay .
epoxy overlay material is an acceptable patching material .
strike off patches so they are level with the existing deck and finish with wooden floats .
portland cement concrete patches require a minimum cure period of num calendar days before application of the overlay .
before placing the overlay obliterate all pavement markings and thoroughly clean the entire concrete deck by steel shot blasting to ensure proper bonding between the epoxy and the concrete substrate .
achieve a final surface texture meeting numbers num through num as defined in icri guideline no .
num and as shown by surface profile samples available from icri or astm enum pavement macrotexture depth of num to num inches .
shot blasting is meant to expose the coarse aggregate and ensure the surface is cleaned of asphalt material oil dirt rubber curing compounds paint carbonation laitance weak surface mortar and other potentially detrimental materials which may interfere with the bonding or curing of the overlay .
remove and repair loosely bonded patches and remove traffic num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction marking lines .
use moisture and oilfree compressed air or high volume leaf blowers to remove dust that adheres to the prepared surface .
in order to determine the adequacy of the surface preparation perform at least num bond test per lane of each bridge .
for each test apply palmsized patties of binder aggregate ¼ to num inch thick at num locations .
after the samples have cured remove the patties with a hammer and chisel to examine the fracture and delamination plane .
verify concrete with fractured aggregate has attached to the entire underside of the patty .
if only lattice or small particles of concrete are attached further deck preparation is required .
c. overlay application .
handle and mix the epoxy resin and hardening agent in a safe manner to achieve the desired results in accordance with the specifications and the manufacturers written instructions .
only apply epoxy overlay materials when weather or surface conditions allow the material to be properly handled placed and cured within the specified requirements for project sequencing traffic control or when rain is imminent within the manufacturers recommended cure times .
completely dry the prepared surface when applying epoxy .
the engineer may allow moisture and oilfree heat sources or torches to dry the surface .
ensure the temperature of the deck surface epoxy and aggregate components are at least num f and rising at the time of application .
do not apply epoxy if the gel time is less than num minutes or if pavement temperatures exceed num f. in situations where road closures are not under strict time constraints obtain the engineers approval to apply epoxy at lower temperatures .
apply the epoxy overlay and aggregate using a double pass method .
the double pass method applies the epoxy and aggregate in num separate layers at the corresponding application rates specified in table num .
table num double pass method epoxy aggregate application rates double pass method epoxy rate galydnum aggregate lbydnum a numst course at least num num numnd course at least num num a application of aggregate must be of sufficient quantity to completely cover the epoxy .
mix the epoxy at a volume ratio of num part a to num part b and mechanically stir with a paddletype mixer for num minutes or according to the epoxy manufacturers written instructions .
after the epoxy has been properly mixed immediately and uniformly apply to the pavement surface with a ³num to ¼ inch vnotched squeegee .
apply the aggregate to cover the epoxy material while the epoxy is still fluid .
remove and replace first course applications that do not receive enough aggregate before gelling .
ensure each course of epoxy overlay cures before removing the excess unbonded aggregate to prevent tearing or damaging of the surface .
use moisture and oilfree compressed air highvolume leaf blowers or vacuum broom to remove excess aggregate .
after loose aggregate is removed remove remaining dust using moisture and oilfree compressed air highvolume leaf blowers or vacuum broom .
obtain the engineers approval before opening the first course to traffic .
begin application of the second course only after removing dust .
the department prohibits traffic on the overlay until it has cured sufficiently to prevent damage from wheel loads as specified in table num .
table num typical curing times average temperature of deck epoxy and aggregate components in f course num num num num num above num a num num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr num num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr less than num hr a refer to manufacturers written instructions num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num apply the second course at the rates specified in table num .
apply epoxy to ensure the wet epoxy does not coat the wear top surface of the aggregate .
once the epoxy is cured remove loose aggregate from the surface with moisture and oilfree compressed air high volume leaf blowers or vacuum broom .
after removing loose aggregate if there are any areas where epoxy has coated the top surface stone remove the excess epoxy using a light shot or sandblast .
protect the bridge deck expansion joints with a bond breaker e.g .
duct tape that can adequately seal the joints from the epoxy .
the contractor may also use duct tape to delineate application areas .
the department recommends taped areas or bond breakers be removed before epoxy starts to harden .
the contractor may also remove epoxy by scoring the overlay before gelling or by saw cutting after cure .
feather the overlay out at the end of the bridge or approach slab and at expansion joints edge of armor angle per the manufacturers written instructions .
if the contractors operations or actions damage or mar the overlay remove the damaged areas and reapply the overlay to the engineers satisfaction .
in the event that part of the epoxy mixture does not cure completely remove the overlay from the affected area and discard .
completely remove residual epoxy remaining on the pavement by mechanical means e.g .
steel shot abrasive blasting or scarifying before reapplying the overlay .
maintain and provide records for each batch provided including num .
number of batches mixed and volume per batch .
num .
location of batches as placed on deck referenced by stations .
num .
batch time .
num .
gel time num milliliter sample .
num .
temperature of the air deck surface and epoxy components .
num .
loose aggregate removal time .
num .
time open to traffic .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square foot of deck surface .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit epoxy overlay sf surface preparation including obliteration of pavement markings is incidental .
patch and repair of concrete will be paid under num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num dewatering foundation num description .
provide install maintain and remove dewatering system necessary for removing andor diverting water around foundations to allow excavation pile installation construction of footings columns and riprap placement as specified or as directed .
water removal may be accomplished by draining pumping bailing stream diversion construction of cribbing or cofferdams .
earthen cofferdams are not permitted .
a. submittals .
num .
submit the materials installation maintenance and removal information of the dewatering system for approval as specified in num .
submit a dewatering plan including drawings and written descriptions of the proposed procedures for dewatering pumping and disposal of fluidized materials .
num .
design temporary retaining structures that meet the most recent aashto guide specifications for bridge temporary works .
calculations for the proposed configuration of the dewatering system must be signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
secure and comply with all permits and idaho department of water resources requirements for this work as specified in num .
meet the environmental protection requirements as specified in num .
construct as specified in num and num .
select and design a dewatering system that isolates anticipated stream flows from construction areas .
ensure the dewatering method will accommodate seal concrete placement to the elevations specified .
vent cofferdam walls to prevent excessive hydrostatic pressure from developing below the seal concrete during probable flooding at the time of construction .
any suspended sediment and turbidity resulting from streambed dewatering activities must not violate applicable in stream turbidity criteria .
once the dewatering system is installed instream turbidity levels must not exceed ambient background water quality for the duration of use .
all sediment and erosion control measures must be in place before the commencement of the dewatering system construction .
maintain a safe clean and accessible project site and repair any damage caused by failure of the dewatering system .
provide adequate clearances in all directions as required for the execution of the work to be performed in the dewatered area .
this must include room for the dewatering pumps installation and removal operations .
a. seal concrete .
place seal concrete within the dewatered area at the pier after pile driving is completed and accepted .
place seal concrete as specified in the applicable provisions of num .
before dewatering cure the seal concrete at least num calendar days and until concrete reaches minimum compressive strength of num psi .
b. dewatering .
after the dewatering system is in place and has been adequately sealed and before any other in stream construction activities have started the water behind the instream barrier may be pumped directly back into the stream if the pumped water meets applicable instream turbidity criteria .
after starting instream construction deposit all pumped water into an upland temporary dewatering sediment basin and treat the water to within acceptable levels before reentering the stream .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num temporary sump holes may be installed to create a more suitable pumping area .
pumps must be capable of dewatering at a faster rate than water enters the area .
pumps must be kept in a workable condition and a spare pump must be available for breakdowns or emergency conditions .
construct a temporary dewatering sediment basin at an approved location .
the sides of the dewatering basin must be constructed of substantial materials designed for the prevention of siltation .
the siltationprevention screening must extend at least num feet above normal high water .
before removal of the screening remove the accumulated silt and dispose of it offsite .
after dewatering clean the top of seal concrete surface of all scum laitance and sediment .
remove local high spots as necessary to provide required clearance for footing reinforcement .
c. removal .
remove dewatering system upon completion of instream construction cleanup inspection and acceptance of the internal dry work .
do not remove dewatering system before placement of the riprap .
flood the enclosed area before removing the dewatering system .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit dewatering foundation ls excavation within the cofferdams will be paid under num .
seal concrete within the cofferdams will be paid under num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num asphaltic plug expansion joint system num description .
provide and install expansioncontraction joints as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers written requirements .
provide and install the new bridge expansion joint system after paving on the bridge has been completed .
obtain the services of one of the following applicators or an engineerapproved equal num .
product sa bridge bond supplierinstaller maxwell products incorporated num south delong street salt lake city ut num telephone no .
num num fax no .
num num num .
product matrix num asphaltic expansion joint system supplierinstaller the d.s .
brown company num e. cherry street north baltimore oh num telephone no .
num num fax no .
num num num .
product wabo expandex joint system supplierinstaller watson bowman acme corporation num pineview drive amherst ny num telephone no .
num num or num num fax no .
num num num .
product thorma joint system by dynamic surface applications ltd. supplierinstaller roger langeliers construction num nw progress court hillsboro or num telephone no .
num num num .
product deery flexable joint system by deery american corp. supplierinstaller deery american corp. num roosevelt ave. chandler az num telephone no .
num num fax no .
num num num materials .
a. binder material .
provide polymermodified asphalt expansion joint binder material that meets the requirements in table num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num expansion joint binder material parameter test method requirements softening point astm dnum num f num c minimum tensile adhesion astm dnum num minimum ductility num f num c astm dnum num cm minimum penetration num f num c numg num sec num f num c numg num sec astm dnum astm dnum num dmm maximum num dmm minimum flow num h num f num c numg num sec astm dnum num mm maximum resiliency num f num c astm dnum num minimum asphalt compatibility astm dnum pass recommended pouring temperature num f num f num num c specific gravity num plus or minus num b .
aggregate .
provide crushed doublewashed and dried granite basalt or orthoquartzite prepackaged aggregate .
ensure aggregate gradation variation is in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions for the system being used .
c. backer rod .
provide backer rod that is a closed cell foam expansion joint filler capable of withstanding the polymermodified asphalt placement temperature .
d. bridging plate .
provide a bridging plate that is numgauge galvanized steel num to num inches wide and num inches long or per joint system manufacturers written specifications .
furnish plates with holes along the longitudinal centerline for location spikes at approximately numinch spacing .
e. location spikes .
use numd common nails for location spikes .
f. test and materials acceptance requirements .
submit certification that the binder backer rod and bridging plate meet the requirements specified when tested using the required test method in table num .
submit the certification at least num weeks before expansion system installation .
num construction requirements .
a .
technical representative .
ensure the asphaltic plug joint manufacturers representative is present during joint installation .
b. sawing and surface preparation .
after paving operations are complete transversely saw cut the full depth of the overlay centered over the joint opening unless otherwise specified .
remove material including waterproofing material between saw cuts to form the blockout .
thoroughly clean and dry exposed concrete steel and cut surfaces within the blockout using compressed air and a hotcompressed air lance .
if there is an interruption due to weather or other causes repeat the operation with the lance immediately before the binder coat operation .
dry num inches of road surface on each side of the joint blockout to obtain a suitable surface for bituminous adhesion .
c. binder .
heat the binder to a minimum of num f in a double oiljacketed melter .
ensure melter is equipped with a continuous agitation system temperature controls and calibrated thermometers to maintain the binder at the manufacturers recommended temperature .
prevent binder from being heated above num f or allowed to exceed num f for more than num hour .
provide a system for accurately measuring the binder and aggregate weights .
d. backer rod placement .
seal the expansion joint gap with a backer rod .
seal gaps less than ¼ inch wide by pouring hot binder into the gap without the use of the backer rod .
first fill gaps of ¼ inch or wider with a backer rod and cut to approximately num percent greater in diameter than the existing gap .
install the backer rod to an optimum num inch below the top of the existing gap .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction overfill the gap with the heated binder material to allow the binder to flow out onto the floor of the blockout .
this will form a flexible bond breaker between the floor of the joint blockout and the bridging plate .
e. bridging plate .
center the bridging plate over the existing joint and bed into the hot binder .
butt joint the bridging plates to accommodate the entire joint length .
secure the bridging plate with location spikes through the drill holes in the plate .
seal butt joints with hot binder and allow binder to setup before the next operation .
f. binder coat .
seal prepared exposed surfaces within the joint blockout with heated binder .
pour the hot binder over the floor area of the joint bridging plate and spread to coat exposed joint cavity areas .
ensure binder is at least ⅛ inch thick on the bottom of the joint cavity with areas of greater thickness where surface irregularities exist .
the binder application temperature must be between num f and num f. g. aggregate preparation .
heat the aggregate to a temperature between num and num f in a rotating drum mixer with attached heat source or hot air lance to remove dust and moisture .
h. aggregate proportion and layer thickness .
mix the aggregate with the binder such that the final proportions by weight will be num percent aggregate and num percent binder plus or minus num percent .
place the combined heated aggregate and binder in layers unless patented installation states otherwise .
each intermediate layer can vary in thickness in order to achieve the required joint thickness but each layer must not be less than ¾ inch or more than num½ inches .
ensure that each stone is coated and voids are filled while avoiding an excess of binder .
rake the mixture and level .
the engineer may allow the top layer thickness to vary ½ to num inch .
in preparing the top layer control the ratio of aggregate to binder to approximately num to num by weight .
overfill the top layer and compact to the level of the adjacent surfaces using a roller or vibratory plate compactor .
immediately after completion of the compaction pour sufficient binder over the joint to fill the surface voids and coat the surface stone .
dust the finished joint with a fine dry aggregate to prevent tackiness .
i .
maintenance of traffic .
facilitate traffic maintenance by installing the joint in num halfwidth phases .
during phase num install approximately half the total joint .
during phase num remove at least num inches of the phase num joint at or near the centerline with the remainder of the joint installed .
schedule operations so all lanes can be open to traffic during nonworking hours .
j .
testing .
submit certification showing binder compliance with the required material properties .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for asphaltic plug expansion joint system by the cubic foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit asphaltic plug expansion joint system cf num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num compression seal expansion joint num description .
provide and install neoprene seals as specified .
prepare all surfaces in contact with new neoprene seals .
num materials .
provide neoprene seals as specified on the plans or an approved equal and as specified in num or an approved equal .
provide lubricating elastic adhesive for installing the neoprene seals that meets astm dnum or in accordance with the manufacturers written specifications and engineer approval .
num construction requirements .
before installing joint seal clean joints of asphalt filler old expansion materialsdevices bituminous material dirt grease and other deleterious material .
clean joints over the total area of the blockout or opening to receive the seal .
during cleaning operations prevent debris cleaning materials and solutions from entering waterways .
ensure the joints are sound clean dry and frost free .
all components and materials will be in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and engineer approved .
each neoprene seal will be one continuous piece between face of curbs and installed as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
sandblast clean expansion joint surfaces immediately before seal installation .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit compression seal expansion joint ft num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num strip seal expansion joint num description .
provide and install a strip seal expansion joint with the movement ratings specified .
num materials .
a .
metal .
provide extruded steel sections and anchorage gusset plates fabricated from structural steel that meets aashto m num grade num or other approved steel used in a system .
provide steel reinforcing bars used in anchorage that meets aashto m num grade num .
b. neoprene seals .
provide preformed neoprene extrusions fabricated from polychloroprene neoprene that is resistant to heat oil jet fuel ozone and uv rays and meets astm dnum .
provide a numpiece seal full length of the expansion joint .
c. adhesive .
provide lubricating elastic adhesive for installing the neoprene seals in the steel extrusions that meets the requirements of astm dnum or in accordance with manufacturers written specifications and engineer approved .
num construction requirements .
a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings as specified in num.f .
b .
installation .
install the expansion joint as specified in the plans approved shop drawings and manufacturers written instructions .
supply special tools or materials required for the joint installation .
the expansion joint manufacturer must have a qualified technical service representative on the project site to supervise the installation review the supporting steel details and inspect the interface surfaces .
ensure welding meets current aashto specifications and num .
deliver and install the neoprene extrusions as continuous elements along the full length of the joint .
ensure shop welded splices in steel extrusions are as specified on the shop drawings .
the engineer will only allow field splices in steel extrusions at locations specified on the plans .
thoroughly clean the metal surfaces in direct contact with the neoprene seal and concrete to provide a high strength bond between the mating steel surfaces with the neoprene seal and concrete .
properly position and attach the joint assembly to the structure before placing concrete in the adjacent deck or back wall .
provide for smooth ride when positioning the deck joint .
ensure the steel joint extrusions on each side of the joint are straight parallel and in proper vertical alignment .
if the joint extrusions are not properly aligned adjust or replace at no additional cost to the department .
cover bridge deck joints with protective material after installation until final cleanup of the bridge deck .
c. testing and inspection .
after the joints are installed flood with water and inspect from below the joint for leakage .
if leakage is observed repair the joint at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit strip seal expansion joint ft num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num elastomeric concrete header num description .
provide and install elastomeric concrete headers in prepared blockout areas as specified .
include the collection and disposal of waste debris .
num materials .
provide elastomeric concrete that consists of a fieldmixed numpart polyurethane material and pregraded aggregate mix the department does not allow epoxybased materials .
provide a manufacturers certification that attests the proposed materials are pretested and meets this specification .
a. elastomeric concrete .
provide ambient cure material num percent solids numcomponent polyurethane with pregraded aggregate mix exhibiting the physical properties listed in tables num and num .
when properly mixed and poured the elastomeric concrete cures rapidly flows and fills voids spalls or irregularities to form a monolithic unit .
table num elastomeric cured binder physical properties test method requirement tensile strength astm dnum num psi hardness durometer d astm dnum num num compression set num hr num f astm dnum method b num tear resistance astm dnum num lbin water absorption astm dnum num heat shrinkage astm dnum num oven aging num f for numhr tensile astm dnum num elongation astm dnum num table num elastomeric cured binder and aggregate physical properties test method requirement compressive strength astm dnum num psi resilience num deflection astm dnum num slant shear bond strength to concrete num psi impact resistance astm dnum num f no cracks num f no cracks num f no cracks b .
bonding agent .
provide manufacturers numcomponent num percent solids bonding agent .
apply bonding agent to the sides and base of the preformed concrete blockout before elastomeric concrete placement .
store mix and apply in accordance with the manufacturers safety data sheet and written instructions .
identify liquid components by the following information part a resin color clear part b activator color tan submit certified test results meeting the requirements in tables num and num for the proposed products for approval before use .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the engineer will accept the following products or an engineerapproved equal num .
wabocrete ii elastomeric concrete by watson bowman acme .
num .
delcrete elastomeric concrete by d.s .
brown company .
num .
plykrete fs by polyset company .
num construction requirements .
meet with the engineer and discuss the method of installation before performing the work pertaining to the elastomeric concrete headers .
ensure a manufacturers representative is onsite during the initial installation to meet with the contractor and the engineer to train the contractor in mixing and placement procedures and to ensure the installation procedures are in accordance with the manufacturers warranty requirements .
if untrained personnel are substituted the engineer may suspend the installation until they receive appropriate training .
the department will not adjust contract time or pay for additional costs resulting from the work suspension .
sandblast and vacuum the blockout surfaces and immediate surrounding concrete area to remove dirt dust sand oil grease paint corrosion deposits laitance and bondinhibiting materials immediately before placing the elastomeric concrete .
prime the substrate surface as specified by the manufacturer and ensure joint gap is as specified on the plans before placing the elastomeric concrete .
mix and place the elastomeric concrete in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and as specified .
provide the engineer with num set of the manufacturers written instructions at least num week before the placement begins .
install the elastomeric concrete when the temperature is at least num f and rising .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the cubic yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit elastomeric concrete header cy removal of existing expansion joint material within designated blockout areas and expansion joint seal installation are covered in other contract pay items .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num removal of expansion joint num description .
remove existing joint material consisting of elastomeric concrete steel armor angles and concrete within the removal limits specified .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
before starting work obtain approval for the appropriate joint removal methods and equipment .
remove steel armor angles and concrete within the proposed blockout so the concrete is not damaged beyond the limits .
use jackhammers with a nominal rating of num pounds or less and held at an angle num or less from the surface of the slab to remove the existing concrete within the new nosing limits specified .
notify the engineer immediately if unsound concrete is encountered beyond the removal depth .
repair concrete overbreak or other damage outside the limits specified at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will be measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit removal of expansion joint ft removed materials are the contractors property and must be properly disposed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num textured concrete surface num description .
texture exposed concrete surfaces with plastic form liner patterns specified or other engineerapproved methods .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
provide plastic form liner patterns bonded to the forms or alternate texturing methods for engineer approval at least num weeks before concrete placement .
alternate texturing methods will require a field mockup panel to ensure uniformity .
ensure inside form dimensions provide for full plan dimensions plus the texturing thickness .
attach and treat plastic form liners with a release agent and then remove in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
align the grooves in the form liner panels at construction joints .
conceal construction joints in the textured concrete surface .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit textured concrete surface sy the cost for materials form placement removal and finishing work is incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp reinforcement num description .
provide and place glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp as specified .
utilize conventional casting procedures for concrete bridge slabs and approach slabs as specified .
num materials .
provide gfrp reinforcement meeting the aashto lrfd bridge design guide specifications for gfrp reinforced concrete bridge decks and traffic railings and as described in this specification .
provide deformed or sand coated gfrp reinforcement .
a .
fibers .
provide fibers in the form of unidirectional rovings of a given size and mass .
provide fiber sizings and coupling agents compatible with the resin system used to impregnate them .
b. matrix resins .
commercial grades of vinyl ester and epoxy resin systems are permitted if the finished product meets the physical and durability requirements .
the base polymer in the resin system must not contain polyester .
blending of vinyl ester and epoxy resins is permitted .
styrene may be added to the polymer resin during processing .
added styrene must be less than num percent by mass of the polymer resin .
report the amount of styrene as a mass percentage of the polymer resin added during processing .
determine constituent content of resin in accordance with astm dnum .
c. fillers and additives .
commercial grade inorganic fillers e.g .
kaolin clay calcium carbonate alumina trihydrate must not exceed num percent by mass of the polymer resin constituent .
commercial grade additives and processaids e.g .
release agents lowprofile shrink additives initiators promoters hardeners catalysts pigments fireretardants ultraviolet inhibitors are permitted but depend on the processing method .
any shrink additives must be less than num percent by mass of the polymer resin .
commercial grade inorganic or organic nonwoven surfacing mats or veils are permitted .
d. manufacturing process .
produce gfrp bars using any variation of the pultrusion process .
document the process used and report the date of production and production lot size .
provide gfrp reinforcement conforming to the requirements in table num table num material property minimum or nominal maximum fiber content by volume num na design nominal diameter inches num na design nominal area in² num na tensile strength ksi num na tensile modulus of elasticity ksi num na shear strength perpendicular to the bar fibers ksi num na tensile strain num na bond strength psi aci numr test method b.num num na longitudinal coefficient of thermal expansion per degree c numenum numenum glass transition temperature per f num na moisture absorption na num longitudinal wicking continuous voids num consecutive num cuts a continuous void is one appearing in all num cuts num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction e. testing .
provide num copies of documentation showing the composition testing procedures and typical test values for the type of gfrp reinforcement being provided for review and acceptance .
submit the documentation along with representative samples two num foot sections for each size to be provided .
before shipment test representative samples as agreed upon between the gfrp reinforcement manufacturer and the department for all gfrp reinforcement produced for the contract for the properties listed in table num .
f. documentation .
for gfrp reinforcement provide num copies of written certifications that the gfrp reinforcement meets this specification .
in addition list the test values and test procedures used to determine the physical properties of the gfrp reinforcement in the certification .
provide certifications bearing the notarized signature of an authorized representative of the bar manufacturer .
identify each bundle of gfrp reinforcement with a durable tag displaying the corresponding lot numbers .
g. repair material .
comply with the requirements established by the bar manufacturer for the material used to repair the cut ends of gfrp reinforcement .
perform all repairs of cut ends at the gfrp reinforcement manufacturers plant unless otherwise approved .
num construction requirements .
unless otherwise specified use any one or combination of conventional forming systems .
provide the engineer a written proposal detailing the forming systems to be used on gfrp reinforced bridge structures .
a .
material handling .
provide padded contact areas for systems handling gfrp reinforcement .
provide padded or suitable banding for bundling bands to prevent damage to the bars .
lift bundles of gfrp reinforcement with a strong back spreader bar multiple supports or a platform bridge .
do not drop or drag the gfrp reinforcement .
b .
storage and placement .
store gfrp reinforcement above the ground surface on platforms skids or other supports as close as possible to the point of placement .
cover the bars with opaque plastic or other types of cover to protect the bars from the external environment .
prevent exposure of gfrp reinforcing bars to temperatures above num f during storage .
hold the gfrp reinforcement firmly in place before and during concrete placement by means of ties and bar supports adequate in strength and number to prevent displacement and to keep the reinforcing at the proper distance from the forms and as specified in num.d .
provide adequate vertical restraint of gfrp reinforcement to prevent upward movement in the fresh concrete due to buoyancy .
when placed in the work reinforcement must be free from dirt paint grease oil or other foreign materials .
before placing concrete remove foreign materials by cleaning the bars using methods and materials recommended by the bar manufacturer and engineer approved .
shear cutting is not permitted on the gfrp reinforcement .
highspeed grinder cutting or hack saw cutting may be permitted with engineer approval .
coat cut ends .
repair all surface damage to gfrp reinforcement as described below or replace the bar with an undamaged bar .
c. repair of bar damage .
repair all visible damage to the accepted gfrp reinforcement .
repair damaged areas using materials and procedures specified by the gfrp manufacturer .
d. concrete placement .
if the reinforcement is not adequately supported or tied to resist settlement floating upward or movement in any direction during concrete placement halt concrete placement until corrective measures are taken .
e. bending .
if bending of gfrp reinforcement is required the bends must be prefabricated .
field bending of gfrp reinforcement is not permitted .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure gfrp reinforcement by the foot .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp reinforcement ft ties bar chairs supports or clips used for fastening gfrp reinforcement in place are incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num pile sleeves num description .
provide and install steel sleeves around the columns or piles to be embedded in the backfill of the mse walls as specified .
num materials .
provide galvanized corrugated metal pipe sleeves meeting num .
provide the size and gauge of pile sleeve as specified .
a .
concrete columns .
provide galvanized metal spacers .
galvanize according to the requirements of astm anum .
provide size as shown on the plans .
b .
shell or hpiles .
provide course aggregate for concrete size no .
num in accordance with num .
num construction requirements .
a .
concrete columns .
position pile sleeves around completed columns before mse backfill placement .
install spacers in the annular space between the column and pile sleeve .
install spacer sets the top bottom and at intervals of num feet or less along the column .
b .
shell or hpiles .
fill the lower num feet of the sleeves with coarse aggregate before placing and compacting the mse backfill and before pile driving .
ensure the inside sleeve is not closer than num inches from the steel pile .
after pile driving finish placing the course aggregate in the annular space between the sleeves and piles in lifts not to exceed num feet for the remaining sleeve length .
rod or vibrate each lift to prevent voids .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit pile sleeves ft metal spacers and coarse aggregate are incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num precast concrete culvert num description .
provide a precast concrete culvert including the design fabrication transportation to the project site and installation .
the precast culvert includes the precast culvert sections and precast components for edge beams wing walls cutoff walls and apron slabs as required .
cutoff walls edge beams footings wing walls and apron slabs may be castinplace at no additional cost upon approval .
upon approval of the shop drawings prepare and submit a structure load rating in accordance with the idaho manual for bridge evaluation .
a .
qualifications .
provide current documentation that ensures the precast concrete manufacturer holds current certification under the npca plant certification program the acpa qcast plant certification program or pci plant certification program .
b. submittals .
submit the precast manufacturers shop drawings and design computations as specified in num for approval before fabrication of the precast concrete culvert and components .
follow the requirements of num.c .
ensure the shop drawings and design computations are sealed and signed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
ensure shop drawings include the following num .
layout .
num .
stationoffset reference points for installation .
num .
precast unit locations .
num .
fabrication details .
num .
lift locations .
num .
reinforcement .
num .
connection details .
num .
dimensions .
num .
details of future utility conduits .
ensure each drawing and computation sheet includes the structure name and route number as shown on the plans along with the bridge drawing number project number key number district number and county name .
submit shop drawings electronically in pdf format as specified in num .
submit electronic asbuilt shop drawings in pdf format before contract completion .
ensure the plan view layout of the precast culvert and culvert components for edge beams wing walls cutoff walls and apron slabs closely resembles the plan view layout shown on the plans .
submit proposed culvert or component layout changes for approval .
submit connection details for approval .
do not begin the construction of any precast units until the design calculations and shop drawings have been approved .
c. design .
design the precast concrete culvert and components in accordance with the current edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and the departments bridge design lrfd manual .
design all portions of this culvert for the design loads specified .
determine design loads related to fill depth .
footing resistance is included in the phase iv report .
num materials .
meet the requirements specified in num .
meet the reinforcing steel requirements specified in num .
provide reinforcing steel meeting aashto m num grade num .
welded wire reinforcement is allowed if it meets the requirements of num or astm anum .
welded wire reinforcement will be accepted based on the manufacturers certification .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction provide grout for precast joints as specified in num type b class num .
provide drainage geotextile for wing wall connection to culvert barrel as specified in num type ii .
num construction requirements .
design and provide plans and details for a precast concrete culvert as specified .
if different sections are designed to accommodate varying depths of fill along the length of the culvert use the same interior opening dimensions so the interior faces of adjacent segments are smooth and flush .
acceptable culvert shapes and dimensional requirements are specified on the plans .
construct concrete and metal reinforcement as specified in num and num .
precast culverts include an edge beam and may include a cutoff wall at each end of the barrel section .
the edge beam may be castinplace as a secondary cast on the endprecast segment or it may be cast monolithically with the endprecast segment .
wing walls may be precast or castinplace .
if precast wings are used a leveling course of granular material at least num inches thick must be placed under the footing where rock is encountered .
provide future utility conduits through the top slab as shown on the plans .
install the conduits in the same general location as specified on the plans .
conduits must be polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe schedule num or heavier .
solventweld pvc joints .
cap open ends of conduits .
prove conduits by blowing a pull string from endtoend of each conduit .
leave the pull strings in place unless otherwise directed .
provide a minimum of num inches of fill over the top of the slab for buried culverts .
apply a waterproof membrane type a or d as specified in num to the top slab of all buried culverts regardless of the fill depth .
a waterproof membrane is not required when there is no fill on the top slab .
construct precast culvert joints soiltight in accordance with the manufacturers written requirements .
provide num inch wide joint wrap material that meets astm cnum .
ensure joint sealant meets astm cnum .
include joint sealant and joint wrap with each culvert joint .
for box culverts install joint sealant on all num sides of the joint .
for stiffleg culverts install joint sealant on all num sides of the joint .
wrap the outside face of the joint continuously from the bottom of one wall up and over the top slab and down the opposite wall with a single length of wrap .
the engineer will not allow splices in joint wrap .
if required by the manufacturer to produce a watertight joint fill joint gaps with nonshrink grout .
connect stiffleg culvert barrel sections using weld plates as specified on the plans .
connection of precast components to the barrel section of culverts must not be done using welded plates .
store the precast culvert at the precast manufacturer until delivery to the project site .
install the precast culvert to the lines and grades as shown on the plans and approved shop drawings .
connect the precast elements together as specified on the approved shop plans .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit precast concrete culvert ls num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num bond reinforcing steel num description .
drill and bond reinforcing steel as specified using an epoxyresin based bonding system .
num materials .
provide adhesive as specified in num .
use type iv grade num bonding system classification .
meet aashto m num grade num requirements for reinforcing steel .
submit certified test results for the proposed product for approval before use .
the department has verified and approved the following products meet the requirements of bond reinforcing steel num .
unitex propoxy num from dayton superior .
num .
hilti hitre num from hilti inc. num .
simpson set pac epoxy from simpson strongtie company inc. other products will need to be approved before use .
this list is for information only and other products may be submitted for approval .
time associated with testing and verifying additional products meet the requirements are not compensable .
num construction .
follow the manufacturers written instructions regarding mixing drillhole diameter and depth application and curing temperatures and conditions .
size the holes to fully develop the deformed bar .
clean and clear the holes of debris before adhesive placement .
if necessary adjust the reinforcing steel embedment depth specified to meet development length requirements of the bonded bar .
ensure the pullout strength of the bonded reinforcing steel exceeds the yield strength of the deformed bar .
adjustments to embedment depth will be at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as a lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit bond reinforcing steel lump sum num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num removing asphalt overlay num description .
remove the existing asphalt overlay from the bridge deck using poweroperated diamond grinding machinery or hydrodemolition methods with engineer approval .
use small poweroperated curb diamond cutting or curb diamondgrinding machinery at the curbs drains and armored joints where the poweroperated diamondgrinding machinery can not access .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
plug existing deck drains by engineerapproved methods to prevent waste materials from the removal operations entering the drains and falling under the bridge .
remove asphalt from the bridge deck without damaging the existing deck drains concrete parapets concrete curbs and metal railing .
repair damage caused by removal operations at no cost to the department .
protect adjacent traffic from debris by means of an engineerapproved positive barrier system .
prevent debris from entering waterways .
the engineer will designate a trial area for the contractor to demonstrate the equipment personnel and methods of operation produce satisfactory results .
begin removal operations only after the engineer accepts the trial area results .
the engineer will inspect the deck during and after completion of the removal process to determine the need for further removal or repair of damaged areas .
removed materials are the contractors property and must be properly disposed of .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square yard of the deck surface .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit removal of asphalt overlay sy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num concrete crack repair num description .
a .
preparation .
prepare concrete surface cracks to inject with an epoxy resin adhesive .
repair cracks wider than num inch measured at the concrete surface including the finishing and cleaning of girders pier caps columns and abutments as specified and as directed .
b. injection .
inject epoxy resin adhesive into prepared concrete cracks .
num materials .
a .
preparation .
use the following material to prepare the cracks for injection epoxy resin for surface sealing .
provide a trowelinggrade epoxy paste adhesive conforming to astm cnum type i grade num class b and c for the surface seal material capable of being applied to vertical and overhead surfaces and capable to confine the injection adhesive in the cracks during injection and curing .
ensure the surface seal material has adequate strength to hold injection fittings firmly in place and to resist injection pressures adequately to prevent leakage during injection .
the department will not allow material that contains asbestos .
ensure properties meet table num .
table num property requirement test method tensile strength num psi at num days astm dnum flexural strength modulus of rupture num psi at num days astm dnum total water absorption num max at num days astm dnum numhour boil bond strength dry cure num psi at num days astm cnum hardened concrete to hardened concrete bond strength moist cure num psi at num days astm cnum hardened concrete to hardened concrete b. injection .
use the following material for injection epoxy resin for injection provide epoxy adhesive for crack injection as an epoxy resin numcomponent low viscosity adhesive containing no solvents or nonreactive dilutives conforming to astm cnum type i and iv grade num class b and c. ensure properties meet table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num property requirement test method tensile strength num psi at num days astm dnum initial viscosity num to num centipoise astm dnum brookfield rvt spindle no .
num at num rpm flexural strength modulus of rupture num psi at num days astm dnum total water absorption num max at num days astm dnum num hour boil bond strength dry cure num psi at num days astm cnum hardened concrete to hardened concrete bond strength moist cure num psi at num days astm cnum hardened concrete to hardened concrete num construction requirements .
a .
preparation .
num .
general .
apply epoxy resin adhesive for surface sealing in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
provide injection ports along the crack at intervals less than the thickness of the member .
set entry ports in accordance with epoxy injection material manufacturers written instructions .
apply surface seal material to the surface of the crack and adjacent areas of application between the injection ports as needed .
drill port holes using a hollow core drill bit with a vacuum retention system for debris removal or otherwise cleaned out before injecting .
drill holes to a minimum ⅝ inch depth and recess the ports a minimum of ½ inch with a ⅛ inch reservoir at the bottom of the port .
for cracks open on both sides of the member provide porting devices on opposite sides at staggered elevations when practical .
apply an adequate seal and allow sufficient time for the surface seal material to gain adequate strength to prevent the escape of the epoxy resin adhesive for the injection grouting .
num .
preparation .
the engineer will mark all areas and cracks that require repair .
clean cracks and adjacent application surfaces to remove loose concrete dirt dust grease oil efflorescence or other foreign matter detrimental to the epoxy injection bond and surface seal system .
the department will not allow acids and corrosives for cleaning .
pressure point spacing depends on size and overall area thickness containing cracks .
num .
finishing .
when the cracks are filled allow the epoxy adhesive to cure for sufficient time to allow surface seal removal without draining or run back of the epoxy material from cracks .
remove surface seal material and injection adhesive runs or spills from the surfaces .
finish surface area flush to the adjacent concrete showing no indentations or protrusions caused by the entry ports placement and blend with the existing concrete surface .
b. injection .
num .
general .
apply epoxy resin adhesive for injection in accordance with manufacturers written instructions .
num .
equipment .
inject numcomponent epoxy resin adhesive using a positive displacement pump equipped to control exact proportions with a nozzlemounted interlock .
provide electric or airpowered pumps and an num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num inline mixing and metering system .
ensure automatic pressurecontrol injection equipment is capable of discharging the mixed adhesive at any preset pressure up to num psi .
ensure equipment is capable of maintaining the volume ratio for the injection adhesive prescribed by the adhesive manufacturer within a tolerance of num percent by volume at any discharge pressure up to num psi .
provide injection equipment with autostop sensors on both a and b component reservoirs that will stop the machine when only num component is being pumped to the mixing head .
test equipment after every num hours of use and at the beginning of each shift for the proper injection ratio of components .
disconnect the injection mixing head equipment and pump the num adhesive components simultaneously through the ratio check device .
control backpressure in the ratio check device with num independent valve nozzles by opening or closing the valve .
provide a pressure gauge for sensing the backpressure behind each valve .
adjust the discharge pressure to num psi for both adhesive components .
simultaneously discharge both adhesive components into separate calibrated containers then compare the amounts discharged to determine if they are within the manufacturers recommended ratio for the appropriate material .
keep complete and accurate pressure and ratio test records and make them available to the engineer .
num .
execution .
spacing of pressure points depends on size and overall thickness of area containing cracks .
start injection work at the lowest point and continue pumping until there is an appearance of epoxy adhesive at the next adjacent entry port .
when epoxy adhesive travel is indicated by appearance at the next adjacent port discontinue injection on the entry port being pumped and transfer epoxy injection to next adjacent port where epoxy adhesive has appeared .
completely fill cracks by continuous epoxy adhesive injection .
if porttoport epoxy adhesive travel is not evident stop work immediately and notify the engineer .
the engineer may elect to core the injected areas to confirm full crack penetration .
rectify areas not receiving full penetration at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for crack repair preparation by the foot along the exposed surface of cracks .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work for crack repair injection by the gallons of epoxy used .
cracks that penetrate a concrete member at full depth sealed on both sides of the member with injectioninspection ports installed on both sides of the member verifying full penetration of epoxy adhesive will be measured and paid for on both sides of the member .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit concrete crack repair preparation ft concrete crack epoxy injection gal num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num patch and repair of concrete num description .
a .
concrete surface .
repair and patch spalls scaling delaminations honeycombing and other deteriorated concrete on the surface of the girders deck underside pier caps columns and abutments including removal of debris from pier cap seats and abutment seats as specified and directed .
b .
concrete deck .
repair spalls and delaminations in the bridge deck including determining the working areas by chain dragging or other approved method preparing the concrete surface repairing metal reinforcement and applying the patching material .
num materials .
a .
concrete surface .
use material for patching and repairing the concrete surfaces that is cementitious fast setting nonsag nonmetallic repair mortar containing a corrosion inhibitor and meets the following requirements num .
compressive strength num psi minimum at num days per astm cnum .
num .
bond strength slant shear num psi minimum at num days per astm cnum .
num .
coefficient of thermal expansion between numx numf and num x numf per astm cnum .
num .
drying shrinkage less or equal to num percent per astm cnum .
num .
suitable for vertical and overhead applications .
submit certified test results from an independent lab for products not on the qpl showing the proposed products meet the specifications .
obtain the engineers approval before use .
b .
concrete deck .
use material for patching and repairing the concrete surfaces that is cementitious fast setting nonsag nonmetallic repair mortar and meets the requirements of astm cnum type rnum .
extend repair mortar as required using thoroughly washed and cleaned pea gravel .
the engineer will accept materials meeting the specified criteria with a manufacturers certification as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
meet the manufacturers written instructions for application of mortars .
removed materials are the contractors property and must be properly disposed of .
a .
concrete deck .
mark out and score removal areas to a depth of ½ inch with a dry concrete saw .
exercise care to prevent damage to the existing reinforcement .
remove deteriorated loose or unsound concrete to a minimum depth of ½ inch or whatever additional depth is required to reach sound concrete using jackhammers with a nominal rating of num pounds or less and held at an angle of num or less from the concrete surface .
sandblast the cavity and the immediate surrounding concrete area to remove dirt oil grease paint corrosion deposits dust laitance and bondinhibiting materials .
prepare surface of cavity by mechanical scarification or sandblasting to provide a minimum surface profile of plus or minus ⅛ inch .
b .
existing reinforcing steel .
if any reinforcement is or becomes exposed during the removal of unsound concrete and the bond between concrete and reinforcement has been destroyed remove at least ¾ inch of concrete from around that reinforcement .
patch material bonds to the entire periphery of the exposed steel reinforcing bars .
if any exposed reinforcement is damaged broken or has lost more than num percent of its section remove at least ¾ inch of concrete from around that reinforcement to allow replacement of the damaged bar or splicing a new bar to the damaged bar as directed .
properly embed or splice replacement or supplemental bars .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. inspection .
complete final surface preparation sufficiently in advance of the mortar placement to allow the engineer to inspect areas before repair .
sound the repaired areas with a sounding bar or hammer after sufficient setting time and correct hollowness by removing and replacing the unbonded patch at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer must be present during the sounding inspection .
d. finish .
match the texture of the existing surface and ensure the finished surface is flush with the existing surface .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will be measure acceptably completed work by the square foot of the repaired concrete area .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit patch and repair of concrete surface sf patch and repair of concrete deck sf the cost of replacement or supplemental bars is incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num superstructure jacking num description .
furnish materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to jack the superstructure for repairing girder ends and abutments or piers directly below the girder as specified and as directed .
design the jacking system and temporary shoring shims and any other incidentals .
construct the jacking system monitor the girder displacements maintain the jacking system and remove all temporary supports upon completion .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
submit plans and design calculations for the proposed jacking system temporary shoring and shims in pdf format for approval before beginning this work .
the plans and calculations must be prepared signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
approval requires up to num calendar days starting from the date of receiving the submittals or resubmittals to the date that they are returned .
design the jacking system and temporary shoring for the loads as shown on the plans .
ensure that superstructure components and attachments can freely move to accommodate the full range of the anticipated vertical movement .
prepare separate submittals for each bridge .
provide a hydraulicallyoperated jacking system capable of simultaneously raising all girders of a superstructure element by an equal amount and at a uniform rate .
supply each jack with a gauge for monitoring the jacking load applied to the superstructure .
support the superstructure on temporary shoring and shims so the hydraulic fluid does not support the weight of the superstructure when the girders are in the raised position .
the maximum difference in lift between adjacent girders is not to exceed num inch .
repair any damage to the superstructure or substructure elements resulting from the jacking operation at no cost to the department .
do not lower the girders back down on the pier cap or abutment seat until the repair concrete has reached num percent of compressive strength .
maintain the jacking equipment in a good state of repair .
equipment must not have damaged hoses fittings lines or tanks that may release pollutants into the work area .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit superstructure jacking ls num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num temporary shoring num description .
provide temporary shoring as required for the support of the existing and the new roadway adjacent to the construction area including designing furnishing constructing inspecting testing and monitoring the temporary shoring system and removing the temporary shoring after the work is complete .
num materials .
determine materials for temporary shoring and obtain engineer approval before use .
num construction requirements .
select and submit before construction the proposed materials and the temporary shoring type shop drawings and design calculations prepared signed and sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer for approval .
ensure shop drawings meet the requirements of num .
include a live load surcharge where vehicular load is expected to act on the backfill surface within a distance equal to ½ the shoring height behind the back face of the shoring .
the increase in horizontal pressure due to live load surcharge is equivalent to that produced by a minimum of num feet of soil .
ensure the clear distance between temporary shoring and temporary guardrail is num feet or more .
design the temporary shoring in accordance with the aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works .
the department will not allow gravity walls e.g .
specific gravity block walls to be used as temporary shoring when the excavation depth is greater than num feet .
include the following in the shop drawings num .
location and limits of the temporary shoring with respect to an existing or established survey line .
num .
plan elevation and section views including necessary dimensions and elevations .
num .
excavation limits adjacent to shoring .
num .
type and size of materials and shoring components being used .
num .
erection excavation and removal sequence of the temporary shoring .
num .
location and limits of temporary guardrail .
num .
design notes including design criteria loads material specifications and inspection testing andor monitoring requirements .
num .
show temporary shoring installed in stages if necessary to accommodate other work activities .
the department advises the contractor to review the phase iv materials report and the existing structure drawings for information on the soils and the existing foundation in the shored area .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably competed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit temporary shoring ls predrilling required for the selected shoring system is incidental .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num utility conduit num description .
install utility conduits across the bridge and under the approach roadway to the termination point outside the structure including threaded inserts cast in the concrete deck pvc pipe sleeves as required and utility conduit .
num materials .
meet the following requirements num .
utility conduit .
pvc pipe schedule num if encased in concrete .
pvc pipe schedule num if not encased in concrete .
num .
deck inserts .
provide a minimum safe working load of num pounds .
num .
standard weight steel pipe .
astm anum grade b or anum .
num construction requirements .
install the threaded inserts and utility conduit as specified unless otherwise directed .
solventweld pvc joints except expansion couplings .
prove conduits by blowing a pull string from endtoend of each conduit .
leave the pull strings in place unless otherwise directed .
verify the location of existing utilities and structures before starting construction and immediately notify the engineer of discrepancies found on the plans .
install the deck inserts for the utility conduits at the spacing specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit utility conduit ls structure excavation and compacting backfill are incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num painting structural steel num description .
prepare and paint the structural steel within the limits as specified .
this work will consist of surface preparation by solvent cleaning power washing blasting testing of blast surface for salts full containment proper disposing of debris furnishing and applying paint shielding adjacent areas from unwanted paint and cleaning up after painting is complete .
the contractor or its subcontractors will furnish labor materials equipment services and incidentals necessary to prepare and paint the steel .
the work includes full removal of paint and rust from the steel construction of any required containment facilities debris collection site storage disposal cleaning of the steel by water jetting and painting of the steel structure .
this work will be done in accordance with this specification and as directed .
the existing paint may contain leadbased paint .
the contractor is required to conduct their own monitoring at the beginning of the work in accordance with federal regulations and adjust worker protection and work practices according to the monitoring results .
the contractor must have current certification in accordance with sspc qualification procedure no .
num qp num and no .
num qp num .
num materials requirements .
the coating system must incorporate singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethanes for all priming and intermediate operations .
singlecomponent moisturecured aliphatic polyurethane or polyester modified aliphatic acrylic polyurethane will be used for all topcoating operations .
all coating products furnished for this contract must be manufactured by the same manufacturer and be compatible with one another .
all coatings will be free of lead or chromates .
paints and certification must meet num .
preapproved paint systems specified are as follows num .
system i sherwin williams .
a. primer corothane i galvapac one pack zinc primer bnumgnum .
b .
intermediate corothane i ironox b bnumanum .
c. topcoat acrolon num hs bnum .
num .
system ii wasser hightech coatings .
a. primer mczinc .
b .
intermediate mcferrox b. c. topcoat mcluster .
the paint system will be as preapproved or be an engineerapproved equal .
an approved equal must be a standard regularly produced product and submitted for approval based on the manufacturers published literature that states instruction for use solids by volume application rates voc content environmental considerations and chemical components of vehicles and solids .
this literature must include a referenced list of bridge projects where the paint systems were successfully used and name the contractor who applied them .
the contractor must furnish paint manufacturers certifications and show that the paint and thinners comply with the paint system requirements .
should the proposed equivalent manufacturers literature require a higher degree of surface preparation or a greater film thickness than specified that degree of surface preparation and film thickness will apply and the contract price will not be changed to reflect these increases .
equivalent paint systems must have demonstrated num years of successful field exposure on bridge structures for evaluation .
the contractor must have the coating manufacturer furnish num unopened quart container of each paint coating material accelerator and thinner to the central materials laboratory for testing .
the samples will be taken at the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction manufacturers plant or store outlet .
contact the central lab manager about sampling at the manufacturer plant or store outlet .
sds and product data sheets must accompany the paint samples sent to the central materials laboratory for testing .
the products will be tested against the manufacturers product specifications and these specifications for compliance .
the manufacturer must supply a quality control test report showing the results of the paint for each batch supplied at the time of sampling .
allow num weeks for paint testing after the central materials laboratory has received the paint .
all paint ready for application must be prepared at the factory .
do not add thinner or other material to the paint after it has been shipped unless recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
add all tinting materials at the time of paint manufacture field tinting is not allowed .
do not paint until the engineer receives and approves all product data sheets certifications qc test reports and the central materials laboratory test results .
all containers must be labeled showing the manufacturers name product name date of manufacture date of expiration and the manufacturers batch number .
paints must meet the following requirements num .
system i sherwin williams .
a. primer .
generic type zincrich singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethane .
vehicle type moisturecured polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
pigment type zinc dust astm d num type ii .
zinc content in dry film num minimum .
coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
color contrast to the intermediate .
b .
intermediate .
generic type micaceous iron oxide singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethane .
vehicle type moisturecured polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
pigment type micaceous iron oxide .
coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
color contrast to the topcoat .
c. topcoat .
generic type aliphatic polyester modified acrylic polyurethane .
vehicle type polyester modified acrylic polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
finish semigloss .
color gray federal standard color chip num num .
system ii wasser hightech coatings .
a. primer .
generic type zincrich singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethane .
vehicle type moisturecured polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
pigment type zinc dust astm dnum type ii .
zinc content in dry film num minimum .
coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
color contrast to the intermediate .
b .
intermediate .
generic type micaceous iron oxide singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethane .
vehicle type moisturecured polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
pigment type micaceous iron oxide .
coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
color contrast to the topcoat .
c. topcoat .
generic type aliphatic singlecomponent moisturecured polyurethane .
vehicle type moisturecured polyurethane .
volume solids num minimum .
coverage num num mils dft dry film thickness .
voc num lbgal maximum .
weight per gallon num lbgal minimum .
finish semigloss .
color gray federal standard color chip num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the contractor must store all flammable materials in approved storage containers at approved locations .
the contractor must store all paint thinners and solvents in accordance with osha regulations and the paint manufacturers requirements .
store the paint and solvents under cover out of direct sunlight .
maintain the storage temperature between num f and num f unless the requirements of the manufacturer are more restrictive .
keep all containers of paint unopened until required for use .
num construction requirements .
the contractor must submit a copy of current certification in accordance with the society for protective coatings qualification procedure no .
num and no .
num sspcqp num and qp num .
before work begins the contractor must submit a containment plan a current medical surveillance plan a lead removal plan an environmental compliance plan and a hazardous waste plan .
the engineer will review the plans and approve them before work commences .
the contractor will conduct the work in compliance with all applicable federal state and local laws codes rules and regulations regarding lead removal .
the contractor must take all necessary precautionary measures to ensure workers and work areas are adequately protected from fire and health hazards resulting from handling mixing and applying materials .
all damage to sound paint on areas not designated on the plans or authorized by the engineer will be recoated at no additional cost to the department and as directed .
a .
surface preparation .
surface cleaning will be conducted using the following methods num .
sspcsp num solvent cleaning to remove oil and grease or other contaminants before blasting .
num .
waterjet according to sspcsp wjnum or better to remove debris and salts .
num .
abrasive blasting the steel to an sspcsp num near white before painting sspcvis num will be used in determining the quality of cleaning .
all water jetting and blasting operations must be done within containment that prevents release of materials or waste .
all wash water and debris from water jetting must be filtered through a filter fabric capable of collecting all loose debris and particles .
the contractor will filter visible paint chips and particulates from the water before placing it into the containers .
before disposal test the water for total toxic metals and provide sample filtration e.g .
through a multistage filtration system ending in num microns or better if needed until the water is not classified as hazardous .
do not abrasive blast until the surfaces are thoroughly dry .
ensure adjacent work areas are protected from abrasive blasting .
blasted bare steel must have an average surface profile of num to num mils .
the blast profile must be angular or jagged rather than peened .
the prepared surface profile must be verified using astm dnum method c. a record of all measurements must be logged and available for the engineers inspection .
the contractor must provide compressed air that is free from moisture and oil contamination for operations in which the air may impinge upon the surface .
the contractor will use the white blotter test in accordance with astm dnum to verify the cleanliness of the compressed air .
conduct the test at least once per shift for each compressor system .
sufficient freedom from oil and moisture is confirmed if soiling or discolorations are not visible on the paper .
if air contamination is evidenced the contractor will examine the work completed since the last satisfactory contamination test and conduct any necessary cleanup or repair .
the contractor will change filters clean traps add moisture separators or filters or make other adjustments as necessary to achieve clean dry air .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the contractor will not conduct final surface preparation that exposes bare steel under damp environmental conditions or when the surface temperature of the steel is less than num f greater than the dew point temperature of the surrounding air .
the contractor must conduct soluble salt testing as one of the final acceptance tests of the prepared steel surfaces before coating .
test steel surfaces for chloride sulfate and nitrate salt contamination before coating .
perform tests on metal loss areas when present .
metal loss areas are areas with evidence of corrosion or pitting .
when metal loss areas are not evident perform tests adjacent to weld areas if present .
otherwise select test sites to be representative of the surface as a whole .
test at the rate of num test per num square feet minimum or as engineer directed in suspected areas .
results must be recorded and submitted for review and compliance .
chloride measurements greater than num micrograms per square centimeter are evidence of excessive chloride contamination .
sulfate measurements greater than num micrograms per square centimeter are evidence of excessive sulfate contamination .
nitrate measurements greater than num micrograms per square centimeter are evidence of excessive nitrate contamination .
areas that are not to specification will be considered noncompliant and must be cleaned by water jetting allowed to dry and then retested for compliance .
the addition of a soluble salt remover e.g .
chlorrid may need to be added to achieve final acceptance .
the addition of a soluble salt remover to the water jetting must meet the approval of the paint manufacturer .
after cleaning with a soluble salt remover the area must be rinsed with potable water to remove any residue .
technical representatives from the paint supplier and soluble salt remover must provide written acceptance before using the product to reduce salt concentration .
testing of the steel must be conducted with a chlortest csn test kit elcometer num csn chloride nitrate sulfate kit or an approved equal .. do not clean in areas adjacent to areas that are being painted .
protect freshly painted surfaces from contamination .
contaminated surfaces must be cleaned to the engineers satisfaction before any subsequent application of paint is made .
thoroughly clean corners angles and bolted or riveted joints .
the surface must meet the specified degree of cleaning immediately before painting .
deficient areas must be recleaned .
b .
containment .
meet the containment specifications of class numa and numw as outlined in sspcguide num .
the contractor is responsible for containing and disposing waste material generated from paint removal and surface preparation operations within the work area .
do not allow removed or applied coatings to fall into a waterway or contaminate the environment .
make every effort to prevent the escape of any dust or paint which will create an epa or osha violation or may create a nuisance to businesses residents andor vehicular traffic near the structure .
provide and maintain adequate ventilation during surface preparation coating application and the curing phases of work to adequately remove dust and fumes prevent injury to workers andor accumulate volatile gases .
supply all equipment and materials e.g .
ground covers rigging scaffolding planking containment screens or tarpaulin materials hepafiltered vacuums needed to contain all paint chips abrasive blast media overspray drips and spills .
use materials that are free of loose dust and debris when brought onto the project site .
protect the surrounding environment from all debris or damage resulting from the work .
contain and recover debris generated during cleaning preparation and coating operations .
design construct and maintain containment systems for operations in accordance with bmps .
the containment system must not cause any damage to the existing structure .
enclose all portions of the structure to be blasted as specified .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the containment system must be able to be removed rapidly in case of high winds .
cease abrasive blasting operations if wind conditions prevent capture of blast rebound and paint residue by the containment system .
if there is a question on wind conditions the engineer will make the final determination on whether blasting operations will cease and the containment system removed .
the containment system must not endanger the safety and health of the workers .
design access to the containment system to prevent any confined materials from escaping .
to prevent the weight of the confined materials from causing failure to the containment system all confined materials must be collected and secured in sealed containers at the end of each daily shift at a minimum .
confined materials must not escape during transfer from the containment systems to the sealable containers .
all confined materials within the containment system must be removed and secured in sealable containers before relocation or removal of the containment system .
if the containment system fails or if signs of failure are present the contractor must stop work immediately .
work will not resume until the failure has been corrected to the engineers satisfaction .
if the containment structure is removed after the abrasive blasting operations and before the coating operation the contractor will install a drip tarp to prevent spillage of paint into the waterway and ground surface below .
levels of air soil and water contamination resulting from surface preparations must meet acceptance standards established by the applicable local state and federal regulations .
during the operation all portions of the structure i.e .
superstructures substructures slope protection highway and appurtenances traveling public and public and private property must be protected from cleaning operations and paint splatter and overspray by using protective coverings or other approved methods .
the contractor is responsible for all damage the operations cause to persons vehicles or property .
provide containment for all paint chips abrasive blast media airborne dust overspray drips and spills .
use approved impermeable or impenetrable cover materials e.g .
tarpaulins drop cloths on or above the ground and other surfaces as required .
the contractor is responsible for the recovery of debris from the covering materials .
all areas used for containment and recovery including all areas over which cover material is placed must be thoroughly cleaned of all debris before work begins .
all containment and recovery areas will be closed to the public and signed appropriately .
the contractor must protect vehicles structures buildings equipment hardware fixtures and other materials from abrasive blast media paint spillage overspray and other damage .
in addition to containment materials the contractor must use protective coverings shields or masking as necessary to protect surfaces that are not designated to receive surface preparation or coating .
maintain all protective coverings during the entire period the work is being performed and remove all coverings upon completion of the work .
do not allow removed material to fall on the ground or in the water .
the contractor will be responsible for the cleanup of any spills of removed material .
all cleanups will be done to the engineers satisfaction and at no additional cost to the department .
immediately suspend cleaning andor surface preparation operations if the engineer deems the containment measures to be inadequate .
alter the cleaning andor surface preparation operations or containment methods to satisfy the specified requirements .
follow all applicable osha regulations regarding the installation and daily inspection of scaffolding platforms and wire cables .
maintain a daily log of the results of the inspections made each shift and after any occurrence that could affect the structural integrity of the scaffolding or wire ropes .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num do not remove the containment structure or begin painting until all abrasive blasted surfaces have been inspected and approved by the engineer .
c. painting structural steel .
the structure must receive a stripe coat of the primer a full primer coat an intermediate coat and a topcoat application .
all painting must be in conformance with the written instructions of the coating manufacturer and with applicable portions of sspcpa num when those requirements are not in conflict with the standard specifications .
in the event of a conflict between the manufacturers technical data and this specification the contractor will comply with this section unless the manufacturers requirements are more restrictive .
when the manufacturers requirements are more restrictive the contractor will advise the engineer of the discrepancies in writing and comply with the more restrictive requirement .
the engineers decision will be final .
the surface must be thoroughly dry and free of moisture dust grease or any other substance that would prevent the bond of subsequent paint applications .
all protective coatings require certification from the manufacturer including that the primer coat can be applied at a relative humidity up to num percent and a temperature as low as num f. do not paint when the temperature of the air paint or metal is below that described in the product technical data sheet when the air is misty or when conditions are otherwise unsatisfactory .
only apply paint when the surface temperature is greater than num f above the dew point .
if condensation is observed on the steel heat or dehumidify until the condensation is removed and conditions are acceptable to begin painting .
after the surface is prepared apply a brushedon stripe coat of the primer on all areas e.g .
edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members rivets or bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines similar surface irregularities .
this stripe coat must be of sufficient thickness to completely hide the surface and must be followed as soon as practical by the application of the full primer coat to its specified thickness .
the contractor must extend the stripe coat a minimum of num inch from surface edges .
all bare steel must be primed within num hours of being blast cleaned and within num hours if the steel has been washed .
if any flash rusting occurs it will be removed by blasting to meet the specification before painting .
paint will be applied to the clean surfaces as follows coating dry film thickness mils stripe primer num num prime num num intermediate num num top num num the contractor will thoroughly clean the surface of each coat before the application of the next coat to remove dirt dust and other interference material .
ensure the removal of detrimental residue from surfaces e.g .
corners pockets .
clean the surfaces by brushing vacuuming or blowing down with compressed air .
remove any grease or oil deposited on the surface of any of the applied coats by solvent cleaning in accordance with sspcsp num before the application of the next coat .
remove and replace any paint that is exposed to unacceptable conditions e.g .
rain dew before adequate curing .
d. methods of application .
the contractor will apply all coats by the methods shown below unless the methods recommended by the paint manufacturer are more restrictive .
take steps to control paint overspray drips splashes and spills .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
airless or conventional spray application .
use airless or conventional spray as appropriate for the coating material .
if conventional spray is approved for use verify that the compressed air supply is clean and dry as determined by the blotter test in accordance with astm dnum .
num .
brush application .
use round or oval brushes .
brush apply the paint using a series of small circles to thoroughly fill in all surface irregularities and end with a series of parallel strokes to smooth the finish .
on vertical surfaces brush the final strokes vertically .
num .
roller application .
select a nap size and roller quality that will properly wet the substrate and produce a smooth uniform film and finish .
apply the coating in such a manner as to achieve complete and thorough coverage of the surface .
num .
daubers .
on surfaces that are inaccessible for paintbrushes use sheepskins or daubers especially constructed for the purpose .
apply each coat only after the previous coat has been allowed to dry as required by the manufacturers written instructions but as soon as possible to minimize the length of time that the coating is exposed to dust and con tamination .
do not allow any coat to remain exposed for longer than the manufacturers written instructions for maximum recoat time before recoating .
if a coat exceeds the manufacturers maximum recoat times for any reason remove and replace the coating .
as an alternative to removing and replacing the coating the contractor may use a specialized surface preparation method .
if so the contractor must provide written instructions from the coating manufacturer e.g .
scarifying the surface to properly prepare the surface to receive the next coat .
the specialized steps must be approved by the engineer in writing .
the contractor will perform the specialized cleaning or removal and replacement of the coatings at no additional cost to the department .
apply each coat at the proper consistency to ensure thorough wetting of the substrate or underlying coat and to achieve a smooth streamlined surface free of dry spray overspray and orange peel .
shadowthrough pinholes bubbles blisters fish eyes skips misses lap marks between applications runs or sags or other visible discontinuities in any coat are unacceptable and must be repaired .
thoroughly coat all surfaces especially hardtoreach areas and irregular surfaces .
when coating configurations e.g .
bolts rivets apply the material from multiple directions to ensure complete coverage .
use wet film thickness gauges in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum to verify the thickness of each coat at the time of application .
apply each coat to the specified thickness .
notify the engineer of any conflicts between the manufacturers recommended dry film thickness and the thickness shown .
the engineers decision will be final .
ensure uneven surfaces e.g .
edges corners crevices welds bolt heads rivets fasteners receive a dry film thickness equivalent to that of flat surfaces .
measure the dry film thickness of each coat using nondestructive magnetic dry film thickness gauges .
comply with sspcpa num for the calibration and use of the gauges and the frequency of thickness measurements .
the dry film thickness must be measured for acceptance using astm dnum method a or b .
if a discrepancy arises about an individual coat thickness or coverage it will be verified using astm dnum method a i.e .
tooke gauge when authorized and witnessed by the engineer .
the tooke gauge readings will be final in determining the dry film thickness of the coatings .
on areas where the tooke gauge is used to determine coating thickness the test area must be repaired according to the approved repair procedure .
repair to the test area will be done at no additional cost .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num apply additional coating of the same type to areas of insufficient thickness .
ensure all repairs blend in with the surrounding surfaces .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer in writing remove excessive coating thickness and reapply the affected coats .
utilize an approved wet film thickness gauge during application of each individual coat in conjunction with an approved dry film thickness gauge following subsequent minimum cure times .
paint film thickness measurements must be made and documented after each application .
where thickness measurements fall below the specified minimum additional applications of paint must be made to meet the thickness required .
all coatings must be inspected and approved by the engineer before the next coating is applied .
apply all coats in such a manner to ensure that they are well adhered to each other and to the substrate .
if the application of any coat causes lifting of an underlying coat or there is poor adhesion between coats or to the substrate remove the coating in the affected area to adjacent sound adherent coating and reapply the material .
if adhesion is questionable conduct adhesion tests in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum as directed and repair all test areas .
the engineer will establish the acceptance criteria for the testing .
replace all defective coating that is revealed by the testing .
repair of damage and unacceptable coatings will be repaired according to the manufacturers written guidelines and these minimum standards .
feather the existing coating surrounding each repair location .
feather for a distance of num to num inches to provide a smooth tapered transition into the existing intact coating .
verify the edges of coating around the periphery of the repair areas are tight and intact by probing with a putty knife in accordance with the requirements of sspcsp num .
roughen the existing coating in the feathered area to ensure proper adhesion of the repair coats .
when the bare substrate is exposed in the repair area properly prepare the surface and apply the coating system to the specified thickness .
when the damage does not extend to the bare substrate repair according to the manufacturers written instructions and the engineers approval .
maintain the thickness of the system in overlap areas within the specified total thickness tolerances .
e. waste collection and disposal .
wastes contained in accordance with these standard specifications must be disposed of in accordance with sspcguide num .
the contractor must obtain and provide epa hazardous waste identification numbers assigned through deq required for collection transportation and disposal of the hazardous waste .
the contractor is fully responsible for proper transport to the designated location .
provide the engineer all necessary information related to the manifesting transporting treatment or disposal of classified hazardous waste .
the engineer must approve the process and the tracking of the material .
it is the departments responsibility to ensure proper handling and disposal of this material .
waste materials must be contained and collected in an approved area .
temporary storage on the project site before transport and disposal will be as if the spent material was hazardous .
storage facilities and containers must meet all state and federal requirements for the storage of hazardous material .
the contractor must institute procedures to prevent spilling of all paint materials .
spills must be cleaned up immediately .
all contaminated material including soil will be tested and disposed .
all trash generated during the contractors operation that becomes contaminated in any way with hazardous substances will be disposed of as a hazardous material .
all spent materials and waste debris will be cleaned up within the containment enclosure daily or before any prolonged work stoppage e.g .
weather interruptions .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction all spent materials and waste debris will be placed in suitable waste storage containers located on the project site .
the waste containers and storage arrangement must be reviewed by the engineer and must be located to avoid potential traffic or environmental hazards .
the contractor will perform weekly inspection of the stored hazardous waste to ensure storage security .
within num calendar days of the removal of waste material from the project site the contractor must submit a certificate to the engineer stating that the material has been disposed of in accordance with sspcguide num .
the contractor will also provide the engineer with documentation verifying compliance .
the documentation must include information on manifesting traceability storage sampling testing shipping or treatment .
f. quality control inspections .
qc is the contractors responsibility .
perform and document all inspection and testing as necessary to ensure conformance with this specification .
qc documentation must include the salt concentrations surface profile coating thickness and paint batch numbers for each coating applied .
all documentation must be made available to the engineer for review before conducting the next step of the operation .
a representative from the paint manufacturer must be present at the beginning of painting to ensure proper application techniques are being adhered to and to establish the proper painting parameters .
g. quality assurance inspections .
qa is the departments prerogative .
the department will perform inspection and testing necessary to verify that an acceptable product is being furnished in accordance with this specification .
all cleaning and painting will be subject to quality assurance inspection and approval .
inspections will be made as determined by the department and the contractor will provide the necessary means to perform proper inspections .
num method of measurement .
painting structural steel will be measured by lump sum .
num basis of payment .
payment for accepted work will be made as follows .
pay item pay unit painting structural steel ls costs associated with furnishing the impermeable or impenetrable cover materials drapes anchors supports and other materials necessary for the containment enclosures and installing and removing of the containment enclosures are considered incidental and will be performed at no additional cost to the department .
a separate payment will not be made for hazardous waste disposal of materials from contamination due to spills .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num ancillary construction num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num conduits general num description .
construct culverts siphons irrigation lines sewers underdrains and embankment protectors .
num materials .
meet the joint requirements of aashto pp num for silttight and leakresistant joints .
determine the strength and thickness of the pipe required based on the cover over the pipe see standard drawings .
provide the specified type of pipe including gaskets if required .
provide pipe extensions of the same material type or class as the existing pipe .
provide materials as specified in concrete sewer pipe num concrete pipe for irrigation or drainage num reinforced concrete pipe num corrugated metal pipe num abs composite sewer pipe num class ps num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe num ribbed polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe num steel reinforced ribbed polyethylene srrpe pipe num polypropylene pipe num num construction requirements .
a .
general .
anchor exposed culvert ends with headwalls or standard metal or concrete end sections .
the contractor may bore or jack to cross under cross walks house drives or service pipes .
b .
concrete pipe .
install concrete pipe to meet astm cnum .
provide mastic joints for elliptical concrete pipe or gasketed joints for round concrete pipe .
mastic pipes are classified as silt tight while gasketed joints are classified as watertight .
lay concrete pipe beginning at the lower end with the receiving end upstream with the ends fully and closely joined .
construct joints using one of the following methods num .
mastic joints .
clean the bell and spigot joint surfaces .
remove any dirt debris flashing or concrete high points which could keep the joint from coming together .
place mastic on the leading outside edge of the spigot all the way around the circumference of the spigot .
join the sealant into num continuous strand by kneading the ends together where they meet .
do not stretch or overlap the sealant .
once the sealant is installed do not step on the sealant or allow dirt or debris to fall on to the sealant .
num .
gasketed joints .
three types of gaskets are common to concrete pipe oring profile and selflubricating .
the contractor will coordinate with the manufacturer to properly install the gaskets and lubricate if necessary .
test the line for leakage in accordance with astm cnum .
substitute reasonable procedures for other materials where necessary if a similar astm specification does not exist for the material being tested .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the engineer will not accept the sewer line if the water loss exceeds num gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile per day .
locate and correct any leaks if the loss exceeds the volume allowed .
the contractor may use the lowpressure air method as an acceptable alternate to hydraulic testing per astm cnum .
construct manholes catch basins inlets sediment and oil trap manholes and sediment control catch basins as specified in num .
c. corrugated metal pipe .
install corrugated metal pipe to meet astm anum .
lay the corrugated metal pipe with the outside laps of the circumferential joints pointing upstream and with the longitudinal laps on the sides .
place the lugs on the coupling metal pipe bands to num side of the pipe top centerline so they will not extend above the pipe .
install silttight coupling bands for corrugated metal pipes .
corrugated metal pipe should not be used in locations where a leakresistant conduit is required .
d. plastic pipe .
submit a certificate of compliance for plastic pipe including the average pipe stiffness resin material cell classification and manufacture date .
install plastic pipe to meet astm dnum and the manufacturers written instructions .
all plastic pipe will be inspected with a mandrel not sooner than num calendar days after the final backfill has been placed and compacted .
the mandrel will be set at num percent less than the actual inside diameter of the pipe .
the diameter of the mandrel will be verified with a proving ring or other method according to the manufacturers written instructions .
the mandrel must contain at least num equally spaced runners num angles .
the mandrel inspection will be performed in the engineers presence .
failure to pass the mandrel test with less than num percent deflection will result in rejection and installation of new pipe .
testing for original sections and retesting of replaced sections will be repeated until num percent of the pipes can pass the test .
use fittings that meet astm dnum .
use gaskets that meet astm fnum .
do not use couplings unless engineer approved .
test lines for leakage in accordance with astm fnum .
no leakage rate is allowed .
the contractor may test by the lowpressure air method as an acceptable alternate to hydraulic testing in accordance with astm fnum .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as specified in the contract pay items .
the department will list pipe by diameter and total estimated length in the bid schedule .
each diameter category may include num or a combination of types thickness or class of material .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities of pipe by type at the contract unit price shown on the bid schedule .
the department will not adjust the contract unit price because of normal minor adjustments in length of individual kinds of pipe .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num culverts num description .
provide and install culverts .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
provide pipe joints that are either silttight or leakresistance as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
install pipes as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot along pipe centerline .
the engineer will allow an additional num foot for each connecting band used in making an authorized extension of existing corrugated metal pipe .
the engineer will include culvert sections attached to aprons in the measurement of culverts .
pipe aprons required only because pvc or pe pipe is used will not be measured or paid for separately when other pipe material is acceptable .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit _____ pipe culverts ft _____ pipe arch ft the department will pay for structural excavation and compacting backfill including the removal of unsuitable material below the established grade as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num pipe siphons num description .
provide and install pipe siphons .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
provide pipe joints that are leakresistant with a maximum working pressure of num psi as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
install metal pipe siphons as specified in num .
completely fill the siphon with water and repair leaks that develop before backfilling using approved methods .
if there are leaks around joints in rubbergasketed concrete pipe encase the joint using an approved reinforced concrete collar .
only num collar and joint repairs are allowed for each num feet of pipe .
empty the siphon of water before making repairs and then refill retest and obtain approval before backfilling .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot along pipe centerline .
the engineer may calculate the length from the dimensions of the approved siphon layout .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit __ pipe siphon ft the department will pay for structural excavation and compacting backfill including the removal of unsuitable material below the established grade as specified in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num irrigation pipelines num description .
provide and install irrigation pipelines .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
provide pipe joints that are leakresistant with a maximum working pressure of num psi as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
install pipe as specified in num .
test for leaks by closing off a section with suitable water bulkheads filling the line with water and applying pressure to the line equal to the maximum static head the finished line will be subjected to at the point of testing .
locate and repair leaks as approved .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot along pipe centerline .
the engineer will allow an additional num foot for each connecting band used in making an authorized extension of existing corrugated metal pipe .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit __ irrigation pipe ft structure excavation and compacting backfill is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price for irrigation pipe .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num sewers manhole and valve covers num description .
construct sewers with manholes inlets connections and other appurtenances to carry stormwater or sewage .
adjust and repair manhole and valve covers .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in gaskets for concrete pipe num rubber gaskets for corrugated metal pipe num manhole covers and rings grates catch basins inlets etc num portland cement num aggregate num metals num concrete curing compounds and admixtures num concrete num reinforcing steel num provide pipe joints that are silttight or leakresistant as specified in num .
provide other materials as specified in num .
corrugated pe pipe may only be used for storm sewers as specified in num and with the following additions num .
use type s pipe .
num .
do not subject a pipeline with couplings to pressure flow .
use only precast concrete manufacturers that hold current certificaton under the npca plant certification program the pcaa plan certification program the acpa qcast plant cerifications program or the pci plant certification program .
num construction requirements .
the contractor may tunnel or jack to cross under cross walks house drives or service pipes .
excavate and compact backfill as specified in num .
lay concrete pipe for sanitary sewer lines beginning at the lower end with the receiving end upstream and with ends fully joined using suitable means to prevent air circulation within the pipeline .
provide and install rubber gasketed joints as specified in num .
install pipes as specified in num .
test the line for leaks before accepting the sewer line as specified in num .
install spiral rib corrugated steel pipe and abs pipe in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
test the line for leaks before accepting the sewer line as follows num .
close off a section with suitable watertight bulkheads .
a .
fill the line with water .
b .
apply num feet of head pressure to the line measured from the top of the pipe at the upstream end and supplying water to the section under test so the water loss may be measured .
the engineer will not accept the sewer line if the water loss exceeds num gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile per day .
locate and correct any leaks if the loss exceeds the volume allowed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the contractor may test by the low pressure air method as an acceptable alternate to hydraulic testing as follows num .
test installation on runs or sections .
the department will allow preliminary testing before backfilling .
test when the pipe is in a wet condition .
num .
use an approved apparatus and method recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
num .
prepare the installation being tested between its plugged ends by pressurizing it to an internal pressure of num psi .
air pressure is defined as the pressure in excess of back pressure on the installation that would occur if the pipe were submerged in water .
hold an air pressure of num psi for at least num minutes or as long as needed for the pressure to stabilize .
num .
the tested section when tested on the air pressure drop method will be if the time required for the pressure to drop from num to num psi coincides with astm cnum .
the contractor may test connections to inlet and outlet structures by blocking off a pipe section of the outlet filling the structure with water and observing the water surface drop .
to be acceptable water loss must not exceed num gallons per inch of inside perimeter of connection per foot of structure height or length per hour with no outside back pressure .
construct manholes catch basins inlets sediment and oil trap manholes and sediment control catch basins as specified in num .
a .
adjusting manhole and valve covers .
adjust the existing manhole and valve covers to conform to the new finished pavement grade .
exercise care in all operations in order to not damage the structures equipment or utilities e.g .
water gas power .
any damage occurring to the utilities due to the contractors operation will be repaired at no additional cost to the department .
make any masonry adjustment by using bricks concrete blocks or placed concrete .
coordinate with the utility owner num business days before lowering the manhole or valve covers .
locate and lower the manhole or valve covers before excavation and adjust to match the finished pavement grade .
where excavation is necessary to adjust to the design elevation place backfill in numinch lifts and tamp by hand .
place concrete collars around manholes and valve covers as specified .
the concrete collar will be num foot wide measured from the metal cover edge to the cut pavement edge .
a numfoot straightedge will be used to determine the completed installation surface smoothness .
place concrete collars ¼ inch below the finished grade .
adjust any high points by grinding .
b. manholes valves catch basins and inlets .
construct manholes valve frames and covers catch basins and inlets .
adjust existing manhole and valve frames and covers to the finished pavement grade .
coordinate with the utility owner num business days before making adjustments .
replace damaged manhole or valve frames and covers .
install concrete collars around manhole and valve frames .
use idaho ir num to test surface smoothness .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure the acceptably completed work as follows num .
by the foot along pipe centerline excluding the distance across catch basins manholes inlets and other structures where the pipe or a portion of pipe is not actually incorporated in the finished product .
num .
manholes catch basins and inlets by the each .
num .
manhole and valve frame and cover adjustment replacement by the each .
the engineer will not measure structure excavation and backfill .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit _____ storm sewer pipe ft _____ sanitary sewer pipe ft manholes type __ each catch basins type __ each inlets type __ each sediment and oil trap manhole each sediment control catch basin each adjust manhole covers each adjust valve covers each replace damaged manhole frame each replace damaged valve risers each structure excavation and compacting backfill are incidental and included in the sewer contract unit prices .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num pipe underdrains and urban and rural edge drains num description .
provide place and inspect pipe underdrains rural edge drains and urban edge drain pipes .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in coarse aggregate for concrete drain rock coarse aggregate size num numa numb num.c subgrade separation geotextile type iii num corrugated pe drainage tubing perforated and unperforated num fittings for pe drainage tubing num grout mortar num metalliccoated corrugated steel underdrains num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains num pvc pipe perforated and unperforated num corrugated steel pipe metalliccoated for sewers and drains aashto m num rodent protection devices for trench drain num edge drain markers num provide drain rock that is clean angular quarried or crushed rock .
the department will accept drain rock by certification .
submit quality control test results that represent each num tons of drain rock placed with at least num test per contract including gradation aashto t num with no wash required and sand equivalent aashto t num to verify the certification .
perform quality control sampling and testing using a qualified independent laboratory and submit the test results .
the contractor may provide a grout product that is on the qpl or submit a proposed mix design for approval .
submit a completed certification itdnum form .
num construction requirements .
a .
general .
line the trench with geotextile .
lay perforated pipe with the perforations down .
place drain rock around the pipe and to the elevation over the pipe .
fold geotextile over the drain rock and overlap at least num feet on the top and at the drain ends .
place approved backfill material to the top of the trench and compact .
install geotextile drainage pipe or tubing and aggregate backfill as specified or as directed .
place the materials as specified over pipe underdrains urban edge drains and rural edge drains .
b .
urban edge drains .
fieldverify locations of urban edge drains in the engineers presence .
at locations where a storm sewer exists or is to be constructed the following applies num .
place the edge drains on the low side of the roadway .
num .
install edge drains to discharge into stormwater sewer catch basins .
num .
cap edge drain inlets in stormwater sewer catch basins and make their outlet pipes drain to a stormwater sewer catch basin .
num .
construct the edge drain slope to follow the grade of the roadway except where side street grades will not allow .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
slope side street edge drains as specified or as directed .
num .
where the plans show edge drain pipe connecting to stormwater sewer catch basins make the connection by coring the concrete wall of the catch basin place the end of the edge drain pipe in line with the inside wall of the catch basin .
num .
seal the gap between the edge drain and the concrete wall of the catch basin with grout mortar and ensure a watertight connection .
c. rural edge drains and pipe underdrains .
excavate for rural edge drains and pipe underdrains as specified in num .
install rodent protection devices for outlet pipes and mark them with a witness post as specified in num bearing the letters ud on white reflective sheeting .
place the outlet pipes in numfoot long corrugated steel pipe sleeves extending from the rodent protectors and with the diameter of the corrugated steel pipes just large enough to allow the outlet pipes to fit through .
ensure the maximum depth of trench excavation for pipe underdrains is less than num feet .
d. drain rock .
place drain rock within designated areas .
e. inspection .
before final acceptance of the work demonstrate to the engineer the drains and outlet pipes are in good condition and have not been damaged during or after installation .
use video inspection equipment to record the drains condition and submit copies of the videos in an approved format .
notify the engineer at least num hours before the video inspection so the engineer may witness the videotaping .
provide video inspection equipment capable of superimposing the date time and location on the picture at the time of inspection .
if the video inspection shows damage repair the damage at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit pipe underdrain ft urban edge drain ft rural edge drain ft concrete coring grout mortar or other items necessary to complete the installation are incidental and the cost included in the urban edge drain contract unit price .
video inspection is incidental and included in the contract unit prices for other items .
the department will pay for materials placed over pipe underdrains urban edge drains and rural edge drains under their respective contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num embankment protectors num description .
provide and install corrugated metal embankment protectors .
num materials .
use entrance and exit sections that meet the requirements of aashto m num or aashto m num .
provide the discharge pipe as specified in num .
use all steel or all aluminum for each assembly .
num construction requirements .
install the entrance device to prevent water from percolating under or around the structure .
install discharge pipe as specified in num .
securely anchor the pipe to the ground surface where it is not possible to provide a trench for the installation .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
embankment protectors will be by each unit .
an entrance and an exit section is num unit .
num .
discharge pipe will be by the foot .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit embankment protector type ___ each discharge pipe ft the department will measure and pay for materials necessary to pave the inlet area as specified in num or num .
excavation backfill outlet protection and anchorage are incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num pipe aprons num description .
provide and install aprons as specified to the inlet and outlet ends of pipe culverts .
num materials .
provide material aprons as specified in concrete aprons num metal aprons num use galvanized or stainless steel bolts nuts and washers .
galvanize other material to meet aashto m num .
fabricate safety longitudinal and optional bars from steel pipe meeting the requirements of astm anum schedule num and hotdipped galvanize the bars after fabrication for metal safety aprons .
use galvanized steel that meets aashto m num .
use class num concrete for apron cutoffs .
use concrete aprons that meet the reinforced class iii concrete pipe .
provide metal or concrete aprons for installation .
attached aprons are required to use the same material as the aprons used for the pipe material .
num construction requirements .
shape area occupied by the apron to conform to the bottom of the structure and to provide a firm and uniform support over its entire area .
backfill cutoff walls and areas adjacent to the apron to prevent undercutting or erosion .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the each .
the engineer will include the culvert sections attached to aprons in the measurement of the culverts .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit ___ aprons for pipe each ___ metal safety apron parallel each ___ metal safety apron cross drainage each structure excavation and compacting backfill are incidental and the cost included in the pipe apron unit price .
concrete for the cutoff is incidental and is included in the aprons contract unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num minor structures num description .
construct minor structures e.g .
drops weirs checks diversion boxes culvert and siphon headwalls and inlet and outlet structures for canals and pipes .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in concrete num reinforcing steel num timber num use class num concrete .
accompany each shipment of reinforcing steel delivered with a completed itdnum form with a copy of the mill test report attached for each heat number included .
the department will take field samples for each heat number and bar size from material delivered .
ensure the supplier submits proper identification with each shipment to readily identify each bar size by heat number .
the engineer will reject reinforcing steel delivered that can not be identified by heat number .
replace rejected reinforcing steel at no cost to the department .
sample complete fabricated bars and order additional bars to account for the field sampling .
do not cut and splice bars to obtain samples .
the engineer will accept the following for field samples num .
if the bar is configured so two numinch long test specimens can be cut from num bar then only num bar constitutes a field sample .
num .
otherwise num complete fabricated bars constitute a single field sample .
fabricate reinforcing steel spirals with additional length to accommodate sampling .
the engineer will not allow cutting that would require splicing to obtain samples .
the engineer will reject bars with failing heat numbers .
replace rejected material at no additional cost to the department .
provide metal grates that meet the requirements of astm anum .
meet the requirements of the american welding society dnum when welding the grates .
use grates for the inlet headwalls only when specified .
grates do not need to be painted or galvanized .
num construction requirements .
excavate and backfill as specified in num .
construct minor structures as specified in num and num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
concrete by the cubic yard as specified in num .
num .
metal reinforcement by the pound of reinforcing steel as specified in num .
num .
timber and lumber by the thousand feet board measure mfbm .
num .
when minor structures are by each material is incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit concrete cy metal reinforcement lb timber treated mfbm timber untreated mfbm minor structures each structure excavation compacting backfill grates and other related hardware cost is incidental and included in the contract unit prices for other contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num fences num description .
provide and erect wire fence and gates .
comply with num .
num materials .
provide materials as specified nonstructural concrete num barbed wire num woven wire num hardware for barbed or woven wire fence num metal fence posts num chain link fence num wood fence posts num num construction requirements .
remove trees brush and other obstacles along the fence line .
remove and dispose of material as specified in num .
see standard drawing notes for additional construction requirements for each specific fence and gate type .
set posts plumb to the spacing and depth as specified backfill and firmly tamp .
set posts for chainlink fence in concrete .
after the posts are set stretch and fasten the wire fencing to wooden posts with staples or to steel posts with wire clamps .
use class num concrete for post and brace bases .
crown the surface of the concrete to drain .
when drilling into rock is required to set a post the contractor may shorten the post if at least num inches of post is grouted in the rock .
consider the air temperature when stretching wire .
in hot weather stretch the wire just tight enough to eliminate sags and in cold weather stretch the wire very tight .
in either temperature condition do not stretch the woven wire so tight the preformed kinks in the horizontal wires are straightened .
provide num inch by num inch no .
num common douglas fir or larch horizontal and inclined wood braces .
dap posts to receive the braces and anchor the ends of the brace with three numpenny nails or a ⅜ inch by num inch steel dowel .
apply a coat of pentachlorophenol solution chromated copper arsenate cca or ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate acza to daps on the posts and the ends of the braces before assembly .
provide brace wires consisting of num loops of numgauge wire twisted to form a taut cable .
lightly notch the posts to position the wire and drive num staples at each notch to secure the wire .
when using metal braces securely splice the tie wires to the fence on both sides of the posts so there are num loops behind the post and num loop in front or wrap the fence wires around the post and tie off .
locate the concrete blocks for the angle braces so at least num inches of the angle brace are embedded in the concrete .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
fence will be along the slope of the bottom wire by the foot excluding the length between gateposts except for type num gates .
num .
gates will be by the each for the size and type specified except for type num gates .
num .
type num gates will be per each including the braces and fasteners .
the engineer will include the length of type num gates in the measurement for wire fence .
num .
two num type num gates installed in a single opening will be measured as num gates .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
braces will be per each and include line corner and terminal braces constructed of metal or wood .
gate braces are included in the gate item cost .
sag braces are included in the fence item .
braces for chainlink fence will not be measured separately and are included in the fence unit price .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit fence type ___ ft gates type num each gates type ___ each braces each clearing for the fence is incidental and the cost included in the fence contract unit prices .
when barb armsecurity attachment for type num fence is specified the work is incidental and included in the fence contract unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num cattle guards num description .
construct cattle guards .
num materials .
use class num concrete .
provide material as specified in metal reinforcement num structural metals num nonstructural concrete num culverts num fences num num construction requirements .
complete roadway grading at the location of the cattle guard before excavating for the cattle guard .
backfill the structure with granular material as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the each including the wing braces and posts .
the distance between the posts will be excluded from measurement for fence .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit cattle guard type ___ each structural excavation and compacting backfill are incidental and the cost included in the cattle guard contract unit price .
the department will pay for culverts as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num guardrail num description .
provide and install guardrail and concrete barrier .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in concrete num nonstructural concrete num metal reinforcement num guardrail and hardware num wood guardrail posts and wood blockouts num steel guardrail posts num num construction requirements .
a. guardrail .
provide galvanized steel wbeam or thriebeam guardrail .
set posts plumb .
backfill around posts with native soil or pea gravel .
place backfill material in layers and thoroughly tamp .
the contractor may drive the posts if it can be done without damage to posts pavement shoulders or adjacent slopes .
drill timber posts before treating .
field drilling is allowed provided the hole is treated with a wood preservative as specified in num before installing the bolts .
remove replace or reinstall misaligned loose or damaged posts and repair damage to the existing pavement shoulders or adjacent slopes at no additional cost to the department .
b .
concrete barrier .
cure concrete barrier as specified in num .
finish the concrete on precast and castinplace concrete barrier with an ordinary surface finish as specified in num .
set concrete barrier to the line and grade as specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
wbeam guardrail thriebeam guardrail concrete barrier and castinplace concrete barrier will be by the foot including the length of anchors terminals and transitions .
num .
guardrail anchors terminals transitions concrete barrier terminals and concrete connectors will be per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit wbeam guardrail ft thriebeam guardrail ft guardrail anchor each guardrail terminal type each guardrail transition each concrete barrier ft concrete terminal each num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction concrete parapet connector each concrete barrier connector each castinplace concrete barrier ft miscellaneous guardrail or barrier components are incidental and the cost included in the guardrail or barrier contract unit prices .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num crash cushions num description .
provide and install crash cushion .
num materials .
provide crash cushion with pad or foundation as shown on the crash cushion and roadside terminal categorization charts .
provide materials as specified nonstructural concrete num reinforcing steel num num construction requirements .
assemble and install crash cushion and pad or foundation as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
submit an installation and repair manual specific to the installed crash cushion .
provide and install selfadhesive object marker sheeting to the nose of the crash cushion or provide an object marker for each crash cushion .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each installation .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit crash cushion sacrificial sand each crash cushion sacrificial water filled each crash cushion sacrificial metal each crash cushion partially reusable each crash cushion low maintenance each crash cushion pad transitions and object marker are incidental and the cost included in the crash cushion contract unit prices .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num sidewalks driveways and curb ramps num description .
construct sidewalks driveways and curb ramps .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in nonstructural concretenum use detectable warning surfaces consisting of truncated domes aligned in a square or radial pattern as specified .
ensure the color of detectable warning surfaces contrast visually with adjacent curb and gutter street or sidewalk either lightondark or darkonlight .
num construction requirements .
grade and compact the subgrade to num percent of the maximum dry density as determined by aashto t num .
compact aggregate base with at least num passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
provide portland cement concrete as specified in num with the following exceptions num .
floatfinish the concrete so the surface is slightly rough but uniform .
work the slab edges and joints with a ¼ inch radius edging tool .
correct honeycombed or rough spots using mortar consisting of num part cement and num parts approved sand immediately after removing the forms .
num .
place shape and compact earth or other approved material against the edge of the sidewalk or driveway .
num .
construct joints as specified .
num .
cure as specified in num.j .
num .
protect the concrete from damage during freezing weather as specified in num.g .
ensure the detectable warning surface is securely embedded in the concrete and installed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
sidewalks will be by the square yard .
num .
driveways will be by the square yard .
num .
curb ramps will be by the square yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit sidewalk sy driveway sy curb ramp sy aggregate base will be paid as specified in num when an item is included .
detectable warning surfaces are incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
when the contract does not include contract pay items for curb ramp related work this work is incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num curb and gutter num description .
construct curb gutter combination curb and gutter or traffic separators .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in nonstructural concrete num superpave hot mix asphalt num aggregates num reinforcing steel num use class num concrete or use ½ inch nominal maximum aggregate size nmas sp num or sp num nonstructural mixture as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
curb gutter curb and gutter and traffic separators may be castinplace portland cement concrete .
curb and traffic separators may be precast portland cement concrete .
curb may be asphalt concrete .
construct contraction joints in portland cement concrete at numfoot intervals to a minimum depth of num inches .
provide a light broom finish .
cure concrete immediately after finishing as specified in num.j .
when precast cast curb in pieces at least num feet but no more than num feet in length .
provide a smooth glassy finish .
install precast curb on a smooth compacted surface .
tack the roadway surface where asphalt concrete curb will be constructed .
place approved backfill material in layers behind curbs and compact .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
curb and curb and gutter will be by the foot along the face of the curb .
num .
gutter and traffic separator will be by the foot along the centerline of the units .
deductions in length will not be made for embankment protectors catch basins inlets driveways or curb ramps installed in the curb gutter or curb and gutter .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit curb type ___ ft gutter type ___ ft curb and gutter type ___ ft traffic separator type ___ ft the department will pay for the asphalt mix and base under the appropriate contract items .
excavation backfill reinforcing steel and diluted emulsified asphalt for tack coat are incidental and the cost included in the curb and gutter contract unit prices .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num signs and sign supports num description .
provide and install signs and sign supports or reinstall signs .
num .
type b signs sheet aluminum num .
type c signs extruded aluminum panels num .
type e signs hdo plywood num materials .
provide materials as specified in structure excavation and compacting backfill num concrete num structural metals num nonstructural concrete num steel and aluminum sign supports num hardware for signs num extruded aluminum num sheet aluminum num wood sign posts num plywood for type e signs num retroreflective sheeting num silk screen opaque inks num silk screen transparent inks num direct applied nonreflective sheeting and transparent films num use class numa concrete for overhead sign bridges overhead cantilever sign structures and tee sign structures as specified in num .
use class num concrete for other sign support foundations as specified in num .
submit a list of proposed materials for installation for approval .
num construction requirements .
a .
sign types .
construct signs as follows num .
type b num inch minimum thickness sheet aluminum with retroreflective sheeting background and a digitally printed silk screened ink direct applied retroreflective sheeting or direct applied nonreflective sheeting legend and border .
remove burrs and sharp edges after fabrication .
num .
type c extruded aluminum panels with retroreflective sheeting background and a direct applied retroreflective legend and border .
use on multiple post signs overhead sign bridges cantilever sign structures or tee sign structures .
num .
type e ½ inch or ⅝ inch hdo plywood with retroreflective sheeting background and a digitally printed silk screened ink direct applied retroreflective sheeting or direct applied nonreflective sheeting legend and border .
use ½ inch thickness for signs smaller than num inches by num inches .
use ⅝ inch plywood for signs num inches by num inches or larger .
fill and sand voids in edges with wood filler then apply edge sealer .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
sign sheeting .
apply sheeting and screen printing as follows num .
cleaning .
clean substrates background sheeting and film as recommended by the manufacturer before application of additional sheeting and films .
do not use cleaners that damage the surface .
num .
butt splices .
use a maximum of num butt splice placed vertically or horizontally with a num inch or smaller gap on signs larger than num inches wide or on numinch extruded aluminum panels .
ensure the color and orientation of the sheeting match .
num .
pop rivets .
pop rivets may be used to attach logo sign panels to a specific service sign .
pop rivets may be used to attach route shields to an existing highway sign .
num .
orientation .
orient retroreflective sheeting as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
adherence .
ensure that sheeting is free of cracks discoloration air pockets or other nonadherence .
num .
screen printing .
screen print sign legends using transparent inks in conformance with the sheeting manufacturers matched component system mcs .
provided screen printed items with a uniform smooth regular outline .
num .
cutting and plotting .
provide letters numbers borders and symbols with a smooth regular outline .
num .
finish .
trim sheeting flush with the sign edges .
ensure the sheeting on extruded aluminum is wrapped into the sheeting groove .
num .
storage and transport .
store and ship finished signs with separation paper between the sign faces .
ensure no more than num signs are stacked horizontally .
vertically store and ship when there are more than num signs .
num .
retroreflectivity .
ensure the sheeting meets minimum retroreflectivity requirements .
repair or replace devices found to be damaged or defective .
c. sign supports .
num .
ground mounted signs .
construct ground mounted signs and as follows a .
risk category low .
b .
fatigue category not applicable .
num .
overhead sign bridges cantilever sign structures and tee sign structures .
submit plans and design calculations that are sealed by an idaho licensed professional engineer .
ensure the sign structure is designed as detailed in the aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals as follows a .
risk category typical .
b .
fatigue category num .
before fabrication submit shop drawings and design calculations in pdf format for approval .
allow num business days for review and approval .
submit asbuilt shop drawings in pdf format .
ensure that welds are performed as specified in num.m .
d. foundations .
construct foundations and place grade and compact backfill and surface material .
a formed cylindrical or square foundation may be used where a foundation hole can not be augured .
if solid rock is encountered drill and grout reinforcing steel into the rock when approved .
num .
ground mounted sign foundations construct foundations for ground mounted signs .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
overhead sign bridges cantilever sign structures and tee sign structures .
install anchor bolts plumb within num degree .
use num nuts and num washers on each anchor bolt num leveling nut and num washer below the base plate and num nuts and num washer above the base plate .
ensure leveling nuts with washer bear against the underside of the base plate before tightening the top nuts .
tighten the lower top nut beyond snugtight as specified in table num .
table num nut rotation beyond snugtight anchor bolt diameter in fnum grade num fnum grades num and num or num num turn num turn num num turn num turn tighten the upper top nut against the lower top nut snugtight .
ensure at least num threads of the anchor bolt are visible above the second nut .
tighten bolts as specified in num.l.num .
place and compact backfill as specified in num .
e. reinstall signs .
when indicated store and reinstall or relocate signs that were previously removed under num .
protect signs during removal transport and storage to prevent damage .
ensure that no more than num signs are stacked horizontally .
vertically store and ship when there are more than num signs .
repair or replace damaged signs .
reinstall signs with new hardware and posts .
install sign brackets and brace angles if applicable .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
signs will be by the square foot to the nearest num square foot .
the sign area is the rectangular shape that encompasses the sign panel except for triangular signs which will be by a triangular shape .
num .
breakaway steel sign posts will be by the pound exclusive of galvanizing .
num .
breakaway wood sign posts will be by the thousand feet board measure mfbm installed .
num .
sign brackets and brace angles are measured by the pound exclusive of galvanizing .
num .
breakaway steel sign post installation including foundations hardware and breakaway base assembly will be per each .
num .
overhead sign bridges cantilever sign structures and tee sign structures including foundations will be per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit signs type ___ sf breakaway steel sign posts type ___ lb sign brackets and brace angles lb breakaway wood sign posts type ___ mfbm breakaway steel sign post installation type ___ each num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num overhead sign bridge cantilever sign structure or tee sign structure each reinstall signs each covering and uncovering signs will be at no additional cost to the department .
when reinstalling signs pay for new posts post installation and new sign brackets and brace angles with the respective pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num delineator and milepost assemblies num description .
provide and install delineator and milepost assemblies .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in nonstructural concrete num rigid posts for delineators snow poles and mileposts num sheet aluminum num retroreflective sheeting num silk screen opaque inks num silk screen transparent inks num flexible posts for delineators num delineators may have rigid or flexible posts .
use rigid posts if snow poles will be installed .
use class num concrete .
num construction requirements .
set delineators and mileposts plumb .
submit the manufacturers written installation instructions for flexible delineator posts .
if the milepost location is within num feet of an established delineator remove the delineator .
a. delineator assemblies .
delineator types num num num or num consist of a delineator post and a delineator .
delineator types num num num or num consist of a stub post and a delineator for installation on concrete barrier .
delineator type num assemblies vary in shape and may be attached to concrete barrier to guardrail posts or to w beam guardrail .
attach in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
submit the manufacturers written instructions before installation .
attach sheet aluminum with retroreflective sheeting to rigid posts .
attach retroreflective sheeting to flexible posts .
use type iv or higher retroreflective sheeting .
b. milepost assembly .
a milepost assembly consists of a concrete foundation post and milepost sign .
if a precast foundation is used dig the foundation hole to a dimension larger than the concrete foundation and then backfill and tamp using approved material .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit delineators type ___ each mileposts type ___ each num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num marker posts witness posts and street monuments num description .
provide and place posts for right of way reference and project markers witness posts and street monuments .
num materials .
provide concrete for the posts and street monuments as specified in num .
use white portland cement for project markers .
after the project markers have dried thoroughly add the letters using num coats of an approved black paint .
allow the first coat to dry thoroughly before applying the second coat .
if light weight aggregates are used provide aggregates in accordance with astm cnum .
provide brass caps as specified in num .
provide steel witness posts as specified in num except the holes may be omitted .
provide cast iron casings that meet the requirements of aashto m num .
an approved equal for the cover and casting is acceptable .
provide wood witness posts of cedar or fir that are well seasoned straight and sound .
treat the posts as specified in num .
paint wood witness posts white with num coat of formula no .
num and num coats of formula no .
num as specified in num .
provide fiberglass witness posts that are single piece markers capable of simple permanent installation by num person using a manual driving tool and resist displacement from wind and vehicle impact forces when properly installed .
provide posts that are a constant t crosssection design which provides a flat surface for sheeting application and a reinforcing rib incorporated longitudinally along the back midsection to provide structural rigidity .
put a point on the bottom end of the markers for easier ground penetration .
provide fiberglass witness posts complying with the properties in table num .
table num fiberglass post criteria property astm test method minimum value ultimate tensile strength dnum num psi specific gravity dnum num weight percent glass reinforcement ignition loss dnum num percent barcol hardness dnum num fabricate fiberglass witness posts of a durable uv light resistant continuous glass fiber and marble reinforced and thermosetting composite material that is resistant to impact ozone and hydrocarbons within a service temperature range of num f to num f. color the posts uniformly throughout the entire crosssection .
incorporate ultraviolet resistant material to inhibit fading or cracking of the markers on field exposure .
ensure the markers exhibit negligible color fading after num hours in accordance with astm gnum .
num construction requirements .
set right of way markers reference markers witness posts and street monuments as specified .
make markings and file recordings under the supervision of an idaho licensed pls when required by num idaho code num idaho code or idapa num .
separate payment will not be made for endorsements or filing fees when work is specified for contract surveying .
mark right of way and centerlane monuments with station and offset .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction excavate hole of sufficient size to permit adjustment of the marker post to the lines required .
align the posts as directed and backfill the hole with suitable material .
carefully tamp in place .
give the upper num feet of the posts for project markers and the upper num inches of the posts for right of way markers a rubbed surface finish as specified in num.i .
cure for a minimum period of num days before use .
place the brass cap in a casing with cover in heavy traffic areas .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit project markers each right of way markers each reference markers each witness posts each street monuments each num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num illumination num description .
provide and install illumination of one of the following types num .
type num .
multiple circuit led sign lighting .
num .
type num .
multiple circuit led street lighting .
installations may include electrical conduit wiring luminaires poles pole foundations and electrical equipment necessary for the construction of a complete lighting system .
num materials .
provide materials that bear the seal of approval of the underwriters laboratories inc. ul national electrical manufacturers association nema or other approved testing organizations .
materials must also meet the nec and local codes and requirements of the connecting utility .
provide materials as specified in concrete num nonstructural concrete num illumination poles and bases num service poles for illumination num pole keys num led luminaries num rigid steel conduit num plastic conduit num concrete junction boxes num composite junction boxes num electrical conductors num illumination pole foundations require structural concrete as specified in num .
electrical service pedestal foundations require nonstructural concrete as specified in num .
submit a list of proposed equipment and materials for approval .
for each item listed include manufacturers name size and catalog number .
submit nonstandard pole design for approval before use .
num construction requirements .
provide work that meets the nec and local codes and requirements of the connecting utility .
where soil conditions allow excavate for pole foundations to the neat lines of the foundation and place the concrete directly against the sides of the excavation .
where soil conditions prohibit this form the foundations and place the concrete as specified in num .
place backfill and compact as specified in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction a. conduit installation .
resurface with material equal to that removed .
place underground conduit at least num inches below the finished surface .
ensure underground conduit does not conflict with poles guardrail or posts sign foundations other underground utilities .
provide rigid steel conduit for exposed service conduit .
attach conduit to utility company poles as directed by the utility company .
use standard factory fittings e.g .
elbows bends tees couplings throughout the conduit runs .
make turns in conduit runs by bending the conduit without kinking or flattening by using the largest radius practical or by using standard factory fittings .
obtain approval of conduit installation before backfilling .
separate conduit runs with at least num inches of sand or soil cushion .
place underground hazard tape in the fill num inches above conduits .
provide tape for ac electrical circuits that is red in color num inches wide and has the legend caution caution caution electrical line buried below imprinted in black .
provide tape for low voltage or fiber optic cable that is orange in color num inches wide and without legend .
num .
rigid steel conduit .
cut conduit ends square and ream well to remove burrs and rough edges .
thread and cap conduit ends with standard conduit caps until wiring installation is started .
when the caps are removed provide the threaded ends with insulated metallic conduit bushings .
install expansion fittings with at least num inches of expansion per fitting where conduit crosses an expansion joint in a structure .
when the trench bottom consists of unsuitable material e.g .
rock hardpan place conduit on at least a numinch bedding of tamped sand or soil .
provide backfill that passes a numinch screen .
num .
plastic conduit .
securely fasten conduit joints together by solvent welding .
bend conduit carefully to avoid damage and without using an open flame .
the department requires elbows risers and bends greater than num to be rigid steel .
to allow for expansion and contraction of plastic conduit during installation of long runs leave num end unconnected or insert an oring expansion coupling near num end of the run until final covering of the conduit is in progress .
cap free ends of conduit to prevent the entry of moisture dirt or rocks .
place conduit on at least a numinch bedding of tamped sand or soil .
backfill with sand or soil without rocks or hard lumps to a compacted depth of num inches above and num inches to each side of the conduit .
the remaining cover over the conduit will pass a numinch screen .
b. junction boxes .
place at least num inches of clean sand and gravel ¾ inch maximum under junction boxes for drainage .
place junction boxes subject to traffic loads on a concrete base .
ensure the outside dimensions of the concrete base is num inches larger than the outside dimensions of the junction box with at least a thickness of num inches and a drain hole approximately num inches in diameter through the center of the base .
do not install the concrete base until conduits under the base have been installed backfilled and compacted as specified in num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num ensure the top of the box is num inch above the surrounding ground elevation or is flush with the surrounding surface when located in a sidewalk or roadway .
c. conductors .
before proceeding to pull wire in underground conduit runs clean dirt or accumulations of moisture from conduit runs .
use powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricants when inserting conductors in conduit .
splice conductors using approved connectors .
do not splice conductors except in pole bases or junction boxes .
interconnect poles on an underground service system and attach to the service ground by means of a no .
num american wire gauge awg thwn softdrawn stranded copper wire .
d. poles .
fit each anchor bolt with num leveling nut and num washer below the base plate and num nuts and num washer above the base plate .
ensure leveling nuts with washer bear against the underside of the base plate before tightening the top nuts .
tighten the lower top nut beyond snugtight as presented in table num .
table num nut rotation beyond snugtight anchor bolt diameter in fnum grade num fnum grades num and num or num inch num turn num turn num inch num turn num turn after the lower top nut has been tightened tighten the upper top nut against the lower top nut snugtight .
attach slip base breakaway devices to the foundation anchor bolts with hex nuts and flat washers .
connect the lighting standard to the slip base with highstrength bolts with hexagon nuts and plate washers .
use a plate to keep the bolts in the proper position .
torque the bolts in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
install the support coupling device in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
plumb each pole after polemounted items and service conductors are in place .
level luminaires in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions after the pole has been placed .
surround the support couplings with an aluminum skirt fastened with stainless steel sheet metal screws .
if it becomes necessary to drill a hole or if the galvanizing is damaged before or during installation thoroughly wire brush the exposed metal to remove loose and cracked spelter coating then paint the cleaned area with num coats of formula no .
num as specified in num .
e. field testing .
the department will require field testing for num consecutive days of normal operation .
give written notice to the engineer when the lighting system is complete and before starting the field test .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit illumination type ___ ls excavation backfilling surfacing and materials are incidental and the cost included in the illumination contract pay items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num planting num description .
provide and plant live cuttings seedlings and container plants including trees shrubs vines and ground cover as specified .
num materials .
provide an equal mix of live cuttings seedlings container plants or combinations of and obtain plants except live cuttings from a local or regional idaho vendor .
the supplier must hold a current and valid idaho sellerdealers license .
certify plants are true to genus and species .
substitutions of other genus or species will not be approved .
match the existing species composition of the surrounding vegetation for species to be planted within wetland areas .
provide materials as specified in topsoil num plants num commercial fertilizer num soil conditioner num mulch num irrigation water num seeding and vegetation special guaranty num num construction requirements .
perform planting operations between september num and may num when ground is not frozen and take advantage of favorable planting conditions unless otherwise approved .
clear and remove only vegetation as necessary for construction operation .
grade and level areas to be planted before staking or marking planting locations .
mark out and stake tree locations and the general planting area layouts for shrubs vines and ground cover .
do not begin planting until the tree locations and planting site general layouts are approved .
cultivate planting areas for shrubs and vines to at least num inches deep .
remove and dispose of weeds and other vegetative growth rocks larger than num inch and other debris encountered in the cultivating work .
when excavating holes for planting keep topsoil separate from subsoil and make loose and friable .
remove and dispose of soils containing a ph greater than num or less than num stones greater than num inch or other detrimental material encountered in the excavation .
a soil auger may be used if approved .
adequately barricade excavated planting holes that are left open when the work is not in progress with appropriate warning devices .
sufficiently roughen glazed surfaces inside planting holes before backfilling .
have the engineer inspect all plants before planting and determine if plants are acceptable .
install plants approximately num feet oncenter in a random pattern as specified after completing final grading and seedbed preparation requirements .
install plants during their dormant stage and allow container plants to remain dormant through the winter .
provide adequate and proper care of plant materials .
adequate and proper care includes keeping plant materials in a healthy growing condition by appropriate handling storing watering cultivating pruning and spraying .
if planting during other seasons is permitted apply approved organic wetting agents or antitranspirants in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions at no additional cost to the department .
do not apply wetting agents or antitranspirants after april num .
a. containerized plant requirements .
remove soil equal to the dimensions of the container and remove the plant from the container without damaging roots stems or leaves .
mix soil conditioner into num inches of loose topsoil in the bottom of planting holes but do not mix with the soil to be used in backfilling .
use approximately num cubic foot num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num of soil conditioner per tree and num cubic feet of soil conditioner per shrub or vine or as directed .
place the plant in the hole with soil just above the root crown and firm the ground around the plant .
bareroot plant requirements .
mix soil conditioner into num inches of loose topsoil in the bottom of planting holes but do not mix with the soil to be used in backfilling .
install bareroot plants before the leaves open or new needles have started forming .
place the plant in the hole and spread out their roots in a natural position without bunching kinking or circling .
carefully place soil in the hole filling in over the root system to just above the root crown and firm the ground around the plant .
b. backfilling and finishing .
fill holes and cavities between plantings and the surrounding soil with topsoil .
in their final position plant the plants to the depth of the root collar or to the depth of the finished grade when grown in the nursery or container .
after planting is completed recultivate the soil surface to a depth of num inches or more .
finish grading planting areas after the soil has settled .
incorporate commercial fertilizer uniformly into the soil surface around trees and shrubs in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
apply mulch around the newly planted plants immediately after planting work in each area is complete and the ground is smooth and clean .
place mulch num to num inches thick .
cover the entire area of shrub and vine root systems as well as around trees .
promptly clean up and dispose of soil discarded branches rejected plants or other debris e.g .
twine rope transit guards wrappings .
remove mulch from plants structures roadway areas and grassed areas not to be covered .
thoroughly water trees shrubs vines and ground cover during and immediately after planting .
repeat watering as often as necessary until the work is accepted .
prevent areas from puddling on top of the soil surface and avoid compaction around the plants after watering .
obtain water without charge from stateowned or statecontrolled water supply systems if such exist otherwise obtain water at no additional cost .
prune trees and shrubs when planting and remove broken or damaged twigs branches or roots in a manner that retains or encourages natural growth characteristics .
paint cut surfaces with a diameter of num inch or greater immediately with approved tree wound dressing .
if herbicides are used to control weeds replace and maintain plants and lawn damaged by its use at no additional cost .
at completion of the original planting the engineer will perform an inspection with the contractor of plant material to note and correct discrepancies .
remove and replace dead plants .
leave plants that do not show expected growth but have green leaves stems or buds and the engineer will inspect again during the plant establishment period .
after the original planting the engineer will periodically inspect the condition of plants and planting areas and identify apparent defects faults conditions and dead plants discovered by the inspection .
correct apparent defects faults conditions and remove dispose and replace dead plants within num calendar days after notification or as directed .
if infestation by insects or disease occurs treat plants using effective remedial measures that are good horticultural practices and in accordance with bmps .
install temporary fence material around wetlands and areas to be protected from wildlife as specified in num .
ensure planting establishment by watering cultivating replacing plants or mulch and other work necessary to maintain the plants in a healthy condition throughout the numyear plant establishment period .
if immediate replacement of dead or rejected plants is impossible due to seasonal conditions or the lack of specified plants place a marker at the plant replacement location and replace plants during next planting season .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the department will require a plant establishment period of num year for replacement plants .
ensure the establishment of the new plantings as specified .
submit a contingency spill and prevention plan with emergency actions to be taken in the event of a spill .
prevent petroleum products chemicals or waste materials from dumping or entering waterways and wetlands .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure accepted and completed work as follows num .
plants trees shrubs vines or ground cover of the specified sizes and kinds will be by each .
num .
fertilizer will be by the ton or hundredpound weight cwt .
num .
soil conditioner will be by loose cubic yard using the manufacturers certification of loose cubic yard when bagged or balled .
num .
topsoil will be by the cubic yard .
num .
mulch will be by the cubic yard or ton .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit topsoil cy mulch cy or ton planting trees seedlings or container each planting shrubs bareroot or container each planting vines bareroot or container each planting ground cover each fertilizer commercial ton or cwt soil conditioner cy the cost of temporary irrigation water and temporary fence material are incidental .
the department will make progress payments for plants at num percent of the contract unit price at original planting completion .
the department will pay the remaining num percent at plant establishment period completion and after defective plants have been replaced if applicable .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num seeding num description .
apply seed including seed bed preparation fertilizing seeding mulch mixtures mulching mulch anchoring mechanical or tackifiers hecps erosion blankets and watering in the areas .
the department may require seeding operations in conjunction with num .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in topsoil num seed num commercial fertilizer num mulch num rolled erosion control product recp num turf reinforced mat trm num water num mulch tackifier num mulch plus tackifier num mulch mixture num hydraulically applied erosion control product hecp num seeding and vegetation special guaranty num num construction requirements .
a .
general .
perform seeding operations as specified .
perform seeding during the seasons specified except for seeding used as a temporary erosion and sediment control measure .
inspect areas within the project site and identify noxious weeds present or which weeds are most likely to be found on the project site and include treatment recommendations .
treat material used as specified throughout the growing season and up to num weeks before transporting to the project site and seeding applications .
obtain approval for all products before use .
use mechanical drill seeding on areas with numhnumv slopes or flatter and areas without excessive rock gravel or hardpan soil .
apply fertilizer seed and mulch in separate operations one following the other in this order with the exception that fertilizer may be applied with a fertilizer attachment at seeding time or with water when watering is specified or as otherwise approved .
perform cultivating tilling and drill seeding operations in a crossslope direction horizontal and ensure furrows remain open .
use broadcast seeding or hydroseeding applications on areas with slopes steeper than numhnumv or areas where a mechanical seeder can not reach .
perform hydroapplications with approved combinations of seed fertilizer soil amendments mulch mixtures mulching mulch anchoring tackifier and hydraulically applied mulch with hydro application equipment and equipped with appropriate centrifugal pump and engine size paddletype mechanical agitation and independent liquid bypass circulation capable of handling and applying a thick homogenous slurry .
perform seeding and placement of soil conditioner mulch fertilizers tackifiers or other soil amendments between march num and april num october num and november num or as approved .
when seed application during autumn does not establish well reseed the area after april num and when the soil is not frozen .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction perform seeding before mulch tackifiers or erosion control blanket product installation .
seeding may occur after conduit work progresses and the topsoil is in final placement within the seeding time period provided the soil is not frozen .
all mulch and soil conditioners are required to be certified noxious weedfree by the idaho state department of agriculture isda or other state accredited laboratory .
b. seedbed preparation .
maintain areas to be seeded visibly free of weeds throughout the growing season using mechanical or handpulling methods or by applying appropriate chemicals or combinations until seeding time .
keep weeds from going to seed .
apply chemicals for treating weeds by a current licensed applicator and as specified in num .
minimize ground disturbance using the least intrusive construction techniques practicable .
cultivate areas to be drillseeded at least num inches deep .
work the soil to obtain a surface that permits proper operation of drill seeding equipment .
leave slopes in a rough condition after final grading and before seeding or mulch or soil amendment applications .
seedbed preparation e.g .
raking mechanical roughening is required as specified or as approved .
do not apply the mulch mulch mixture or soil amendment to smooth slopes .
in all areas to be broadcast or hydroseeded rake or mechanically roughen the soil at least num inches deep and leave in a rough condition immediately before applying seed mulch or soil amendments similar to that obtained by walking a cleatedcrawler tractor up and down the slopes .
where slopes are benched or serrated the department will not require additional preparation .
in areas subject to severe erosion ensure the seedbed preparation limits do not exceed the area on which the entire seeding and mulching can be applied within num day .
if conditions occur that prevent seeding at specified furrow depths or if the roughened condition is destroyed prepare the seedbed again at no additional cost .
c. fertilizing commercial .
provide the fertilizer type and application rate as specified .
apply fertilizer by the most appropriate of the following methods num .
fertilizer drill .
num .
broadcast .
num .
water applied .
collect random samples from a minimum of num different locations and thoroughly mix and homogenize the samples into a single composite sample .
sample all changes in the soil e.g .
color texture .
obtain a representative composite sample and submit for testing num months before final placement and seeding application to determine soil ph nutrients and organic materials present .
provide a soil analysis by an naptpap accredited laboratory to determine fertilizer and organic materials e.g .
mulch compost required to amend the soil .
obtain a soil analysis report with recommended soil amendments to be added to the soil before beginning subsequent revegetation activities .
apply approved fertilizers soil amendment products and organic material as listed on the qpl at seeding time and applied in accordance with seeding plans or at the manufacturers written rate .
the application rate and timing of fertilizer application will be as specified or as recommended and approved .
add and lightly incorporate the specified fertilizer ingredients soil amendments and organic material as recommended into the top num inches of the topsoil and uniformly distribute to the areas to be seeded before subsequent revegetation activities as specified in this section and num.b .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num for slopes steeper than numhnumv or where hydroseeding is specified uniformly distribute the specified ingredients and organic material onto the soil surface by hydroseeding method .
fertilizer components andor organic materials may be added to the mulch mixture and applied during the hydroseeding application .
for slopes numhnumv or flatter dry fertilizers may be applied directly to the soil and lightly incorporated into the soil surface followed by the seed application .
apply fertilizer when average noontime temperatures are num f or lower on established stands .
wherever physically possible place fertilizer with the seed when mechanical drill seeding using a fertilizer attachment .
fertilizer may be broadcast wet or dry or with a fertilizer drill attachment .
fertilizer may be applied with irrigation water as approved .
d. seeding .
the contractor will provide seed unless otherwise specified .
apply seed using hydroseeding or a mechanical seeding method on all disturbed areas .
before seeding begins take steps to mechanically break up materials previously placed for the purpose of temporary soil stabilization and erosion control to the engineers satisfaction .
if seed is applied using broadcast seeding or hydroseeding methods rake the soil before applying seed fertilizers mulch and soil amendments .
the department will provide seed at no cost to the contractor unless otherwise specified .
use the specified seeding mix and application rate .
apply native shrub and forb species separately from grass species .
in separate applications apply seed fertilizer and mulch .
do not mix fertilizer with the seed in the hydroseeder unless otherwise approved .
apply seed to the seeding area first followed by the fertilizer and mulch application second .
apply seed uniformly by the most appropriate method as determined by slope soil or site conditions using one of the following methods num .
mechanical seeding notill drill double disc with agitator or spinning disc for numhnumv slopes or flatter .
a .
set drill rows according to the seed species size and dimension .
ensure drill spacing does not exceed num inches .
set drill depth according to the seed size and dimension not to exceed numinch depth and place seed on the furrow bottom .
b .
regulate the seed drill speed and spring pressure so ½ inch of soil covers the seed and the furrows are left open .
do not use drag chains .
c. when mulch is applied or used after mechanically seeding place seed just below the soil surface and cover well .
d. do not perform seeding when soil is too wet or too dry frozen or otherwise untillable or when wind or rain interferes with mulch or seed placement .
e. broadcast native seeds immediately ahead of the drill or seed separately .
seed legume seed through a separate box from the grass seed with seed spouts out or broadcast ahead of the drill .
thoroughly mix seed before placing in the drill or seeder box .
f. if area is impractical for mechanical seeding broadcast the seed using a hydroseeder or dry broadcast equipment .
g. do not allow trucks or equipment to drive on the area after seed is in place .
num .
broadcast seeding .
a .
dry whirlwind or hand broadcast for embankment slopes or cut slopes steeper than numhnumv or as approved .
b. hydroseeder .
perform hydroseeding in num steps num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num the contractor may incorporate up to num percent of the total hydroseeding mixture with the seed to allow for easy application .
add all seed including grass and forb species to the hydroseeding mixture within num to num minutes of completing the hydroseeding application .
num apply the remaining mulch mixture fertilizer and soil amendments to the entire area .
uniformly apply the mulch mixture in a thick homogenous slurry by hydro application equipment .
apply the mulch mixture at a rate of num gallons of water per acre or as approved .
apply the hydroseeding mixture from opposite directions to achieve complete coverage .
when seeding areas greater than num acre use appropriate equipment including a tank size with a minimum working capacity of num gallons .
use pump capable of pumping the specified mulch mixture at the full mix rate recommended by the manufacturer .
the pump should provide a minimum discharge capacity of num pounds per square inch and num gallons per minute .
the engine should be capable of handling mixing and discharging a thick slurry up to num feet .
equip the mixing tank with a paddletype agitation system designed for maximum mixing extending the full length of the tank and supported at each end with an independent liquid bypass circulation .
ensure seed agitation time in the hydroseeder does not exceed num minutes .
do not apply hydroseeding mixture if rainy conditions are anticipated or outside the manufacturers written application instructions .
if unanticipated rainy conditions occur reapply the hydroseeding mixture to uncured areas as directed and at no additional cost .
hydraulically apply seed to the soil surface .
spray each application from num opposing directions to achieve complete coverage .
do not perform seeding or mulching applications when wind interferes with seed placement .
the engineer and the contractor will inspect the finished seeded and mulched slopes to ensure complete coverage has been met .
if adequate coverage has not been achieved reseed and re apply soil amendments tackifiers and mulch on the inadequately covered areas .
e. mulch mulch anchoring and hydraulically applied erosion control products .
apply weedfree organic mulch soil amendment and soil binder tackifier to disturbed areas on slopes numhnumv and steeper after seed has been applied to the soil surface within num calendar days as specified .
supply supported documents including proof of equivalent revegetation abilities in the form of test results obtained by independent peerreviewed research efforts for similar landforms soil types aspect climate and elevation .
do not perform mulching when wind interferes with mulch placement .
apply straw grass hay wood fiber soil amendments mulch mixture or any combination of these materials as directed .
ensure material applied to the ground allows for the absorption and percolation of moisture .
apply mulch so the underlying soil is not visible .
num .
mulch .
do not use hydromulch applications on slopes flatter than numhnumv or in conjunction with drill seeding applications .
do not perform mulching when wind interferes with mulch placement .
apply straw grass hay wood fiber soil amendments mulch mixture or combination of these materials as directed .
ensure material applied to the ground allows for moisture absorption and percolation .
apply at the following rates a .
straw or grass hay air dry .
num tonacre b .
wood fiber .
num tonacre c. soil amendments .
as specified num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
mulch anchoring .
a .
mechanical .
use mechanical mulch anchoring on numhnumv slopes or flatter as directed .
use a heavy disc with flat scalloped discs approximately ¼ inch thick having dull edges and spaced at least num inches apart to anchor mulch into the soil .
ensure anchoring to a depth of at least num inches with no more than num equipment pass on the same surface .
install mechanical anchoring in a horizontal direction to the slope .
b. tackifier .
supply an organic biodegradable nonpolluting nonvolatile and nontoxic tackifier that is transparent flexible water soluble retains flexibility after curing and makes a porous latticelike membrane structure within the upper soil layer .
obtain tackifier products listed on the qpl .
apply tackifier to stabilize slopes numhnumv and steeper .
anchor mulch using a tackifier applied in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and at a rate appropriate for the material soil types conditions and degree of slope .
apply tackifier and mulch with seed as specified or as directed .
ensure tackifier product does not inhibit water oxygen or seed growth or leave undesirable residues in the soil .
ensure tackifier does not reemulsify once cured by drying and is effective with acidic or alkaline soils .
if applied separately incorporate a method to differentiate between the tackifier and mulch material by color or tracer material during tacking operations .
do not apply tacking when wind interferes with tackifier placement .
num .
hydraulically applied erosion control product hecp .
hydraulically apply mulch and tackifier that contains a qualified proteinrich nutrient source weedfree organic mulch biological soil stimulant and humic substance on slopes steeper than numhnumv during the seeding time period .
apply seed as specified in num.d or as otherwise directed .
provide a mixture that is nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms and aquatic and plant life and that does not interfere with or impede seed germination or vegetative growth and establishment .
apply mulch so the underlying soil is not visible .
the application rate for the mulch tackifier or mulch and tackifier mix will be as specified by the manufacturer for the slope gradient and soil conditions .
a .
hydraulic mulch .
mix and apply the mixture in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and at a rate for the soil type surface roughness conditions and slope steepness .
b. stabilized mulch matrix .
mix and apply the mixture in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and at a rate for the soil type surface roughness conditions and slope steepness .
c. fiber reinforced matrix .
mix and apply the mixture in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and at a rate for the soil type surface roughness conditions and slope steepness .
d. bonded fiber matrix .
apply a hydraulic mixture of a qualified proteinrich nutrient source weed free organic mulch biological soil stimulant and humic substance soil amendment and soil binders to numhnumv and steeper slopes after seed has been applied .
mix and apply the mixture in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions at a rate for the soil type surface roughness conditions and slope steepness .
furnish a qplqualified hydraulic mixture with a cover factor meeting large scale testing of less than num coverage not to exceed num percent coverage meeting astm dnum num and having a functional longevity of num to num months minimum of num months for numhnumv slopes or num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction steeper .
submit testing documentation including proof of equivalent revegetation abilities in the form of test results by independent peerreviewed research efforts for similar landforms soil types aspect climate and elevation .
thermally process wood fiber products within a pressurized vessel within num percent of num percent .
provide a qpllisted tackifier or an approved tackifier that is transparent flexible retains flexibility after curing water soluble and makes a porous latticelike membrane structure within the upper soil layer .
the tackifier product can not inhibit water oxygen or seed growth and must be able to stabilize numhnumv slopes or steeper .
the tackifier will be organic biodegradable nonpolluting non volatile nontoxic and leave no undesirable residues in the soil .
the tackifier is not allowed to re emulsify once cured by drying and will be effective in acidic or alkaline soils .
apply tackifier and mulch with seed as specified or as directed .
f. erosion blankets .
num .
rolled erosion control products recp .
install recps on slopes in vertical direction and in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions or as approved .
num .
turf reinforced mat trm .
install trms in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions or as approved .
g. watering .
provide a temporary water delivery system by using sprinklers or trucks .
apply water by the acre unit au .
keep pipe connections tight to avoid leakage and washing .
maintain sprinklers in proper working order .
if runoff begins stop watering and apply the balance after earlier water has penetrated the soil .
the standard application rate is num gallons per acre which constitutes the estimated water quantity that will saturate the soil to a numinch depth under average conditions .
the engineer will inspect for the numinch saturation depth by excavating to a depth of num inches and observing wetness .
the wetness inspection locations will not be in slick spots or in unrepresentative areas .
apply water on seeded and stabilized areas until vigorous growth is established as determined by the engineer .
ensure there is no damage to plantings or seeded areas .
obtain method and equipment approval before applying water to any plantings seeded areas or mulching applications .
apply water using tanker or water tank with pump hose and approved nozzle apparatus water dispersion .
the spray head must deliver a fine mist which will not damage plants or the mulch and tackifier .
seeding performed between may num and september num whether for permanent or temporary erosion control will require irrigation until growth has been established .
if the project has a mitigation area install irrigation systems before seed and mulch are applied .
obtain approval before use of irrigation water by tanker pump hose and spray head .
the spray head must provide a fine mist that does not damage plants or the erosion control blanket .
h. performance standard and acceptance .
revegetated areas will be inspected at installation completion .
if adequate coverage was not achieved the contractor will be required to reseed and reapply soil amendments andor tackifier on seeded areas .
the engineer will make a final inspection and acceptance num year following seeding completion .
the contractor will request the inspection at least num calendar days in advance .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
for determining areas measurements will be taken parallel to the slope .
num .
seedbed preparation will be by the acre .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
seeding mulching mulch anchoring soil amendment mulch mixture and fertilizing will be by the acre for each time this work is performed .
provide weight measurements to verify appropriate rates were applied .
num .
mulch plus tackifier will be by the acre or by the square yard for each time this work is performed .
num .
hecps will be by the acre or by the square yard for each time this work is performed .
num .
rolled erosion control products and turf reinforced mats will be by the square yard .
num .
water delivery system will be by lump sum .
num .
watering will be by the acre unit .
an acre unit au is the water quantity required to saturate a num acre area to at least num inches deep .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities as follows pay item pay unit seedbed preparation acre seed acre seeding acre mulching acre mulch anchoring mechanical acre mulch anchoring tackifier acre soil amendments acre mulch mixture acre mulch plus tackifier sy or acre hydraulically applied erosion control products sy or acre rolled erosion control products sy turf reinforced mat sy fertilizing acre water delivery system ls watering au weed control is the contractors responsibility and is incidental .
if seeding is performed between may num and october num watering is incidental to seeding and the cost included in the seeding contract unit price .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num precast concrete headgates num description .
provide and install precast concrete headgates .
num materials .
provide material as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
shape the area to be occupied by the headgate to conform to the structure and to provide a firm and uniform bearing over its entire area .
backfill and compact the dike or ditch around the structure to avoid undercutting or erosion .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each including num length of pipe in addition to the pipe cast in the headwall .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit _____ precast concrete headgate each structure excavation backfill and compacting backfill are incidental and the cost included in the precast concrete headgate contract unit price .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num concrete slope paving num description .
construct concrete slope paving around structures and on embankments .
num materials .
provide materials for concrete slope paving as specified in num .
provide no .
num coarse aggregate for those portions of slope paving designated as exposed aggregate .
provide class num concrete for slope paving with num to num percent entrained air .
when colored concrete is specified provide colorants and submit a color panel for approval .
where exposed aggregate slope paving is specified submit the method of obtaining the finish and an exposed aggregate panel for approval .
provide preformedexpansion joint fillers as specified in num .
the contractor may use sound cedar or redwood .
num construction requirements .
construct as specified in num .
grade the slope paving area and compact to num percent density as specified in num .
as soon as the desired exposed aggregate surface has been attained and washed cure the concrete surface as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square yard of finished surface measured in the plane of the finished surface .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for the accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit concrete slope paving sy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num riprap num description .
provide and place riprap .
the department will specify riprap size and placing method .
num materials .
provide material as specified in riprap num num construction requirements .
when required excavate the toe trench for riprap below probable scour elevation or to the elevation specified .
excavate the trench num feet below channel grade where scour elevation can not be determined and elevation is not specified .
start by placing a course of the largest stones in the toe trench .
do not lay stone until the toe trench and slopes are approved .
place riprap so the larger stones are in contact with each other and the voids are filled with the finer materials producing a wellgraded compact mass .
place the stone on the slope in a way that ensures the specified thickness in num operation .
do not disturb the underlying material when placing the riprap .
do not place in layers parallel to the slope .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the ton or cubic yard of riprap .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit loose riprap ton or cy the department will pay for excavation of toe trenches below the level of the intersection of the slope to be riprapped and the adjacent final ground or channel floor as specified in num .
riprapcontrol geotextile will be paid for as specified in num .
preparation of the slope to receive riprap above the level of the intersection of the slope to be riprapped and the adjacent final ground or channel floor is incidental and the cost included in the riprap contract unit price .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num joints num description .
provide and install joint material .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in preformed expansion joint filler num joint sealer for asphalt and concrete pavements num hot poured elastomeric type concrete joint sealer num neoprene compression seal num silicone sealant num num construction requirements .
place preformed expansion joint filler accurately in the positions and to the lines and elevations specified .
firmly anchor the preformed expansion joint filler to the surface of the concrete on one side of the joint with numpenny wire nails or numgauge wire cast into the concrete .
mix and apply hot poured sealers as specified in the manufacturers written instructions .
apply silicone sealant in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
clean joints .
properly repair spalls or breaks before sealing .
install neoprene compression seals by first coating the sealer andor the sides of the joint with the adhesive lubricant .
push the sealer down so it is at least ¼ inch and no more than ⅜ inch below the surface of the bridge deck at the edge of the joint and at least ⅛ inch and no more than ¼ inch below the surface of concrete pavement at the edge of the joint .
install the joint material to extend from edge to edge of the slab in one continuous length .
do not stretch the sealer more than num percent of its original length during installation .
num method of measurement .
not specified .
num basis of payment .
providing the material and performing the specified work is included in the structure or pavement contract items .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num temporary traffic control num description .
provide install maintain remove and relocate temporary traffic control devices .
num materials .
provide material as specified in guardrail and concrete barrier num crash cushions num signs and sign supports num pavement markings num retroreflective sheeting num ensure temporary traffic control devices are in acceptable or marginal conditions as defined in american traffic safety services associations atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
a .
temporary traffic control signs .
provide temporary traffic control signs meeting num .
b. channelizing devices .
provide weighted base tubular markers surfacemounted tubular markers vertical panels drums barricades or other channelizing devices .
provide weighted base or surfacemounted tubular markers that are at least num inches high and have at least num inches width when facing traffic .
attach surfacemounted tubular markers with an adhesive in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
do not nail or bolt tubular markers to the pavement .
provide barricades that have the following minimum lengths num .
type num num feet .
num .
type num num feet .
num .
type num num feet .
c. temporary pavement markings .
provide temporary pavement marking tape or temporary waterborne paint pavement markings .
when used ensure temporary pavement marking tape is retroreflective white or yellow adheres to concrete or asphalt pavements with precoated with pressuresensitive adhesive num inches wide and is capable of conforming to the pavement surface .
when used for brokenline pavement markings use numfoot long line segments .
provide numsided temporary flexible raised pavement markers when used on undivided highways .
install in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
provide reflectorized rigid raised pavement markers for temporary applications .
provide numsided markers when used on undivided highways .
install in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
ensure that markers are removable without the use of heat grinding or blasting .
d. floodlights .
provide floodlights capable of illuminating flagger stations work areas and equipment crossings with at least num footcandles or greater .
ensure floodlights are equipped with a meter that records hours of operation .
e. arrow boards .
provide arrow boards with a meter that records hours of operation .
f. portable changeable message signs pcms .
provide portable changeable message signs with message sign control system power source and mounting and transporting equipment components .
ensure that pcms are equipped with a meter that records hours of operation .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num g. temporary concrete barrier .
provide temporary concrete barrier meeting num .
remove and reset temporary concrete barrier .
remove store and reset temporary concrete barrier .
store the removed barrier outside of the highway clear zone .
replace damaged sections of temporary concrete barrier .
provide temporary traffic control as specified in num until the temporary concrete barrier is reset .
h. temporary crash cushion .
provide temporary crash cushions meeting num .
provide testlevel num or num temporary crash cushions when the highway posted speed is less than num mph .
provide testlevel num temporary crash cushions when the highway posted speed is greater than or equal to num mph .
i .
truck mounted attenuator .
provide a truck mounted attenuator attached to a shadow vehicle .
provide test level num or num truckmounted attenuators when the highway posted speed is less than num mph .
provide testlevel num truck mounted attenuators when the highway posted speed is greater than or equal to num mph .
j. miscellaneous temporary traffic control items .
provide miscellaneous temporary traffic control items .
k. flagger equipment .
ensure flaggers wear highvisibility safety apparel and are provided a stopslow paddle .
l. pilot car .
provide a vehicle with a pilot car follow me sign mounted on the rear of the pilot vehicle .
show the company name of the pilot car contractor on both sides of the vehicle .
num construction requirements .
do not use devices for purposes other than those for which they are intended .
cover or remove temporary traffic control devices when not applicable .
ensure temporary traffic control devices are in acceptable or marginal condition or repair or replace unacceptable devices as defined in the atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
repair or replace devices that are unacceptable as defined in the atssa guidelines .
ensure temporary traffic control devices remain in place and serviceable during the time their use is required .
provide weighted bases when necessary to ensure that channelizing devices remain in place .
install temporary markings as soon as practical on newly placed pavements .
for temporary pavement markings omit the test strip when waterborne paint is used .
repair damaged markings .
use temporary flexible raised pavement markers or temporary rigid pavement markers to supplement or as a substitution for other pavement markings .
use num markers placed side by side to mark doublewidth lines .
the engineer may require additional markers placed at a reduced spacing .
remove surfacemounted tubular markers temporary paving market tape temporary raised pavement markers and rigid raised pavement markers without damaging pavement surface .
obtain approval before removing temporary traffic control .
return temporary traffic control devices provided by the department .
illuminate flagger stations work areas and equipment crossings when nighttime work is being performed .
provide floodlights num minutes before sunset and up to num minutes after sunrise when workers or operational equipment are present .
ensure floodlighting does not produce a glare condition for approaching road users flaggers or workers .
provide an extra floodlight onsite for backup .
when a flagger station is moved use the backup floodlight to illuminate the new station .
secure the pcms control system with a lock and change the default control system password to prevent tampering .
perform flagger control with certified flaggers .
certified flaggers have completed a flagger training course from a departmentapproved source and carry a current certificate of training .
certifications issued by other state departments of transportation that have a reciprocity agreement with the department are acceptable .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
temporary traffic control signs will be by the square foot of sign .
num .
weighted based tubular markers surfacemounted tubular markers vertical panels drums and barricades will be per each .
num .
temporary pavement marking tape and temporary pavement marking waterborne paint will be by the foot and will include removal when applicable .
num .
temporary flexible raised pavement markers and temporary rigid raised pavement markers will be per each .
num .
floodlights will be by the hour or lump sum .
num .
arrow boards will be by the hour or lump sum .
num .
portable changeable message signs will be by the hour or lump sum .
num .
temporary concrete barrier and removing and resetting temporary concrete barrier will be by the foot .
num .
temporary crash cushions and truckmounted attenuators will be per each .
num .
miscellaneous traffic control items will be by the lump sum .
num .
traffic control maintenance will be by the hour .
num .
flagger control will be by the hour and is limited to the actual number of hours flagging stations are staffed .
if allowed by the engineer flagger control for the contractors sole convenience will be at no additional cost .
num .
pilot car operation will be by the hour .
maintain a daily record of hours for traffic control maintenance flagger control andor pilot car usage .
provide the records weekly for approval of hours recorded .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit temporary traffic control signs sf weighted base tubular markers each surfacemounted tubular markers each vertical panels each drums each barricade type ___ each temporary pavement marking tape ft temporary flexible raised pavement markers each temporary rigid raised pavement markers each temporary pavement marking waterborne ft floodlights hour or ls arrow board type ___ hour portable changeable message sign pcms hour or ls num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num temporary concrete barrier ft remove and reset temporary concrete barrier ft temporary crash cushion each truck mounted attenuator each miscellaneous temporary traffic control items ls traffic control maintenance hour flagger control hour pilot car hour num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num painting num description .
prepare surfaces and apply paint to specified surfaces .
provide protective devices to prevent damage to the work facilities or traffic .
dispose of waste .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num for selected paint systems .
use the following structural steel paint systems num .
system a application to newly fabricated girders and bearings .
num .
system b application to newly fabricated railing immersion service num coats of epoxy below waterline and one coat of urethane above the waterline and repair of system a .
num .
system c and d spot zone or encapsulation of existing paint including lead based paint .
num .
system e selected immersion service based on water quality conditions .
each system for structural steel paint is described in table num .
table num system descriptions system application layer formula composition dry film thickness a shop only primer num intermediate num top coat num inorganic zinc epoxy polyurethane num num mils num num mils num num mils b shop or field primer num intermediate num top coat num organic zinc epoxy polyurethane num num mils num num mils num num mils c shop or field primer num intermediate num top coat num moistures cured urethanes moistures cured urethanes moistures cured urethanes num num mils num num mils num num mils d shop or field primer num intermediate num top coat num moisture cured urethanes moistures cured urethanes polyurethane num num mils num num mils num num mils e shop or field primer num intermediate num top coat num epoxy epoxy polyurethane num num mils num num mils num num mils num construction requirements .
a .
general .
comply with applicable environmental protection and occupational safety and health standards rules regulations and orders .
failure to comply is sufficient cause for painting contractor suspension or disqualification .
contain waste materials e.g .
used blasting material old paint classified as hazardous and dispose in accordance with the applicable federal state and local laws .
provide protective devices e.g .
tarps screens covers as necessary to prevent damage to the work and to other property or persons from cleaning and painting operations .
assume responsibility for damage to vehicles persons or property resulting from the painting operations .
remove or obliterate paint or paint stains that result in an unsightly appearance on surfaces not designated to be painted .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num protect the prepared surface from weather and contamination before and during the application process .
protect the work against disfigurement by splatters splashes and smirches of paint materials .
protect painted surfaces from weather contamination and damage until the paint has dried .
repair painted surfaces that are marred or damaged during the operation to a condition equal to that of the coating specified .
sprinkle the adjacent roadbed and shoulders with water or dust abatement for a sufficient distance on each side when traffic causes an objectionable amount of dust .
after painting operations are complete thoroughly clean the painted surfaces of other work that would cause dust grease or other foreign materials to be deposited on the painted surfaces .
ensure the dry film thickness of each coat and total thickness of the finished product is as specified .
determine the thickness of previously applied coatings or an existing coating that is to be topcoated on steel in accordance with sspcpa num before applying the next coat .
separately apply each coat of paint to ensure complete coverage .
hide the previous coat by a single coat of the next application .
apply paint only on clean and dry surfaces and only during periods of favorable weather and as follows num .
the atmospheric temperature paint and surface to be painted are between num and num f when metal surfaces are num f above the dew point .
num .
the humidity is less than num percent .
determine the dew point with the use of a psychrometer and psychrometric tables .
num .
do not paint when the temperature of the air paint or metal is below that described in the product technical data sheet when the air is misty or when conditions are otherwise unsatisfactory .
num .
do not paint damp or frosted surfaces or surfaces hot enough to cause the paint to blister to produce a porous paint film or to cause the vehicle to separate from the pigment .
num .
do not apply paint coat if the anticipated atmospheric temperature will not remain above num f during the drying period .
provide a suitable enclosure to allow painting during inclement weather .
control atmospheric conditions inside the enclosure throughout the painting operation .
remove the enclosure when the paint is dry or weather conditions allow open exposure .
perform painting in a neat and skillful manner .
ensure the application is without runs sags skips and other defects .
the contractor may apply a subsequent coat only when the previous coat is dry and clean .
provide rollers when used of a type that does not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
if air spray is used provide suitable traps or separators to exclude oil and water from the air .
keep the paint thoroughly mixed by continuous mechanical agitation .
keep paint thoroughly mixed so the pigments stay suspended during its application .
thin the paint in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and product data sheets .
the same manufacturer will provide coatings for the complete system .
store paint materials in the manufacturers original containers in a weather tight space and where the temperature is maintained within the paint manufacturers recommended storage temperature range .
monitor the paint material storage facility with a highlow recording thermometer device .
ensure paint storage facility is separate from the storage facilities used for storing painting equipment storing contaminated waste or construction generated waste .
warrant coatings for num year after acceptance .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b. painting of existing structural steel .
apply coating systems on existing structural steel .
c. painting new structural steel .
num .
surface preparation .
references e.g .
sspcsp num sspcpa num refer to volume num systems and specifications of sspcs steel structures painting council manual .
sspcvis num refers to sspcs visual standards for abrasive blast cleaned steel .
blast clean new steel structure surfaces to be coated in accordance with sspcsp num nearwhite blast .
use methods specified in sspcsp num sspcsp num and sspcsp num as necessary to supplement blast cleaning .
the nearwhite blast surface is shown in the pictorial standards of sspcvis num .
if a conflict between the pictorial standard and the written sspc definition follow the written definition .
prepare contaminated surfaces to the engineers satisfaction before application of coating material .
ensure the surface covered with a coating is free of moisture dust grease or other substance that prevents bonding .
perform blast cleaning using an abrasive that will uniformly produce a surface profile of num to num millimeters deep in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges but not greater than that recommended by the paint manufacturer .
verify the surface profile obtained on the prepared surface using astm dnum method a or c. grind laminations raised by the blasting operation to a flush surface and reblast the ground area to obtain the specified anchor pattern .
submit a written record of surface profile measurements .
grind the edges of flamecut steel that will receive paint until the hardened edge accepts the abrasive blast imparted during the blasting procedure .
verify the surface profile obtained on this prepared surface using astm dnum method a .
prepare edges of plates of main stress carrying members except bearing stiffeners and girder webs in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnumm section num .
meet the welding requirements of ansiaashtoaws dnumm bridge welding code before painting .
num .
materials .
meet the materials requirements as specified with an inorganic zinc primer epoxy intermediate and a polyurethane topcoat .
paint the structural steel as specified using paint system a as specified in table num .
ensure the coated steel final dry film thickness is num to num millimeters .
submit a manufacturers certification stating the coating materials meet the specifications and the coatings are compatible .
the engineer will not allow application of coating materials until the product certifications have been provided and the materials have been tested and accepted by the central materials laboratory .
notify the engineer at the preconstruction meeting which manufacturers products will be used along with the paint suppliers name and telephone number .
the central materials laboratory will set up the inspection of the products at the manufacturers plant or suppliers facility on notification .
the department will inspect sample test and approve the products before being released for shipment to the fabricator or the field painter .
allow a minimum of num calendar days for the testing of the paint samples in the central materials laboratory after the products are received .
submit the paint manufacturers current product data sheets mixing and thinning directions recommended spray nozzle types and sizes spray pressures minimum drying times temperature and humidity data for curing and other appropriate product information for approval .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
coating of new structural steel .
when not in conflict with these specifications perform coating application using trade best practices coating manufacturers written instructions and those applicable portions of sspcpa num .
prepare surface of the structural steel specified to receive the paint system apply finish protect shop and fieldapplied paint coatings and complete other work specified .
apply in the shop the prime intermediate and topcoat coatings in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and this subsection .
the steel fabricator applying the shop coats and the contractor performing the field painting will be certified in accordance with the steel structures painting council sspc painting contractor certification program or approved equal .
approved equal can be documentation by the fabricator andor the contractor provided they have been successful in applying bridge paint systems for at least the past num years .
clean the surfaces prepared for painting for approval .
the engineer will observe and inspect the first applications of the num paint coats .
ensure the first members painted with the numcoat system meet the engineers satisfaction and approval .
once approved this application of coatings will be the standard the engineer will judge the remaining paintwork .
only apply a prime coat in the shop to faying surfaces and the exposed bolted connection areas where bolt heads washers and nuts are exposed to the steel .
the design of bolted faying surfaces is for a class b slip coefficient .
ensure the faying surfaces are painted to the correct paint dry film thickness to provide a class b slip coefficient .
mask other coats from the faying surface .
supply a paint manufacturers testing certification that shows the paint to be used will provide the required resistance at the proposed thickness when tested in accordance with the requirements of the research council on structural bolting test method to determine the slip coefficient for coatings used in bolted joints .
apply coatings in an enclosed shop with a controlled environment to match best conditions for application and curing as recommended by the paint manufacturer .
apply the prime coat the same day the steel is blasted .
if the steel shows flash rusting before being primed blast clean the steel again to meet the specifications .
if material other than rust contaminates the prepared surface clean the surface to meet the specifications and the engineers approval before making the succeeding application .
apply each coat in a uniform layer completely covering the preceding coat .
tint the individual coats sufficiently different so skips and holidays can be easily detected .
correct runs sags skips mud cracking holidays or other deficiencies before application of succeeding coats .
the engineer may require corrective work e.g .
recleaning application of additional coating at no additional cost to the department .
precede each specified coat by a strip coat on edges corners seams crevices interior angles joining members junctions rivet or bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines and similar surface irregularities .
ensure a sufficient thickness of strip coat completely hides the surface being covered follow as soon as practical by the application of the full prime intermediate or finish coats to its specified thickness .
application of this strip coat may require special techniques in accordance with the manufacturers written application specifications .
for steel surfaces inaccessible to painting after erection paint surfaces before erection .
discuss inaccessible areas with the engineer before painting .
make and record coating thickness measurements and a visual inspection for complete coverage after each coat application and before succeeding coat application .
if dry film thickness measurements or visual inspections of coverage do not meet the specified minimum make additional applications .
measure dry film thickness above the average magnetic surface profile of the anchor pattern in the steel substrate .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the engineer will measure the dry film thickness for acceptance using astm dnum method a or b magnetic gauge or magnetic flux gauge .
if a question arises about an individual coat thickness or coverage the engineer will verify using astm dnum method a tooke gauge .
if the tooke gauge shows a prime coat thickness to be less than the specified minimum thickness or a missing intermediate coat the engineer will reject the total coating system on that member even if the thickness of the total system equals or exceeds total thickness specified .
the contractor or the fabricator will reclean and recoat the steel at no additional cost to the department .
on areas where the tooke gauge is used to determine coating thickness and the prime coat is determined to be of the correct thickness repair the destructive test area in accordance with the approved repair procedure .
repair the test area at no additional cost to the department .
in areas where dry film thickness measurements are impractical the engineer will measure wet film thickness in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum .
num .
field painting and repair .
supply the approved steel fabricator field and repair procedures plan to the field personnel .
ensure field repairs include the application of the complete numcoat system primer intermediate and finish coats .
use formula num organic zinc rich with a dry film thickness of num to num millimeters in the field for minor primer damage .
clean the erected exposed bolted areas and areas with exposed primer with intermediate and topcoat application .
make field painting and repairs in accordance with the coating manufacturers written instructions the field painting and repair plan .
the engineer will review the field painting areas for approval before final acceptance .
prevent damage with temporary attachments or supports for scaffolding or forms to the coating system .
repair damage that may occur in accordance with the prescribed procedure at no additional cost to the department .
num .
protection of the work .
adequately protect the work until final acceptance .
protect surfaces not to be coated under this contract from overspray and drippings .
repair painted surfaces that are marred or damaged with materials to a condition equal to that required for the finished surface .
replace or repair damaged coatings at no additional cost to the department .
num .
environmental control .
apply coating materials as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers written specifications .
adhere to the manufacturers written specifications for uniform temperature and humidity for the curing of the inorganic zinc .
the engineer will not allow application if conditions are not favorable for the proper application and performance of the coating .
num .
transportation and erection .
exercise extreme care in handling the steel in the shop during shipping during erection and during subsequent erection of the bridge .
insulate the steel from the binding chains by approved softeners .
pad hooks and slings used to hoist steel .
space the diaphragms and similar pieces so rubbing damage to the coating will not occur during shipment .
store the steel on pallets at the project site or by other approved means so the steel does not rest on the dirt or so steel components do not fall or rest on each other .
before shipping the steel present shipping and project site storage details for approval at the prefabrication meeting .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
sealing .
fill and seal crevices and gaps between structural shapes and plates around bolt heads or nuts and similar areas that would retain moisture with the following a .
coating materials where possible .
b. sealant if the crevice or gap can not be bridged with coating materials .
apply the sealant after complete application of topcoat .
c. backing material and sealant to fill crevices and gaps the sealant alone can not bridge .
apply sealant over the backing material to form a watertight seal .
num .
stenciling .
stencil the month and year of application and the type of coating used in numinch high block letters at num locations on the structure being coated .
the engineer will determine the exact stenciling location .
color the stenciling flat black .
num .
quality control and assurance inspection .
be responsible for quality control qc of the surface preparation and painting .
submit a qc plan for approval before starting work .
perform inspection and testing in accordance with the qc plan .
ensure the qc plan includes at least the following information a .
paint manufacturer brand and type of paint proposed for each coat .
b .
a copy of the manufacturers certification as specified in num showing the paint meets the contract requirements including the voc limitations .
c. curing timetable with temperature and humidity requirements for the specified thickness of the applied inorganic zinc .
d. masking plans and diagram for bolted and faying surface areas .
e. testing frequency and acceptance criteria for surface profile and dry film thickness measurements of each coating .
include the type of measurement instrument and calibration standards by which the instrument will be calibrated .
f. a copy of the qc sheet that will be used to maintain the written records of the date and time of blasting measured surface profile of the steel date and time of coating applications cure times dry film thickness of each coating batch numbers of coatings air temperature relative humidity and steel temperature at the time of coating .
g. shop paint repair procedures e.g .
for scratches gouges holidays mud cracking runs sags .
h. field painting and repair procedures .
i .
equipment maintenance procedures e.g .
moisture traps cleanness check on recycled abrasive paint nozzle tip replacements .
j .
designate a qc officer responsible for ensuring the above procedures are maintained .
num .
quality assurance .
the engineer will perform inspection and testing as necessary to verify that an acceptable product is provided as specified .
the engineer will perform qa inspection on cleaning and painting for approval .
the engineer may inspect cleaned surfaces before painting .
provide the necessary means for inspections .
d. painting timber .
num .
preparing surfaces .
remove cracked or peeled paint loose chalky paint dirt and other foreign material by wire brushing scraping or other means immediately before painting .
ensure the moisture content of the timber is less than num percent at the time of the first application .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
paint .
paint formula num and formula num .
use num applications to paint new timber requiring painting .
paint is intended for use in covering previously painted surfaces .
use white or tinted paint as specified .
apply paint by brush air spray or roller spread evenly and work thoroughly into seasoning cracks corners and recesses .
apply another coat when the full thickness of the previous coat has dried .
num .
application .
after the first application has dried and the timber is in place putty cracks checks nail holes or other depressions flush with the surface .
e. painting concrete .
num .
preparing the surface .
remove laitance and curing compounds from the surface before painting the concrete surfaces .
use abrasive blast cleaning .
at the time the paint is to be applied ensure the surface is thoroughly dry and dust free .
num .
paint .
use formula num tinted paint as specified .
num .
application .
apply paint in num separate coats at a minimum finished application rate of num to num square feet per gallon .
apply the second coat in a direction perpendicular to the first coat .
allow the first coat to dry thoroughly before applying the second coat .
ensure final appearance is even with uniform color acceptable to the engineer .
paint only when the ambient temperature is num f or above for the application and drying of the paint .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will not measure the work .
num basis of payment .
the department considers painting as incidental work for the items requiring paint .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num snow poles num description .
provide and install snow poles .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in rigid posts for delineators snow poles and mileposts num retroreflective sheeting num flexible snow poles num num construction requirements .
install snow poles as follows num .
rigid snow poles .
assemble rigid snow poles delineator and reflectors .
num .
flexible snow poles .
attach flexible snow pole to rigid delineator post and attach reflectors in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit snow poles type ______ each the department will not make separate payment for delineators where rigid snow poles are installed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num mobilization num description .
mobilization consists of preparatory work and operations including those necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site for the establishment of offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work for premiums on bond and insurance and for other work and operations which must be performed or costs incurred before beginning production work on the various contract items .
mobilization cost for subcontracted work is included in the subcontract unit price .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
not specified .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure accepted work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities and as follows pay item pay unit mobilization ls the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price or num percent of the total contract amount whichever is less on the first monthly progress payment estimate .
the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price or num percent of the total contract amount whichever is less on the second monthly progress payment estimate providing the contractor has initiated productive work .
on completion of work the department will pay the remaining mobilization bid amount in excess of num percent of the total original contract amount .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num pavement markings num description .
prepare pavement surface and apply waterborne or preformed thermoplastic retroreflective pavement markings .
num materials .
provide waterborne paint materials as specified in num .
provide preformed thermoplastic meeting aashto m num .
provide glass beads meeting aashto m num type num .
provide paint and beads in original packaging showing the lot numbers .
sample paint materials in accordance with idaho ir num and submit the samples for testing to the central materials laboratory .
provide a sample num pound bag of glass beads for testing by the central materials laboratory .
receive lab approval before using the paint or glass beads .
allow num weeks for laboratory testing .
num construction requirements .
a. waterborne paint .
num .
each paint application will be num mil wet film .
additional applications must be placed num or more days apart .
the departments standard practice is num paint applications for permanent pavement markings and num paint application for temporary traffic control pavement markings .
the total quantity specified is the total linear feet to be painted e.g .
a quantity of num linear feet is needed the plans will specify the contractor to place num coat for temporary and num coats for permanent .
num .
place at least num pounds of glass beads per gallon of applied paint .
num .
apply pavement markings to clean and dry pavement when the pavement temperature is between num f and num f and the relative humidity is less than num percent .
num .
limit the deviation of longitudinal pavement markings to less than num inches per num feet .
provide longitudinal pavement markings with a width tolerance of num percent .
limit broken line overlap to num feet .
num .
use glass beads to provide a minimum retroreflectivity of num millicandelas per square meter per lux for white pavement markings and num millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow pavement markings .
num .
do not thin paint .
num .
repair tracking marks and spilled or damaged material .
num .
test strips .
place a paint no glass beads test strip onto a clean smooth ferrous metal panel to determine pavement marking uniformity and thickness .
measure pavement marking thickness in accordance with astm dnum .
calculate the applied wet film thickness using the percent volume of solids provided by the manufacturer as follows m measured dry film thickness percent volume of solids where m wet film thickness mils of paint placed .
place test strip num to determine glass bead application and retroreflectivity .
test in accordance with astm enum .
place test strip num when broken line or dotted pavement markings are used .
demonstrate the broken line or dotted line patterns before marking the roadway .
present test strips for engineer approval before placing pavement markings on the roadway .
num .
reporting .
provide the results of retroreflectivity testing paint and glass bead quantities applied and paint and glass bead material invoices daily .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction the wet film thickness verification will be calculated using the following equation m g x num d x w where m wet film thickness mils of paint placed .
g gallons of paint applied .
d distance feet .
w width of line inches .
measure and record temperature and humidity at the start of work and num to num hours after starting .
discontinue work during precipitation events .
b. preformed thermoplastic .
num .
apply pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
num .
provide a minimum pavement marking thickness of num mils .
num .
provide a minimum retroreflectivity of num millicandelas per square meter per lux for white pavement markings and num millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow pavement markings .
test in accordance with astm enum .
num .
provide a minimum skid resistance value of num british pendulum number bpn when tested in accordance with astm enum .
c. testing .
test the retroreflectivity of installed pavement markings daily .
test in accordance with astm enum .
provide documentation the retroreflectometer has been calibrated within the last year .
take num or more readings per mile for each line pattern installed .
where less than num mile of markings are placed take num set of readings for each line pattern installed .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
longitudinal pavement markings will be measured by the foot .
subtract the length of gaps in broken and dotted line pavement markings from the measured length .
num .
transverse word symbol and arrow pavement markings will be measured by the square foot .
num basis of payment .
payment for accepted work will be made as follows pay item pay unit longitudinal pavement marking waterborne ft longitudinal pavement marking preformed thermoplastic ft transverse word symbol and arrow pavement markings waterborne sf preformed thermoplastic sf a separate payment will not be made for glass beads .
waste disposal cleanup and other items not specifically identified are incidental .
for permanent pavement markings a payment will be made for each application of waterborne paint .
temporary pavement markings will be paid for under num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num rumble strips num description .
construct rumble strips .
num materials .
not specified .
num construction requirements .
construct a numfoot rumble strip test section within the project site for approval before proceeding .
limit the longitudinal rumble strip deviation to less than num inches per num feet .
immediately remove debris .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed rumble strips by the mile .
num basis of payment .
payment for the accepted work will be made as follows pay item pay unit rumble strips mile debris removal waste disposal and emulsified asphalt are incidental to rumble strip installation .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num removal of bridge deck concrete num description .
remove defective concrete andor contaminated concrete from the upper portions of bridge decks as specified .
removal does not include full depth deck removal unless required as class b or surface preparation beyond that which is incidental to the removal process .
on completion of removal the engineer will inspect the deck to determine if further removal is required .
temporarily plug bridge drains to prevent waste materials from entering the drainage system .
protect expansion joints and barrier curbs from damage .
class a removal is the removal of concrete from the deck top surface specified and to the mean depth limits specified .
use hydrodemolition or mechanical means after the seal coat has been removed .
if the hydrodemolition removal extends beyond the mean removal depth where unsound concrete is encountered the department will still consider the work class a removal at no additional cost to the department .
remove concrete not removed to specified limits during hydrodemolition by mechanical means .
if less than an entire continuous slab is to undergo class a removal saw cut the line separating where it is required and the section where removal is not required before removal of concrete to a depth of approximately num percent of the planned removal depth .
class b removal is the removal of concrete after completion of class a removal and as directed .
num materials .
none specified .
num construction requirements .
before starting deck removal obtain department approval of the concrete mix design for the new deck a .
class a removal .
num .
mechanical removal .
perform mechanical removal using poweroperated diamond grinding machinery or by the use of numpound maximum jackhammers operated at a num angle or less from the surface of the slab .
if reinforcing steel is exposed in the course of this class of removal immediately stop work and request instructions from the engineer .
num .
hydrodemolition removal a .
concrete removal .
the engineer will designate a trial area for the contractor to show the equipment personnel and methods of operation are capable of producing satisfactory results .
the engineer will set parameters for the removal of the concrete .
begin work upon engineer acceptance of the trial results area .
b .
completely clean exposed steel of rust scale and corrosion .
repair reinforcing steel that is damaged or broken with an approved procedure at no additional cost to the department as specified in num.e .
c. equipment .
use hydrodemolition equipment that is selfpropelled with a highpressure water jet stream capable of removing concrete to the specified depth and capable of removing rust and concrete particles from reinforcing steel .
use handheld highpressure wands or numpound maximum jackhammers operated a num angle or less from horizontal in areas that are inaccessible to the selfpropelled machine .
d. during the startup of hydrodemolition have a qualified fulltime employee of the hydrodemolition equipment manufacturer onsite until the removal operation is progressing satisfactorily .
ensure the representative remains available for the hydrodemolition work .
adhere to the manufacturers written instructions andor recommendations made by the representative on or off the project site at no additional cost to the department .
the cost of the manufacturers representative is incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num e. provide documentation to show that only qualified personnel trained by the equipment manufacturer operate equipment .
provide sufficient spare parts and service to maintain the equipment operation .
f. provide shielding to ensure containment of dislodged material within the removal area .
protect the public from flying debris on and under the project site .
g. runoff .
collect runoff water and residual material within existing roadway slopes then dispose by land application offsite .
line temporary collection ponds with a separation geotextile .
do not allow runoff water or residual material to flow into the vehicular or pedestrian traffic areas or nearby waterways .
obtain required permits and comply with applicable regulations concerning water disposal .
h. cleaning .
perform cleaning before debris and water dry on the surface with a vacuum system or other method capable of removing wet debris and water in the same pass .
blowdry the deck with air to remove excess debris and water .
adequately support exposed reinforcing steel that is left unsupported by the hydrodemolition process and protect the steel from construction operations .
b .
class b removal .
after the class a removal has been completed the engineer will check for delamination in accordance with astm dnum and resound or chain the deck to verify unsound material has been removed .
perform additional removal designated as class b with the handheld hydrowand or numpound maximum jackhammer operated at an angle of num or less from horizontal or by the use of hand tools .
if the bond between concrete and reinforcing steel has been destroyed remove the adjacent concrete to a depth that will provide a minimum ¾ inch clearance around the steel .
clean before debris and water dries on the surface .
adequately support exposed reinforcing steel that is left unsupported and protect the steel from construction operations .
as with class a removal exercise control of debris and wash residual .
protect areas below the bridge and as directed .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square yard based on planned quantity for class a and measured quantity for class b .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit concrete bridge deck removal class a sy concrete bridge deck removal class b sy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num mailbox num description .
remove the existing mailbox assembly and provide and install mailbox assembly .
num materials .
provide mailboxes that are approved by the u.s. postmaster general .
fabricate the platform shelf and brackets in accordance with astm anum .
galvanize the supports platform shelf locking wedges antitwist plates bolts bracket nuts screws washers and miscellaneous hardware in accordance with astm anum class cd or astm bnum class num .
provide mailbox support posts that meet num and num .
num construction requirements .
remove the existing mailbox assembly and snow shield and return it to the owner .
provide and install a new mailbox assembly and mailbox snow shield as specified or as directed .
verify the number and size of the mailbox mailbox snow shield and type of assembly before ordering .
place the name and address as shown on the existing mailbox on the new mailbox or as directed .
maintain continuous access to the mailbox and do not interrupt mail service .
the engineer may approve an acceptable temporary mailbox assembly installed during construction operations before the installation of the new mailbox assembly .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
mailbox will be per each assembly regardless of the type or size .
num .
mailbox snow shield will be per each .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit mailbox each mailbox snow shield each post platform shelf brackets and other hardware are incidental and the cost included in the mailbox contract unit price .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num antiskid num description .
provide and stockpile antiskid material at designated locations .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
the engineer will accept material at the point of delivery from the contractorprovided sources or the engineer will accept the aggregate at the crushing plant from designated sources .
num construction requirements .
prepare the stockpile site by clearing and smoothing the area as directed .
construct stockpiles neat and regular in form and occupy as small an area as possible .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the ton or cubic yard .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit antiskid type____ ton or cy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num construction geotextiles num description .
provide and install geotextile .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num .
num construction requirements .
a .
shipment and storage .
place the geotextile in a dry place off the ground and protected from damage and maintain in an opaque heavyduty protective covering during periods of shipment and storage .
b .
placement .
grade the area to be covered to a smooth uniform condition without obstructions depressions and debris .
spread the geotextile immediately ahead of the covering operation .
do not drag the geotextile on the ground or mishandle it .
place the geotextile loosely and without wrinkles so the placement of the overlying material will not tear the geotextile .
hold the geotextile in place with pins staples or small piles of fill or rock .
lap or sew the geotextile as specified at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets .
place the cover material on the geotextile so at least num to num inches of material is between the vehicle or equipment tires or tracks and the geotextile depending on the survivability of the geotextile and the weight of the construction equipment .
cover the geotextile with the specified cover material as soon as possible .
do not allow the geotextile to be exposed to the elements for more than num calendar days for ultraviolet stabilized geotextiles and num days for geotextiles that have not been ultraviolet stabilized .
c. soft ground .
limit construction vehicle size and weight so rutting in the initial lift above the geotextile is num inches or less deep when geotextile is placed over soft ground .
do not turn vehicles on the first lift above the geotextile .
do not enddump the cover material directly on the geotextile .
limit compaction of the first lift above the geotextile over soft ground to routing of placing and spreading equipment only .
do not allow sheepfoot type equipment on the first lift .
closely observe subsequent lifts during compaction and if foundation failures occur during compaction operations use lightweight compaction equipment .
use pegs pins or the manufacturers recommended method as needed to hold the geotextile in place until the specified cover material is placed .
do not drop cover material on unprotected geotextile from a height greater than num feet above the geotextile surface .
d. seams .
use sewn seams that consist of num parallel rows of stitching .
ensure the num rows of stitching are ½ inch apart with a tolerance of ¼ inch and do not cross except for restitching .
provide a locktype stitch .
if a flat or prayer seam is used the minimum seam allowance i.e .
the minimum distance from the geotextile edge to the stitch line nearest to that edge is num½ inches .
ensure the minimum seam allowance for other seam types is num inch .
obtain approval of the seam stitch type and the equipment used to perform the stitching before work start begins .
use a j seam with num passes of a locktype stitch with at least num stitches per inch .
the contractor may use the prayer seam flat for repair of damaged inplace geotextiles .
sew the seams with highstrength polyolefins polyester or kevlar thread that is as resistant to deterioration as the geotextile being sewn .
provide thread color that contrasts with the geotextile color .
do not use nylon threads .
ensure the strength of the seam is at least num percent of the minimum required tensile strength for the intended application as specified in num num num num and num .
obtain approval before production field stitching or seaming .
e. repairs .
if the geotextile is torn punctured or the overlaps or sewn joints disturbed as evidenced by visible geotextile damage subgrade pumping intrusion or roadbed distortion remove the backfill around the damaged or displaced area and repair or replace the damaged geotextile at no cost to the department .
place a patch of the same type geotextile over the damaged area and overlap the existing geotextiles at least num feet from the edge of the damaged area except for pavement overlay geotextiles .
patch overlay geotextiles as specified in num.i .
where geotextile seams are required to be sewn repair damaged sheets by sewing .
sew seams as specified in num.d .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num f. underground drainage .
construct underdrains .
place the geotextile to conform loosely to the shape of the trench .
overlap the geotextile at least num inches at longitudinal and transverse joints or sew the geotextile joints .
in trenches less than num inches wide overlap the width of the trench .
type i installations refer to protected conditions and type ii installations refer to unprotected conditions as defined in num .
when drainage geotextiles are placed under or over a horizontal or sloping surface e.g .
subgrade in conjunction with drain blankets use the geotextiles that meet the construction survivability requirements of subgrade separation geotextiles .
g. ripraperosion control .
construct geotextiles under riprap or rock buttresses as specified .
overlap the geotextile at least num feet at longitudinal and transverse joints or sew the geotextile at joints at the time of manufacture to form geotextile widths as specified .
if overlapped place the geotextile so the upstream strip of geotextile is on top of the next downstream strip .
where placed on slopes lap each strip over the next downhill strip .
key the geotextile at the top and the toe of the slope .
secure the geotextile to the slope loose enough the geotextile will not tear when the riprap is placed .
do not key the geotextile at the top of the slope until the riprap is in place to the top of the slope .
start placement of aggregate andor riprap on the geotextile at the toe of the slope and proceed upwards .
show the combination of the rockfill drop height and the aggregate cushion thickness are adequate to not puncture or damage the geotextile when placing the riprap or rockfill .
where an aggregate cushion is required place it at least num inches thick .
the limits specified in table num apply .
table num riprap drop criteria size of riprap material maximum drop directly onto geotextile onto aggregate cushion blanket num lb rock num feet num feet num lb rock num num feet after placing the riprap backfill voids in the riprap face so the geotextile is completely covered .
do not grade slopes after riprap placement if grading results in stone movement directly on the geotextile .
do not allow stones weighing more than num pounds to roll down the slope .
the engineer may reduce drop heights if geotextile damage from the stones dropping is evident .
when geotextile is placed on slopes steeper than numhnumv place the stones on the slope without freefall .
type i geotextiles are low to moderate survivability and type ii geotextiles are higher survivability as defined in num .
h. subgrade separation .
prepare the subgrade as specified in num or as directed .
overlap adjacent geotextiles at least num feet at longitudinal and transverse joints or sew the geotextiles to form the widths specified .
type i refers to moderate survivability conditions and type ii refers to high survivability conditions as defined in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction i. pavement overlays .
construct pavement overlays as follows num .
weather limitations .
do not place sealant and geotextile when the roadway surface or weather conditions would prevent proper construction .
do not place paving grade asphalt sealant until the minimum air temperature is at least num f. num .
initial surface preparation .
prepare the pavement surface before the sealant is applied as specified in num .
in addition clean cracks exceeding ⅛ inch width and fill with suitable bituminous crack filler .
allow the crack filling material to cure in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions before placing the geotextile .
place leveling courses before placing the geotextile .
num .
asphalt sealant application .
provide asphalt sealant that is the type and grade specified .
spread the sealant material using a pressure distributor as specified in num .
uniformly sprayapply the asphalt sealant to the prepared dry pavement surface at the rate recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and as approved .
do not allow the distributor tank temperature to exceed num f for paving grade asphalt cements .
spray the asphalt sealant num inches wider than the paving geotextile .
apply the sealant only as far in front of the geotextile installation as is appropriate to ensure a tacky surface at the time of geotextile placement .
place the geotextile on the sealant while it is hot .
do not allow traffic on the sealant .
num .
geotextile placement .
protect the geotextile from moisture .
place the geotextile using mechanical or manual laydown equipment capable of providing a smooth installation with minimal wrinkling or folding .
slit wrinkles or folds larger than num inch and lay flat .
shinglelap transverse joints and slit folds or wrinkles in the direction of the paving operation .
provide overlap sufficient to ensure closure but not more than num inches .
use brooms or pneumatic rollers to maximize geotextile contact with the pavement surface .
apply additional handplaced sealant material at laps .
limit traffic on the placed geotextile to necessary construction equipment and emergency vehicles .
avoid abrupt starts and stops .
remove and replace damaged geotextile with the same type of geotextile and shingle lap the overlaps in the direction of paving at no cost to the department .
num .
overlay placement .
ensure overlay placement closely follows geotextile placement .
do not allow windrow asphalt on the geotextile ahead of the paving machine .
avoid abrupt starts or stops and keep turnings of paver and other equipment to the minimum to avoid geotextile damage .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work to the nearest square yard of surface area covered .
a separate measurement will not be made for construction of laps seams joints or patches unless the engineer orders more than the specified lap in which case the added lap width will be measured .
the engineer will compute the square yards of drainage geotextile in the trench by multiplying the length of the trench where geotextile is used by the average perimeter of the constructed trenchs typical section .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit drainage geotextile sy ripraperosion control geotextile sy subgrade separation geotextile sy pavement overlay geotextile sy if the engineer directs geotextiles with properties more stringent than specified the department will allow price adjustments for difference in material cost only .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num biaxial geogrid num description .
provide biaxial geogrid and all accessories equipment and labor necessary to reinforce subgrade or subbase or similar applications as specified or as directed .
num materials .
provide the geogrid manufacturers certified test results attesting the geogrid meets the specifications .
provide geogrid certifications signed by the manufacturers authorized agent including the following information about each geogrid to be used num .
manufacturers name address and phone number .
num .
full product name .
num .
style or product code number .
num .
geogrid roll andor lot number .
num .
geogrid polymer type .
num .
testing agency name address and phone number .
num .
certified test dates and results .
num .
published physical dimensions .
provide the test dates on the certification .
as a means of identification provide the manufacturers name full product name style or product code number and lot andor roll number which will permit field determination the product delivered to the project site is covered by the certification .
ensure the certified copy of the test results includes each test result and each mean average roll value .
the department will not accept the certification without the certified test results .
the engineer will obtain geogrid samples for testing .
each sample will be taken beyond the first wrap and will be at least num feet long and extend across the full geogrid roll width .
the samples will be labeled with the manufacturer and full product name style or product code number lot and roll number and sampling date .
a. geogrid property requirements .
provide biaxial geogrid and associated components that meet the requirements in table num .
ensure the biaxial geogrid consists of a regular network of connected longitudinal and transverse polymer elements with aperture geometry sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the surrounding materials .
construct in single or multiple layers meeting the requirements in table num .
table num geogrid property requirements minimum valuea property test method type i type ii type iii tensile strength num strain lbft astm dnum num num num tensile strength num strain lbft astm dnum num num num flexural rigidity lbmil mgcm astm dnum num num num num num num junction strength lb griggnum num num num num aperture size range in id caliper num num num open area coe cwnum num num num a minimum average roll values in the weakest direction .
the geogrid type is shown on the plans .
when the geogrid type is not shown use type ii .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b .
transportation and handling requirements .
inspect geogrid deliveries to ensure the proper material is received .
during all periods of shipment and storage do not expose the geogrid to temperatures above num f or to any deleterious materials that might adversely affect its performance .
follow the manufacturers written instructions regarding storage handling and protection from sunlight .
provide clear identification on every geogrid roll as required above including product designation identification manufacturers name lot number and material quantity which clearly differentiates between rolls of different geogrid types .
num construction requirements .
place fill material over the geogrid with low ground pressure i.e .
less than num psi track equipment e.g .
small dozers designed for low ground pressure work .
compact fill material to class a or as directed .
do not turn track equipment on the first lift of material over areas supported by geogrid .
install geogrid at the locations specified or as directed .
temporarily stretch and secure geogrid in place with staples pins sand bags or backfill as required by fill properties fill placement procedures or as directed .
keep the geogrid taut and free from wrinkles during first the fill lift placement .
remove slack in the geogrid as required by the engineer .
provide a minimum overlap width of num feet or as directed .
at transverse joints install the preceding roll so it overlaps the following roll in the direction that the fill will be placed and spread .
ensure that geogrid sections do not separate at overlaps during fill placement .
cut geogrid placed at corners or curves so there is always a minimum num feet overlap .
operate rubbertired equipment on the geogrid at num mph or less and only if the underlying material is capable of supporting the load .
dump and spread the backfill in uniform lifts to maintain the required thickness at all times .
do not operate track vehicles on the geogrid until there is a minimum of num inches of fill material between the geogrid and the tracks .
if ruts are created in the fill material due to construction traffic fill them with additional fill material .
do not blade adjacent material into the ruts .
repair any geogrid sections that are damaged by construction activity at no cost to the department .
ensure all repaired sections contain a minimum num feet overlap in all directions .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the square yard .
a separate measurement will not be made for overlaps .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit biaxial geogrid sy num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num field laboratories num description .
provide and maintain the specified class of field laboratory at an approved location for the engineers exclusive use for this contract .
field laboratories previously approved by the department before implementation of the num standard specifications may be approved for use in accordance with the departments previous approval provided the equipment has passed the departments laboratory qualification program can perform the required tests and remains in a safe operating condition .
num .
class i field laboratory aggregate and soils .
num .
class ii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave hma sp num .
num .
class iii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave hma sp num and sp num .
num .
class iv field laboratory superpave hma sp num and sp num .
num materials .
a .
all field laboratories .
provide field laboratories meeting these requirements num .
certified in accordance with the departments laboratory qualification program .
num .
single trailer num separate trailers or onsite building .
num .
exterior doors meeting applicable requirements for egress .
at least num door will have a nominal width measuring not less than num inches .
num .
minimum of num exterior windows not smaller than num feet by num feet .
num .
weather tight .
num .
lockable windows and doors .
num .
minimum ceiling height of num feet num inches .
num .
minimum total interior floor space of num square feet .
num .
meet all applicable federal and state safety codes .
num .
equipped with adequate ventilation meeting all state and federal regulations for the evacuation of fumes created by heating or testing of hot mix asphalt .
num .
hardware necessary to allow the engineer to secure the field laboratory with department locks on all doors .
num .
adequate electric heating and electric air conditioning capable of maintaining a room temperature within num to num f continuously with lights furnaces and ovens operating .
num .
steps of nonskid metal with metal handrails and level landing platform secured to the field laboratory .
maintain and repair field laboratory and all equipment .
field laboratory trailers will be situated in a manner to reduce vibration and excessive movement .
additional measures may be required to promote a stable facility for ignition oven scales to perform properly e.g .
screw jacks adjustable jack stands .
the field laboratory will be furnished with the following items or their approved equivalent num .
lighting and electrical .
provide exterior and interior lighting with sufficient num and num vac wall outlets to power all necessary test apparatus with a minimum of num extra num vac outlets .
num .
counter .
a minimum of num square feet of counter space measuring num to num inches wide .
metal clad counters are required for class ii iii and iv field laboratories .
sharp edges will be rounded .
the counter num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction must be equipped with a stainless steel sink with minimum dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inches deep and will include a faucet flexible hose type sprayer and drain .
num .
furniture .
office desk and chair .
b .
class i field laboratory aggregate and soils .
num .
scales .
one num electronic scale with digital readout sensitive to num grams and a minimum range of num kilograms .
num electronic scale with digital readout sensitive to num pound and num pound capacity .
num .
quartering canvas .
one num vinyl coated canvas with an approximate size of num feet by num feet num with approximate size of num feet by num feet .
num .
mechanical sieve shaker .
permanently fixed to floor or with approved stabilized base leveled with a minimum tray size of num inches by num inches equipped with screens and pan .
num .
rocker screen set .
manual screen set num foot by num foot with the following screens num inch num inch num inch ¾ inch and no.num .
num .
sieve shaker with sound enclosure .
motor driven shaker capable of handling num inch diameter half height brass wire u.s. standard sieves .
sieves will meet astm enum standards .
sieve sizes will be num ¾ ½ ⅜ no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num and a pan with lid .
num .
deep frame wet washing sieves .
a num inch diameter half height no .
num and full height no .
num brass wire or stainless steel sieve .
num .
laboratory oven .
one num oven with a minimum num cubic foot chamber with num or more shelves .
num .
hot plate .
a numburner electric or propane hot plate .
num .
sand equivalent shaker .
electrically operated with electronic timer .
num .
sample splitters .
one num adjustable sample splitter with adjustable chute width of ½ inch to num inches and num sample pans .
one num fixed width sample splitter with fixed chute width of num inch and num sample pans .
num .
microwave oven .
microwave oven with a minimum chamber size num cubic feet and a minimum of num watts with num microwave pans .
num .
safety equipment .
fire extinguisher first aid kit eyewash kit and other safety equipment required by law .
num .
miscellaneous equipment .
additional equipment e.g .
oven mitts brushes water squeeze bottle mixing spoons disposable gloves to perform the following tests a. idaho it num. b. aashto t num method c. c. aashto t num method d. d. aashto t num. e. aashto t num. f. aashto t num .
c. class ii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave sp num .
same as class i field laboratory plus the following num .
laboratory oven .
add a second oven with a minimum num cubic foot chamber with num or more shelves .
num .
ncat ignition furnace .
including the equipment and personal protection gear necessary to perform aashto t num method a internal balance and aashto t num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
miscellaneous equipment .
additional equipment e.g .
oven mitts brushes water squeeze bottle mixing spoons to perform the following tests a. idaho it num. b. aashto t num. c. astm dnum .
d. aashto t num. e. aashto rnum .
d. class iii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave sp num and sp num .
same as class ii field laboratory plus the following num .
scales .
two num electronic with digital readout sensitive to num grams with a minimum range of num to num grams .
num .
gyratory compactor .
pine instrument gyratory compactor models afgnum or afgnum num vac num amp num hz .
including manuals and software .
included with the gyratory compactor will be num molds and the equipment to perform aashto t num .
num .
specific gravity station .
including the necessary equipment and accessories to perform the aashto t num bowl method and aashto t num .
e. class iv field laboratory superpave sp num and sp num .
the class iv laboratory does not require aggregate or soils testing .
equip with the following num .
scales .
two num electronic with digital readout sensitive to num grams with a minimum range of num to num grams .
num .
quartering canvas .
vinyl coated fabric with an approximate size of num feet by num feet .
num .
sieve shaker with sound enclosure .
motor driven shaker capable of handling num inch diameter half height brass wire u.s. standard sieves .
sieves will meet astm enum .
sieve sizes will be num ¾ ½ ⅜ no.num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num and a pan with lid .
num .
deep frame wet washing sieves .
a num inch diameter half height no .
num and full height no .
num brass wire or stainless steel sieve .
num .
laboratory oven .
two num ovens with minimum num cubic foot chambers with num or more shelves .
num .
gyratory compactor .
pine instrument gyratory compactor models afgnum or afgnum num vac num amp num hz .
including manuals and software .
included with the gyratory compactor will be num molds and the equipment to perform aashto t num .
num .
ncat ignition furnace .
including the equipment and personal protection gear necessary to perform aashto t num method a internal balance and aashto t num .
num .
specific gravity station .
including the necessary equipment and accessories to perform the aashto t num bowl method and aashto t num .
num .
safety equipment .
fire extinguisher first aid kit eyewash kit and other safety equipment required by law .
num .
additional equipment .
additional equipment to perform the following tests as necessary a. idaho it num. b. aashto t num. c. aashto t num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction d. aashto t num. e. astm d num. f. aashto t num. g. aashto r num .
num construction requirements .
the field laboratory will be operational for at least num working days before start of testing and will only terminate num working days after completion of paving or as directed .
material requiring testing will not be accepted until the field laboratory is properly equipped operational and approved .
the field laboratory will not be moved without written approval .
an allweather parking area for the field laboratory will be provided and maintained as directed .
the parking area will be approximately num feet wide and num feet long leveled across its length and width cleared of vegetation and debris and sloped to drain .
the contractor will be responsible for restoring the area after the field laboratory is removed .
the field laboratory is the contractors property and will be removed as directed .
provide electrical service or electric generator installed by a licensed electrician .
the electrical contractor will file for an electrical inspection permit with the idaho department of labor and industrial services and the field laboratory electrical service approved by a licensed electrical inspector before turning over to the engineer .
the contractor will furnish the following num .
trash containers .
appropriate trash containers with bags .
haul trash as necessary .
num .
water .
an adequate supply of potable water will be provided at all times for testing purposes .
the water supply will be plumbed into the field laboratory sink and will have sufficient pressure to wash samples .
the contractor will control the discharge of waste water from the field laboratory in an approved manner .
waste water will not be allowed to create muddy conditions around the field laboratory .
num .
portable toilet .
a portable toilet for use by the field laboratory personnel will be provided .
the portable toilet will be serviced weekly or as directed .
num .
cleaning equipment .
broom dustpan num gallon wetdry vacuum mop and pail .
num .
printer .
provide num printer with toner and paper capable of connecting to a laptop computer via a usb port .
num method of measurement .
the field laboratory will be measured as a lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for the accepted field laboratory as follows pay item pay unit class i field laboratory aggregate and soils ls class ii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave sp num ls class iii field laboratory aggregate soils and superpave sp num and sp num ls class iv field laboratory superpave sp num and sp num ls the department considers furnishing maintaining and repairing the field laboratory parking area equipment other costs related to the field laboratorys operation and restoration of the field laboratory site as incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
electrical inspection permits will be obtained at no additional cost to the department .
costs associated with the field laboratory operation including insurance and utilities will be paid by the contractor .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num temporary turbidity curtain num description .
provide and install a geosynthetic barrier which totally encloses construction within watercourses to confine sedimentation within the work area .
the turbidity curtain must be a preassembled system including the geotextilegeomembrane connection securing mechanisms flotation devices stakes and ballast chain .
provide a system of adequate capability appropriate for the site conditions e.g .
current windwaves depth stream bottom elevation to normal water surface elevation .
construct the turbidity curtain according to this specification the plan details specified or as directed .
the work includes continued performance inspection maintenance and removal of the turbidity curtain and all accessories upon completion of the work within the turbidity curtain area .
before delivery to the project site submit manufacturers cutsheets and shop drawings detailing the materials installation maintenance and removal of the temporary turbidity curtain for approval .
this submittal must include a minimum of num examples of projects where the manufacturers turbidity curtain was used .
num materials .
ensure that the turbidity curtain is a bright color i.e .
yellow or international orange that will attract the attention of boat traffic .
turbidity curtain installation must include navigation warning lights along the curtain at least every num feet and at each corner .
use num ounces per square yard pvccoated fabric with a minimum grab tensile strength of num pounds for the turbidity curtain .
provide the geosynthetic material anchoring system floatation and other necessary hardware to meet a type num turbidity curtain installation for the anticipated construction conditions .
provide certifications and written specifications from the manufacturer to confirm compliance .
turbidity curtain will be accepted in accordance with the applicable procedures specified in subgrade separation geotextile type ii in num and num .
num construction requirements .
securely place orient and anchor the turbidity curtain according to the specified locations and depths and according to the manufacturers written installation guidelines or as directed before work commences .
design the turbidity curtain system to handle sitespecific drainage or flow conditions .
provide and maintain sufficient anchors tiedowns or other mechanisms to ensure proper position and performance of the turbidity curtain in accordance with the manufacturers written directions .
connect individual segments of curtains together using the manufacturers endtoend attachments .
attach anchor lines to the flotation device as described in the manufacturers written installation instructions .
any visible plume of cloudy water outside the protected construction area constitutes inadequate turbidity curtain performance .
immediately modify adjust or repair any portion of the turbidity curtain to correct inadequate performance .
design the anchor system to maintain adequate shape and barrier integrity of the curtain system under the construction conditions .
ensure the anchor system does not impede construction operations .
ensure that the turbidity curtain maintains continuous contact with the bottom .
excess curtain must lie without wrinkles on the bottom away from construction activity .
maintain the turbidity curtain until the construction activity within the watercourse is complete and the turbidity is reduced to approved levels .
maintenance includes inspecting the turbidity curtain flotation and ballast to ensure the work area is securely partitioned from the waterway .
when the turbidity curtain is no longer required carefully remove the curtain and related components to minimize immediate turbidity .
before removing the curtain turbidity must not exceed preconstruction levels .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum complete in place .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num basis of payment .
the department will pay for acceptable quantities at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit temporary turbidity curtain ls maintenance proper alignment and removal of the turbidity curtain and all accessories upon completion of the work within the turbidity curtain area are incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num timelapse camera num description .
furnish and install a stationary timelapse camera system at a location to view the work of each stage of construction .
move the camera to new locations as necessary to view the construction of the subsequent stages of construction .
upload images from the camera and ensure a fullyfunctional website is viewable by the public .
the camera system will monitor work on the project site as well as capture images for the production of a timelapse movie .
num materials .
provide a stationary high resolution wide lens timelapse camera capable of capturing each stage of construction .
video and audio capabilities are not required .
the camera system must be able to capture high resolution images of at least num megapixels for use in producing a high resolution ultra hd numk and nump time lapse movie generated from the still images taken during the work .
the camera system must be able to operate in typical idaho weather conditions e.g .
num to num f num mph winds for the time of year the construction is occurring .
the camera system must be able to store data onsite e.g .
solid state hard drive and communicate the data via a data connection e.g .
lte cellular connection to transmit the data to the engineer .
the camera system requires a website viewable by the public any time the project site is illuminated .
provide all necessary hardware software data transmission data storage mounting hardware num technical support monitoring maintenance lens cleaning and power interruption alerts by email for the duration of the work .
num construction requirements .
install the stationary camera system in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions requirements or as directed .
digital still images will be taken every num minutes or otherwise directed .
each image must include the year month date and time that the image was taken .
submit all original digital still images without alternation manipulation editing or modifications using imageediting software .
submit a professionally produced highresolution ultra numk and highdefinition nump timelapse movie of the work .
editing will include image stabilization color correction removal of inclement weather footages and images outside the desired daily time range determined by the engineer .
submission must include highresolution still images captured at the increments required above .
file naming must include the year month date and time that each high resolution still image was taken .
num method of measurement .
camera systems will be measured by the each and the service for the camera e.g .
cellular lte data will be measured monthly .
num basis of payment .
payment for accepted work will be made under pay item pay unit timelapse camera each timelapse camera service monthly any additional items necessary to provide a fullyfunctional camera system are incidental e.g .
equipment setup installation maintenance support removal timelapse movie .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num lawn construction num description .
prepare site construct and install sod or turf or apply seed and maintain designated lawn areas .
ensure construction work and lawn area are established to the specified condition at the end of the specified establishment period .
num materials .
ensure plant materials conform to the current edition of american standard for nursery stock .
a .
turf seed .
provide turf seed that consists of droughttolerant finetextured turftype grasses that are specific for the project site .
this may include fescue bluegrass perennial ryegrass or a combination of the type suitable for the designated turf area .
refer to num for further seeding requirements .
b. sod .
provide sod that consists of drought tolerant fine textured turftype grasses that are specific for the project site .
this may include fescue bluegrass perennial ryegrass or a combination of the type suitable for the designated sod area .
provide grass species true to type and name in accordance with the standard plant names current edition by the editorial committee of the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
provide grass sod less than num months old free of weeds and undesirable plants and not frozen or dormant .
obtain the engineers prior approval of the supply source before cutting and delivering to the planting site .
ensure sod has been properly handled and cared for has natural color is in healthy condition and properly stored watered and cultivated .
the engineer will reject sod showing evidence of improper handling or discoloration due to prolonged storage before delivery and placement .
c. fertilizers and soil conditioners .
refer to num and num .
d. soil amendment .
refer to num .
e. mulch .
refer to num .
num construction requirements .
amend the soil with fertilizers soil conditioners soil amendments and mulch or combinations to the specified condition as per seed and sod nutrient requirements and as recommended by a contractorsupplied soil analysis .
a .
lawn bed preparation .
till the lawn areas to at least num inches deep by means that will loosen the soil and bring it to a condition suitable for seeding sodding and fine grading .
before and during this operation make the surface free of vegetative growth .
remove weeds stones larger than num inch hard clods roots sticks debris and other matter encountered during tilling that is detrimental to good seed bed preparation or that is toxic to grass .
provide soil amendment for sodding that consists of organic soil coarse sand num percent passing the no .
num sieve and num percent retained on the no .
num sieve decomposed sawdust flexible flax fibers sphagnum peat moss compost and other biological additives or combinations .
uniformly spread and incorporate soil amendments conditioners and fertilizer applications into the upper num inches of lawn bed .
ensure the volume percentage of the top num inches of the lawn bed after mixing consists of approximately num percent native topsoil num percent coarse sand and num percent organic soil conditioner .
after fertilizers soil conditioners and soil amendments are incorporated work the areas as necessary to provide a smooth firm but friable lawn bed at the required finish grades .
after cultivation carefully fine grade and roll the area to the required finish grade and provide a fine textured smooth and firm surface without any foot prints undulations or irregularities .
provide good drainage by smoothing irregularities on the surface that form pockets where water will sit or accumulate .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num finish grading lawn seeding area adjacent to walks driveways and pavements to approximately num inch below the adjacent walk driveway and pavement finish grades .
finish grading the sod bed to num¼ to num½ inches below the adjacent walk driveway and pavement finish grades .
b .
turf seed sod application .
apply turf seed uniformly to lawn areas by one of the following methods num .
with an approved double roller landscape seeder .
num .
in a slurry with a hydroseeder for slopes steeper than numhnumv .
num .
hand broadcast and raked or covered with a drag .
plant seed num inch deep or less ensure the ground surface is true to grade and free from ruts foot prints or other irregularities .
do not apply slurry mixture during windy conditions winds in excess of num mph when the ground is excessively wet standing or pooled water on surface or frozen or if rainy conditions are anticipated within num hours of application .
in the event of unanticipated rainy conditions reapply the mixture to all uncured areas .
ensure hydroseeded mixture has at least num hours before a rain event for soil binder to cure .
the engineer may reduce curing time .
apply the slurry mixture within num minutes of adding the seed to the slurry mixture .
mix and apply the slurry mixture products in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
submit a copy of the manufacturers written instructions to the engineer at least num calendar days before beginning application .
do not install the sod if the soil has pooled or puddled water accumulation on the surface or when the ground is excessively wet frozen or otherwise untillable .
cut individual sod pieces to a uniform size with square corners at a uniform depth of num to num¼ inches .
lay the first row of sod in a straight line and subsequent rows placed parallel to and tightly against each other .
stagger lateral joints .
ensure butt joints between strips are tight without any gaps .
exercise care to ensure that the sod is not stretched or overlapped .
after placing the sod roll the lawn with a sod roller in a diagonal direction then water sod and allow water to soak into the root system .
ensure sod is moist but do not allow water to puddle or pool on the surface .
ensure the finished sod surface is smooth and uniform .
c. establishment period .
the soil may need more than num fertilizer and soil conditioner application during the establishment period .
contact the engineer for final acceptance and to determine whether additional fertilizers andor soil conditioners are needed .
num .
seeded areas .
the seeded lawn establishment period begins at completion of initial grass sowing .
the establishment period ends when each lawn area has been mowed a minimum of num times and presents a healthy and well cared for appearance with a uniform color texture and condition without weeds .
seeded area establishment consists of a .
protecting the planted area from trespass and other damage hazards .
b .
promoting seed germination and grass growth .
c. mowing .
d. removing clippings weeds litter and debris .
e. reshaping reconditioning and reseeding areas which become eroded washed out flooded or which for any reason fail to show healthy specified grass growth .
water lawn areas in accordance with good horticultural practices for the prevailing or existing conditions .
provide water for the establishment period unless a departmentowned or departmentcontrolled water supply system is available .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction mow the first time when the grass has attained a height of approximately num inches and when the ground is sufficiently firm to prevent rutting .
mow the grass to a height of num inches subject to the approved modification relative to the kind of grass and the season .
provide subsequent mowing when the grass attains a height of num inches .
contain grass clippings in a bag or grass catcher or remove clippings from mowed areas within num hours after mowing for the first num mowings .
do not allow clippings to smother or retard grass growth .
provide individual or blanket treatment weeding and noxious vegetation removal in accordance with accepted lawn care practices .
the department will conduct an evaluation at the end of the establishment period and identify any areas that have not met the requirements .
reseed the areas identified by the department as not meeting the contract at no additional cost .
supply the same grass seed type in accordance with the original work requirements including the establishment period .
num .
sodded areas .
the establishment period ends num weeks after lawn completion and acceptance or when the engineer accepts the completed work whichever comes first and when sodded areas present a healthy and well cared for appearance with a uniform color texture and condition without weeds .
d. extension of establishment period .
bring areas not acceptable at the end of the normal establishment period to the specified condition before final acceptance .
the engineer may extend the establishment period .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work as follows num .
seeded lawn by the acre to the nearest num acre constructed and established .
num .
sodded lawn by the square foot of lawn constructed and established .
fertilizer soil conditioner soil amendment and mulch will be by force account as specified in num.c.num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities as follows pay item pay unit lawn construction seeded acre lawn construction sodded sf fertilizer and soil conditioner ca soil amendment ca mulch ca topsoil will be paid for as specified in num .
the soil analysis cost is incidental .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num underground sprinkler system num description .
provide install and test an underground sprinkler system .
num material requirements .
incorporate new materials and equipment in the system with performance test certifications when requested .
a .
water pipe and fittings .
provide pvc plastic water pipe and fittings .
use standard design fittings appropriate for the type of pipe and pressure rating .
ensure pipe and fittings meet the requirements of astm dnum for sdr num pr num pipe and stamped n.s.f .
approved .
use only standard fittings designed for their specific use selected and installed to provide the least friction loss of water .
use only the appropriate materials e.g .
cements solvents thinners joint compounds accepted for use with the kind of pipe used .
b. sprinkler heads .
provide sprinkler heads of the sizes capacities and types as specified to ensure uniform coverage at the operating water pressure .
provide sprinkler heads with working parts made of sturdy durable materials .
ensure nozzles orifices and working parts are precision machined and highly resistant against wear .
num .
stationary .
provide stationary nonpopup sprinkler heads for lawn and shrub areas with orifices or nozzles that spray in a fullcircle or partcircle as specified .
provide spray heads with removable and interchangeable orifices or nozzles that can adjust water volume and coverage area .
num .
popup nonrevolving .
provide popup nonrevolving sprinkler heads with orifices or nozzles that adjust water volume and coverage area .
ensure the popup portion of the head returns freely to its closed position when it is set to an angle of num degrees .
provide sprinkler heads that are accessible from the top without disturbing the sprinkler housing .
ensure orifices and nozzles are removable and interchangeable from the top of the head without disturbing the sprinkler housing or ground .
num .
popup rotary .
provide popup rotary sprinkler heads and working parts that operate smoothly without ceasing under the specified operating pressure .
provide a sprinkler assembly with nozzles that are interchangeable and replaceable without disturbing the sprinkler assembly or the ground .
provide popup rotary sprinkler heads that are water jet or impulse motivated .
ensure a heavy retractor spring provides positive plate closing when in the off position .
ensure the complete working assembly is removable from above the ground as a unit to permit adjustment and servicing .
ensure partcircle heads are adjustable to any part of a circle from num to num degrees .
c. vacuum breakers .
provide pressure type or atmospheric type vacuum breakers i.e .
antisiphon valves with machined valve seats and a working pressure rating of num psi .
ensure the vacuum breaker make and designs meets idaho and local sanitary requirements .
d. gate valves .
provide heavy duty gate valves meeting the requirements of astm bnum num or approved equal .
provide valves with a service rating of num psi for nonshock cold water and a hydrostatic shell test rating of num psi .
ensure the manufactured valve contains a printed or cast identification .
e. quickcoupling valves valve couplers and hose swivels .
provide quick coupling valves with selfclosing type caps made of a heavyduty irrigation material that have a service rating of at least num psi and are designed for connection to the water supply lines .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction ensure quickcoupling valves are watertight before and after the coupler is inserted .
ensure the valve seat mechanism is designed to close before the coupler is removed .
provide couplers or keys for quickcoupling valves portable sprinkler heads or hose swivel attachments .
provide bayonet type couplers or keys made of highly corrosionresistant metal designed for quickcoupling valves .
provide hose swivels with a num degree swivel elbow that is free turning and covers a num degree swing .
provide watertight washers and seals when in service .
f. electric automatic controllers .
provide automatic electronic controllers designed to operate on numvolt num hz singlephase ac .
provide a controller with a master switch able to shut off irrigation operation without disturbing the timing sequence .
provide a manual setting for each station within the controller to permit independent operation of each station .
provide a controller that controls and operates each station independently within a numday cycle .
provide a controller that contains variable and adjustable watering times and separate adjustments for each station that does not affect the timing cycles of other stations .
provide controllers for outdoor installation when specified .
install a weatherproof cabinet or housing designed specifically for each individual controller .
provide a cabinet that is made from corrosionresistant metal with a high quality paint or enamel .
provide a cabinet that allows easy removal or part replacement without the use of special tools and that is lockable to prevent tampering and vandalism .
design install and adjust the controller to work efficiently with the remote control valves and set watering cycles as designated .
g. section zone control valves and master valves .
provide control valves having a service rating of at least num psi for nonshock cold water designed for underground installation and operating with standard keys .
ensure valves have removable bonnet and stem assembly adjustable packing gland rising stem to ensure full valve opening renewable disctype washer seating and hexnut brass union .
furnish them with an integral union or separate union for adjacent installation or in the pipeline .
provide automatic control valves that are normally closed with electric actuation operated by the controller .
provide a numvolt num hz ac wire conductor system or as specified .
protect solenoids or other actuating mechanisms from moisture damage .
num .
automatic master valves .
provide automatic master valves for use with automatic controllers within the main water supply line .
ensure the valves operate at the pressure rating set for the irrigation lines without creating excess surge pressure .
num .
drain valves .
provide manualtype drain valves used in waterlines at locations so water can drain out by gravity .
h. electrical conductors .
provide solid conductors that can be installed underground as specified .
i .
water and power sources .
supply electrical power for testing water and power sources required in flushing and balancing the system at no additional cost .
if a departmentowned or departmentcontrolled water supply system is available at the project site it may be used without charge .
num construction requirements .
a .
site preparation .
excavate pipeline trenches and areas to be occupied by controllers bases valves protective valve sleeves drain sumps and other required facilities .
install pipelines at least num inches deep in areas outside the roadways .
under roadways place the pipe at the ballast bottom .
the engineer will measure pipe cover depth from the pipe top to the finished ground surface .
excavate at least num inches square and num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num inches below the drain valve sumps .
hold excavations to the least width practicable and work without fouling the adjacent topsoil .
dispose of excavated materials not acceptable for backfilling in a satisfactory manner .
ensure trench bottoms and other excavations are true to grade and free from protruding stones roots or other debris .
construct plastic pipe bedding of earth or sand with at least num inches on all sides of the pipe .
protect the pipe with backfill material without stones clods or other injurious matter .
place topsoil as required in the upper part of the backfill .
place backfill in layers num inches or less in compacted thickness and thoroughly tamp roll or puddle each layer .
if sufficient acceptable backfill material is not available from required excavations make up deficiency with acceptable material in a satisfactory manner .
correct backfill settlement as required during the life of the contract .
where pipelines are run under curbs walks pavements and other such improvements which are to remain in place preserve such structures from disturbance or damage to the extent practicable and install the line by jacking whenever possible .
repair structures that are disturbed or damaged at no additional cost .
encase all pipes under roadways in a suitable galvanized iron or other approved conduit .
b. sprinkler system installation and adjustment .
layout the sprinkler system as specified .
the engineer may allow minor alterations to distribute adequate water coverage .
before proceeding with the installation of any system section verify the specified measurements with the available water supply and pressure .
if there are apparent discrepancies obtain approval before making changes .
num .
pipe valves and fittings .
lay pipe valves and fittings to drain by gravity with a minimum number of drain valves .
the engineer will inspect installations that have been tested and are ready to be accepted for compliance with contract requirements before being covered by backfill material .
do not move or install plastic pipe when the pipe is wet or the ambient temperature is below num f. join plastic pipe and plastic fittings with solvent cement except put threaded joints together with an approved nonhardening puttytype joint compound .
make cuts square and clean .
if pipe is chucked or clamped protect it from nicks and scarring by wrapping in canvas emery paper or other suitable material .
in making solvent cemented joints the procedures are as follows a .
cut pipe square and deburr the ends .
b .
wipe off fitting and pipe with a clean cloth .
c. coat fitting with primer .
d. quickly coat pipe with primer to fitting socket depth .
e. quickly coat fitting again with primer .
f. quickly coat pipe liberally with the approved cement .
g. quickly coat fitting lightly with the approved cement .
h. quickly coat pipe again with the approved cement .
i .
quickly insert pipe into fitting until it bottoms .
j .
twist pipe at least num turn .
k. hold tightly at least num seconds .
l. wipe off excess cement and primer .
m. allow it to set at least num hours before testing .
n. backfill trench in the cool morning hours .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction in making joints with threaded fittings exercise care to avoid undue strain on plastic material .
on plastic toiron connections make the iron connections first using a nonhardening joint putty type .
tighten threaded joints about num turn past handtight with a strap wrench .
place plastic pipe in continuous contact with the trench bottom and lay the lines alternating from sideto side of the trench to provide for possible length contraction due to temperature changes .
when testing the lines for water tightness center load the pipe between joints with backfill material as necessary to prevent pipe arching or whipping under pressure .
before installing sprinkler heads and valves thoroughly flush pipelines and blow out dirt and foreign matter .
install quickcoupling valves num inches above the planting bed finished grade .
assemble gate valves with a union .
num .
flushing and testing lines .
test pipelines valves and fittings other than those leading from section control valves to sprinkler heads for water tightness by sections at the highest operating pressure obtainable for each system section in the engineers presence before trenches are backfilled .
ensure pipe fittings joints valves and other appurtenances are watertight during the test with valves tested in open and closed positions .
repair and remedy leaks or defects .
make tests and repairs on each unit or system section repeating the process until the pipelines and valves are completely watertight and leak proof .
correct damage to existing facilities caused by the testing by leakages or by repairs to the system at no additional cost .
num .
sprinkler heads .
set sprinkler heads other than shrubbery heads to finish grade .
except for shrubbery heads set sprinkler heads num inches away from curbs walks and pavements and flush with the lawn finished grade .
set shrubbery sprinkler heads on risers above finished grade at the heights as specified or as directed and num inches away from curbs walks and pavements .
num .
automatic controller and valve controls .
install the controllers at the locations specified which may consist of num or more controllers working as a unit .
the controllers and cabinets are to be firmly mounted on a substantial and firm concrete pedestal or base on a heavy galvanized iron pipe stanchion set in concrete or on faces of walls or structures .
when wallmounted ensure bottom of controller is at least num feet above the floor .
adjust and set controllers to provide specified station cycles and timing .
install meter bases at the power source .
contact the local utility company to determine their requirements before performing any electrical installations .
ensure power source connections meet the requirements of the company or agency providing the power supply and their representative is contacted and given sufficient notice before making such connections .
ensure wiring is in accordance with the schematic wiring diagram as specified or as approved .
ensure the wire sizes awg of common return or ground wires and control wires are as specified or as approved .
the engineer may allow placing the electrical conductors in the same trench as the water pipe as long as contact with the pipe is avoided .
if allowed protect wires by placing the conductors under the pipelines .
place a numinch soil cushion without rocks or hard lumps in the trench bottom before placing the conductors and then firmly tamp and backfill with the same material .
twist and solder wire connections .
ensure wire splices are watertight and to the engineers satisfaction .
provide a uloop approximately num inches wide and deep in the direct burial conductor at each conduit entrance bushing to prevent the conductor from pulling on conduit due to settling subgrade material .
conductors through conduit are to be separate runs and not twisted braided or banded in a group or groups .
at section control valves the conductor may be placed under the protective sleeve with clearances of at least num inches below the sleeve .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
protective valve boxes sleeves and drains .
protect manual drain valves with noncorrosive metal sleeves with lock caps furnished in lengths sufficient to enclose and clear the bonnet portion of the valve as installed .
provide protective sleeves with integral flanges to resist sleeve removal or with numgauge copper wire for fastening the sleeve to valve or pipe .
protect automatic control valves with numinch concrete sewer pipe with concrete plug cover standard cast iron sleeves and covers or approved equal .
provide sufficient lengths to enclose the valve assembly and extend to the water supply line top .
a concrete or cast iron box may be substituted with a suitable cover and large enough to house grouped valves and couplings when more than num valve is installed at num location .
use crushed or uncrushed rock or gravel for drain sumps below drain valves that is free draining well graded and containing material retained on a ¾ inch sieve .
set boxes sleeves pipe covers and caps at valves with the tops flush with the final finished grade .
num .
valve keys tools accessories data and warranties .
furnish num of each valve key type for manual valve operation .
provide keys with thandles and shafts of sufficient length to permit the operator to work from a standing position .
provide tools and accessories necessary for irrigation system adjustment normal field repair and operation .
also provide manufacturers or dealers written installation instructions parts lists maintenance and operation manuals and instructions and similar available data .
num .
system adjusting balancing and final inspection .
adjust and balance each completed section or irrigation system unit to provide uniform coverage and adequate service .
adjust and balance each section or unit at the normal water pressure and with fully open valves .
the engineer will use the following criteria for final inspection a .
there is uniform and effective coverage and service to all areas to be irrigated for all zones .
b .
every zone is able to be completely drained by gravity .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure accepted work quantities for an underground sprinkler system by lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted work as follows pay item pay unit underground sprinkler system ls num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num compost num description .
provide and apply compost on disturbed areas which include areas within the right of way where existing vegetation has been removed or new construction areas including haul roads .
contact the engineer before applying compost .
apply as a temporary and permanent erosion control measure meeting all applicable portions of num .
num materials .
provide compost homogeneous in color e.g .
dark loam with an earthy smell i.e .
not odiferous and that contains no visible straw or organic or inorganic trash i.e .
maximum of num percent plastic and less than num percent for other trash .
completely decomposed material will be evidenced by total breakdown of raw ingredients and lack of odor or heat generations i.e .
mature and stable exhibiting no anomalous hotspots .
num .
solvita maturity testing ammonia nhnum and carbon dioxide conum respiration or temperature selfheating tests may not reheat to num f num c above ambient temperature .
num .
combination evolution rate is greater than num .
num .
conductivity testing is less than num mmhos per centimeter and no greater than num mmhos per centimeter .
num .
ph of num to num .
num .
sieve testing requirements must be friable and pass through a minimum num inchscreen .
num .
maximum nutrients allowable a. nitrogen total tkn num percent dry weight .
b. phosphorus total num percent dry weight .
num .
maximum physical contaminants i.e .
manufactured manmade inerts a .
plastic num percent dry weight .
b .
concrete num percent dry weight .
c. ceramics num percent dry weight .
d. metal num percent dry weight .
e. other num percent dry weight .
num .
percent moisture allowable num to num percent .
num .
must be certified noxious weed free .
the supplier or the idaho state department of agriculture isda seed laboratory will sample every num tons of compost .
compost tests will be completed and certified by a naptpap or an independent seal of testing assurance programcertified laboratory .
the following labs are accredited to perform the required tests stukenholtz laboratory twin falls id .
northwest agriculture consultants kennewick wa .
university of idaho analytical science laboratory moscow id .
certifications .
the supplier will provide records of row temperature turning schedules and noxious weed free certification by the isda .
provide a copy of the production schedule and noxious weed free certification .
the compost portion will meet the chemical physical and biological properties outlined .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num construction requirements .
for slopes up to numhnumv distribute compost evenly to all areas to be seeded at the rate of num to num cubic yard per acre and incorporate the compost into the soil in preparation for drill seeding .
for slopes steeper than numhnumv apply compost to the soil surface at the rate of num to num cubic yards per acre using a pneumatic blower with a calibrated seed and tackifier injection system .
for areas less than an acre the compost may be hand placed and lightly incorporated into the soil before seeding begins .
any site with erosion problems especially due to wind may require compost more than num inches thick and may take more than num applications as directed .
the engineer will evaluate the erosion potential and discuss with the contractor before the first application .
these applications will take place within num calendar days following the work within the designated area unless otherwise specified or directed .
this time limit may be shortened if wind or precipitation cause erosion or sediment problems .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed compost by the acre parallel with the slope based on planned quantity for each time this work is performed .
num basis of payment .
payment for accepted work quantities will be made as follows pay item pay unit compost acre num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num traffic signal installation num description .
provide and install fully functional permanent traffic signals .
operate and maintain temporary signalization as required .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in concrete num nonstructural concrete num traffic signal materials num use class num concrete for pole foundations .
cabinet foundations pads and electrical service pedestal foundations require nonstructural concrete specified in num .
provide materials that bear the seal of approval of the ul nema or other approved testing organizations .
materials must also meet the nec requirements local codes and connecting utility requirements .
submit a list of equipment and materials proposed for installation .
for each item listed include manufacturers name size and catalog number .
obtain approval of the submitted shop drawings before fabrication begins for the following items num .
steel signal poles nonstandard poles only .
num .
concrete junction boxes .
num .
composite junction boxes .
only use listed catalog numbers to identify material and equipment type and configuration required for use in the traffic signal installation .
num construction requirements .
construct as specified in this section and num .
provide work that meets the nec local codes and connecting utility requirements .
the contractor may use existing signalization equipment to aid in the control of traffic during construction .
salvage existing signalization equipment and remove in a neat skillful manner and deliver to the department .
the department will not pay for removal and salvage of this equipment separately .
submit the cabinet wiring schematic and the application programming for the control equipment for approval before fabrication begins .
submit the specified or preapproved controller cabinet and auxiliary equipment to be installed in the cabinet assembly to the department for inspection compliance with specifications and operational testing before installation .
make the cabinet assembly submittals or resubmittals available to the department for at least num business days .
when there are multiple cabinet assemblies per contract add an additional num business days per assembly .
if the contractor proposes to furnish cabinet assembly equipment other than the makes and models specified or preapproved provide the complete control equipment and cabinet assembly for evaluation and testing for num business days .
the department may accept or reject such alternates depending on the evaluation to determine if the proposed alternate equipment is equal to or better than that specified .
resubmittals of nonspecified or non preapproved equipment requires num business days for testing and evaluation .
when there are multiple cabinet assemblies per contract add an additional num business days per assembly .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num when components do not comply with the specifications or fail during testing the engineer will reject the components notify the contractor of the rejection and provide the date the components are available for pickup .
the department is not responsible for costs and contract delays associated with rejected components and resubmitted components .
deliver the equipment submitted for inspection and testing to idaho transportation department signal shop num chinden boulevard boise idaho num after the departments evaluation and testing is complete the department will ship the approved equipment to the appropriate district office on the departments regular delivery schedule .
submit requests for alternative shipping methods locations or delivery schedules in writing for approval .
if approved the department will deduct expenses incurred by the department from the next progress payment estimate .
ensure that vehicle and pedestrian signal heads are installed with faces completely covered .
securely attach covers to prevent accidental removal or from being dislodged .
ensure covers remain in place and can only be removed during testing or temporary operation until the intersection has been permanently opened and the signal is operational .
the contractor may use opaque covers with a transparent center section or port for viewing of individual lens indications for testing that remain in place until the signal is placed in full operation .
the department will not allow covers with a transparent section or viewing port on a signal head that is in operational display .
the department requires full opaque covers for blanking out or restricting the visibility of an unwanted signal display .
nonapproved signal covers and attachment methods include cardboard trash bags burlap sacks plywood electrical tape and duct tape .
ensure the neutral wires are white and the wires are identified by attaching wire markers at terminal points .
mark the wires in accordance with the number on the field signal wiring diagram .
attach wire identification that is a one piece marker and is the required size for the size of conductors installed .
use powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricants when inserting conductors in conduit .
before proceeding to pull cable in the underground conduit runs clean dirt or accumulations of moisture from conduit runs .
do not use winches or other poweractuated equipment not specifically designed for pulling wire .
ensure cable runs are continuous between the terminal blocks as specified on the field signal wiring diagram .
do not splice between terminal blocks .
neatly arrange wiring within controller cabinets in bundles in a squared corner pattern and lace or tie wrap .
provide at least num feet of slack cable in the cabinet base for each cable .
ensure cable shielding or jacket remains in place except the last num inches measured from the termination of the shortest wire in each cable .
use approved connectors on conductors at the terminal points .
the contractor may use cable with more conductors than called for in the wiring diagram .
when this is done tape off the extra conductors and label as spares .
install direct and veil optical programmed signals in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
mask each section of the signal with specified materials in an acceptable manner .
the engineer may require onsite help of the equipment manufacturers company representative for directing and veiling in accordance with the visibility requirements .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction install detector loops as specified .
cut the slot approximately num inch wider than the loop cable and of sufficient depth to provide at least num inch of cover over the top wire if located in the top pavement course and ½ inch of cover if located in the bottom course .
cut the slot corner on a diagonal or chamfered to prevent sharp cable bends .
remove sharp edges that might damage the loop cable jacket .
hydro clean and dry the slot with pressurized air to remove loose material before inserting the loop wire .
provide num continuous length of cable from the junction box around the loop area and back to the junction box .
splice loop conductors in the junction box .
num turn is once around the saw slot with the same cable .
num turns are twice around the slot with the same cable and so forth .
place the loop cable in the sawed slot in the same direction clockwise or counterclockwise for loops on the same lane .
use a blunt instrument to seat the loop cable at the bottom of the sawed slot .
do not use a screwdriver or similar sharp tool that could damage the cable jacket .
a loop system is defined as num num or num loops in num lane that is connected to a detector loop amplifier .
test each loop after installation in the roadway and again after the slot has been sealed .
after the loop cable is installed in the cut slots and tested fill the slot with an approved polyurethane resin sealant .
test the loop cables in the junction box with a permanent type wire marker indicating approach loop number and input or output e.g .
loop no.num lane a the north approach input nanum and output nanum .
connect the leadin cable to the loop wire only in a junction box with a soldered waterproof splice .
make the splice insulating package so it includes loop leads and loop leadin cable as num unit and extends at least num inch onto the outside jacket of the leadin cable .
ground the leadin cable shield at the cabinet end to the system ground .
solder the cable shield at the junction box so the cable shield is continuous throughout the intermediate junction boxes included in the insulated splice to prevent grounding .
run the test conductor continuous from the farthest junction box in each loop system to the controller cabinet .
do not splice in the test conductor .
do not install electrical conductors carrying over num volts in the loop detection conduits or junction boxes .
comparative inductance test each loop system .
test each loop as well as the system the loop is associated with as follows num .
ground fault test before splicing to the leadin cable test individual loops between the loop conductor and an approved ground point with a numvolt handcharged megohm meter .
biddle model numcl aemc corporation model num or approved equal .
test loop systems with their leads unterminated at the control cabinet between num of the num leadin conductors and approved ground point with a numvolt handcharged megohm meter .
biddle model numcl aemc corporation model num or approved equal .
ensure the minimum reading for the loop system test is at least num megohms .
for the individual loop test ensure the minimum reading on the handcharged meter is infinity .
correct discrepancies before signal turn on .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
comparative inductance test check each loop system with an approved loop testing meter .
record and certify the values for the above tests using departmentprovided forms .
field test the system for num consecutive calendar days of normal operation without a failure .
give written notice when the signal system is complete before starting the operational test .
correct the signal equipment that fails during the test period or before final project acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
signal equipment items provided by the department and installed by the contractor that fail due to no fault of the contractor before final project acceptance will be corrected by the department at no expense to the contractor .
submit manufacturers warranties guarantees instruction sheets and parts lists for materials used in the signal installation upon project completion .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure acceptably completed work by the lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows pay item pay unit traffic signal installation ls excavation backfilling surfacing and materials are incidental work .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num surveying num description .
surveying includes scheduling coordinating and providing construction surveying field and plan measurements confidence point checks grade verification point checks calculations necessary for completing the work and to properly control the work in its entirety and quantity computations for pay items requiring area volume and linear measurement .
measurement of all other pay quantities is excluded from this item of work .
perform work as specified and in accordance with standard engineering and surveying practices under the responsible charge of a professional engineer or an idaho licensed pls .
any work that falls under num idaho code e.g .
setting centerline control resetting land corners locating property lines setting right of way monuments creating authoritative control positions is required to be completed by an idaho licensed pls .
select the pls for work required under this subsection from the survey firms currently listed under the departments consultant term agreement list i.e .
category cnuma cnum or cnum .
a .
general .
the contractor is responsible for survey and control .
correcting errors made by the contractor will be at no additional cost to the department whether the errors are discovered during the actual survey work or in subsequent phases of the work .
the engineer has the right to communicate directly with the surveyor .
b .
personnel .
furnish technically qualified survey crews and a crew supervisor experienced in highway and bridge surveying and layout .
the qualified crew supervisor will be on the project site whenever surveying or staking is in progress .
c. equipment .
furnish survey instruments and supporting equipment capable of achieving the specified tolerances .
check survey equipment for accuracy before beginning survey work and as required .
d. submittals .
submittals for any work that falls under num idaho code must be signed and sealed by an idaho licensed pls .
all other work under this item may be signed and sealed by an idaho licensed engineer or pls .
resubmittals may be required depending on completeness and correctness of the work .
initial ground disturbing activities or bridge deck construction is not permitted until the contractor is notified in writing to proceed .
notification will be provided within num calendar days after receipt of the applicable submittal or any resubmittals .
notification to proceed does not relieve the contractor of its responsibility to maintain the survey work and to correct errors regardless if the errors are discovered during the actual survey work or in subsequent phases of the work .
full payment will not be made on the surveying contract pay item until all survey submittals are received and accepted .
e. departmentprovided information .
the department will furnish the following data num .
plans showing locations of control points at the beginning and the end of the project e.g .
point of intersection of tangents point of curvature point of tangency of horizontal curves point on curve point on tangent that have been collected in the development of the plans if any .
num .
plans showing locations of benchmarks if any .
num .
crosssections developed during design if any .
num .
digital terrain model dtm .
predesignoriginal surface and design surface if any .
num .
design survey notes if any .
num .
finished grade book if any .
copies of departmentprovided survey data will be available for the bidders inspection .
verify survey data provided by the department and as specified on the plans before use .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num f. presurvey conference .
the contractor subcontractors pls survey crew leader and all surveying personnel involved in surveying will meet with the engineer num weeks before beginning survey work .
the presurvey conference is to allow the discussion of methods and practices of accomplishing the required survey work e.g .
survey and staking methods stake marking grade control confidence and grade verification point reporting referencing structure control project documentation .
g. automated machine guidance amg .
in lieu of setting stakes the contractor may elect to use amg if the contractor num .
informs and receives engineer approval before using amg .
num .
discusses the amg work during the presurvey conference or num calendar days before its use .
num .
demonstrates capabilities accuracy and reliability of the intended amg procedure if required .
num .
performs any supplemental staking as directed at no cost to the department .
num .
provides confidence points verifying dtm models used for the work per num.h .
h. directed surveying .
directed surveying includes field surveying and office computations necessary for changes made by the department and for extra work .
directed surveying does not include any quantity calculations .
prior written authorization including the work to be performed is required .
clearly mark all field work completed under directed surveying in the daily diary and total hours directed daily .
all requirements of num will apply to directed surveying .
i. monument survey work .
complete tasks required as specified in num num and num before other construction surveying tasks .
num materials .
a .
general .
furnish acceptable tools supplies and stakes of the type and quality normally used in highway survey work .
furnish stakes and hubs of sufficient length to provide a solid set in the ground with sufficient surface area above ground for necessary legible markings .
remove and dispose of construction flagging lath stakes and other staking material after the work is complete .
b .
flagging .
mark the top num inches of stakes with fluorescent paint andor plastic flagging with the following fluorescent colors type stake with color centerline hub w tack or pk nail in pavement white centerline reference point hub w tack and lath red white and blue benchmark solid permanent point w lath white and blue slope stake stake and lath white reference to slope stake hub w tack and lath red and white grade finish stake grade stake w stake chaser blue right of way limit lath orange clearing limits lath or flagging orange and white gas lines petroleum hub w guard stake and lath yellow drain lines sewers hub w guard stake and lath green waterlines irrigation hub w guard stake and lath blue conduit hub w guard stake red note color standards may vary when utilities have been located by the utility marking service .
mark reference stakes with the color of the referred item e.g .
red for conduit .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num construction requirements .
a .
general .
establish construction survey points elevations and grades as necessary to control layout and complete the work .
clear the survey line to facilitate surveying and remove clearing slash from the travel or work areas .
cut brush and trees flush to the ground .
minimize removal unless area is to be cleared and grubbed during construction .
check control surveying and staking to ensure specified tolerances are met before use .
calculate grades elevations offsets and alignment data necessary for staking andor setting items .
submit copies of the calculated grades .
the contractor may request approval for alternate methods of establishing grade control with wire lines computer or lasercontrolled grading equipment or other suitable methods .
the contractor is responsible for protecting the survey and control work provided .
stakes and information damaged or removed will be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
the department may spot check the work for accuracy and unacceptable work may be rejected .
the contractor will resurvey rejected work and correct work that is not within the specified tolerances at no additional cost to the department .
for work being controlled by a numd design model submit the following num .
a detailed outline and list of the pay items and work that will be controlled by the numd design model .
num .
a narrative outlining any changes made to the departments prepared numd design model .
num .
a copy of the data files that will be loaded into the contractors equipment for machine guidance or verification prepared by the contractor that include and represent the departments prepared numd design model with changes identified in the narrative .
provide files in landxml format or as directed .
b. discrepancy notification .
complete a preliminary check of the plans and specifications before beginning construction .
immediately notify the engineer of any discrepancies or deficiencies e.g .
in grade elevations alignment locations dimensions .
compare staked cut and fill depths with the plans .
refer to the engineer differences found between the horizontal or vertical alignment data shown on the plans and the alignment observed on the ground during progress of the work not immediately correctable or requiring interpretation .
c. recordkeeping .
comply with num idaho code if a record of survey is required .
keep a neat and legible diary signed daily and listing for each days work including the date weather crew equipment location and type of work performed .
list by serial number measurement equipment e.g .
distance meters total stations scanners gps receivers levels that require calibration for correct operations and document calibration at the time of use .
delete errors by lining out .
the daily diary is in addition to and complementary to any electronic data collection technology used by the contractor .
keep a separate field book containing data on vertical and horizontal control .
keep diaries containing a log of office work .
keep a separate diary for directed surveying office computations .
keep field notes diaries and books according to standard surveying practice .
loose leaf books in any form will not be accepted .
make available the field notebooks and forms used upon request .
submit weekly copies of diaries books and notes .
d. computations and plots .
use prismoidal and geometric formulas for volume computations to calculate pay items requiring more precise volume measurements e.g .
inplace volumes of concrete quantities of earth cut or fill material stockpiles .
submit calculations supporting the method used .
measure the original and design surface for comparison and submit documentation .
calculate preliminary quantities from this data using the averageend area method and submit plots and calculations for approval .
when work is complete superimpose final design surface with original surface and calculate final quantities using the prismoidal method .
alternate methods for num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num calculating quantities may be approved .
submit measurements and calculations for quantity computations including a copy of grade calculations cross sections plots and computer print outs in an approved format .
submit num copies of grade sheets .
submit a horizontal and vertical control base map showing primary and secondary control points annotated with x y and z coordinate data .
plot the base map at a legible scale and update and resubmit as new control is added .
e. crosssections .
develop crosssections from field measurements taken at even numfoot station intervals .
take crosssection measurements before and after excavation and before backfill .
when the centerline curve radius is less than or equal to num feet take crosssections at a maximum centerline spacing of num feet .
when the centerline curve radius is greater than num feet take crosssections at a maximum spacing of num feet .
take additional crosssections at breaks in terrain and at changes in typical sections .
for each crosssection measure and record points at breaks in terrain but at least every num feet unless otherwise approved .
measure and record points to at least the anticipated slopes and reference locations .
reduce crosssection distances to horizontal distances from centerline .
take crosssections at right angles to tangents and normal to curves .
include in cross sections grades locations and existing ground line profiles .
crosssections may be developed from digital terrain models provided the ground survey measurements do not exceed num feet in any direction major breaks in terrain are included and the horizontal and vertical control for the work is used .
f. length verification .
fieldverify lengths of pipe pipe culvert barrier pipe siphon and sign posts at an appropriate time and as specified in num .
report final lengths to the department and the contractor for inclusion in record drawings as specified in num .
g. stake maintenance and marking .
maintain reference stakes benchmarks slope stakes slope reference stakes clearing limits culvert reference stakes grade stakes curb curb and gutter radii and other stakes necessary for the work until the construction has been accepted .
legibly mark survey stakes with station elevation and offset referenced to their respective control line .
renew illegible stakes at no additional cost to the department .
mark slope reference and guard stakes with station .
h. confidence points .
confidence points are used to verify the accuracy of the natural ground dtm to provide evidence just before construction to ensure the dtm is a reasonable representation of the original natural ground for computation of volumes and pay quantities and for any other application that fits the concept of confidence points .
num .
collect confidence points to validate and check the original ground dtm .
confidence point locations will follow these guidelines a .
be collected with surveygrade theodolite total station andor surveygrade gps .
b .
be randomly selected without regard for the location of dtm points or triangles .
c. be evenly distributed over the entire dtm area to be validated .
d. be proportionately distributed between confidence point classifications as applicable .
e. at a density sufficient to validate the surface num generally ten num per instrument location as used in collecting dtm data .
num ten num confidence points for each roughly numfoot strip .
num ten num confidence points within any roughly numfoot radius .
num in the case of data collected photogrammetrically num percent of dtm points .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
generate a report showing the test results that include a status for each point indicating whether the dtm is within tolerance at that location outside of tolerance or exceeds that value by numtimes .
plot the locations of confidence points by type and result to support visual analysis of the results .
investigate all confidence points that exceed the tolerance .
examine the area surrounding each failing confidence point and try to resolve the failure even if it passes the numtimes test .
employ techniques e.g .
drawing tight contours rotating the view conducting a drivethrough or flythrough as needed .
overlay the feature mapping with the triangles and look for features e.g .
ditch bottoms edges of pavement roadway crowns that are not properly represented by the triangles .
try to identify triangulation errors e.g .
triangles crossing breaks in grade or extending across areas not intended for modeling .
densify or replace portions of the original ground dtm where clusters of confidence points exceed tolerances .
look for patterns e.g .
a distinct area with increased density of failures repeating pockets of failing points .
look for any systematic error that these patterns may be suggesting .
num .
original ground confidence point vertical tolerances values .
type surface represented feet surfaced paved or concrete surface num graded machine graded and compacted surface num natural irregular natural ground num rugged extremely rugged rock surface num num .
original ground acceptance criteria .
a. twothirds of all errors fall within the confidence point error tolerances .
b .
all of the errors fall within numtimes of the respective tolerances .
num .
failing results .
remedy or justify every numtimes failure and accept up to onethird of the confidence points exceeding the respective tolerance values .
each digital terrain model used for detail design or for earthwork payment must have a passing confidence point analysis .
num .
confidence point documentation .
keep a record of all original confidence point observations as well as a record of the final confidence point analysis report showing the test results .
include an explanation for accepting numtimes failures .
num .
confidence point deliverables .
submit the following information for a topographic mapping survey a .
intelligent digital terrain model current version of bentley inroads .dtm file containing all the tied topographic features .
b .
confidence point report on the intelligent digital terrain model in a pdf .
c. original notes taken in the field and num pdf of the original field notes .
d. coordinate the file of all confidence points containing point number northing easting elevation and point code .
i. grade verification points .
grade verification points are to be collected such that they provide a reasonable record of the grade as constructed and are used to verify the accuracy of the constructed grades relative to the design .
provide grade verification point data in the approved coordinate file format to the engineer for analysis .
the engineer may request additional grade verification points if quantity distribution or placement does not meet the criteria stated below .
the engineer may choose to collect additional grade verification points using department personnel .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
collection of grade verification points .
collect grade verification points with a total station .
alternative survey equipment may be used with approval .
the engineer may require validation of the accuracy of the selected collection method .
if hubsstakes are used to control the grade for construction grade verification points will not be taken within num feet from any grade control hubstake .
num .
grades outside the subgrade area .
measure and record grade verification points upon completion of trimmed and finished areas outside of the subgrade area e.g .
ditches waterway channels roadbed side slopes embankment areas .
location and spacing of these grade verification points will provide a reasonable record of the constructed roadbed side slopes and ditches and placed at a nominal rate of num grade verification point for every num square feet of roadbed side slopes and ditches .
num .
grades within the subgrade area .
measure and record grade verification points upon completion of the subgrade and each course and before the placement of the next course .
location and spacing of these grade verification points will be to provide a reasonable record of the grade as constructed and placed at a nominal rate of num grade verification point for every num square feet of grade .
num .
construction tolerances .
in constructing the work the contractor will meet the appropriate construction tolerances for the material as specified in the contract regardless of any surveying or staking tolerances specific to the work item .
a .
areas with specified tolerance values .
for areas with specified tolerance values the contractor will meet the tolerances when constructing the work given in num.m .
b .
areas without specified tolerance values .
for areas outside of the subgrade area e.g .
ditches side slopes detention ponds with a tolerance specified as line and grade line grade and crosssection or no defined numeric tolerance given in the specifications the engineer will hold work to a tolerance based on the design requirements material size construction method or other factors as determined by the engineer .
the engineer will use the verification point data to evaluate the grade using any industrystandard technique or method and will provide acceptance or rejection of the grade before the end of the first full business day following receipt of the grade verification point data .
do not begin placement of the next course until the engineer has accepted the grade and approval is given to proceed .
j. centerline reestablishment .
if requested by the engineer or the contractor reestablish centerline from instrument control points at even numfoot station intervals .
the maximum spacing between centerline points is num feet when centerline curve radius is less than or equal to num feet .
when the centerline curve radius is greater than num feet the maximum distance between centerline points is num feet .
reestablish centerline as many times as necessary to construct the work .
points horizontal and vertical to be reestablished include but are not limited to num .
point of curvature .
num .
point on curve .
num .
point of tangency .
num .
point on tangent .
num .
reference point .
k. control points .
relocate initial horizontal and vertical control points in conflict with construction to areas not to be disturbed by construction operations .
furnish the coordinates and elevations as specified in num.c for the relocated points before the initial points are disturbed .
set additional control outside limits of construction suitable for use during machine control operations as necessary .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction l. establish and check benchmarks .
protect benchmarks during the work .
check benchmarks to ensure specified tolerances are met before use .
benchmarks must allow a level rod to stand vertically and squarely on the mark and will be referenced to centerline and horizontal measurements .
include any benchmarks established in control base map as specified in num.c .
m. establish alignment points .
establish alignment points at horizontal and vertical points of curvature points of tangency and stations on the alignment spaced within num feet at significant breaks in the ground at drainage structure locations and at approaches .
mark stakes on the side facing the initial station .
n. survey tolerances .
survey and establish controls within the following tolerances description horizontal vertical control absolute position independent of provided control num ft num ft control relative to nearest provided control num ft num ft centerline points including offsets num ft crosssections slope stakes and references num ft num ft walks and bike paths num ft num ft curb and gutter num ft num ft culverts ditches and minor drainage structures num ft num ft walls e.g .
retaining mse sound num ft num ft bridge substructure num ft num ft bridge superstructure components num ft num ft clearing and grubbing limits num ft right of way limits num ft roadway subgrade finish stakes num ft num ft roadway finish grade stakes num ft num ft paving reference line num ft num ft at the presurvey conference coordinate with the engineer to determine the survey tolerances for items not listed above .
o .
clearing and right of way limits .
stake clearing limits on both sides of centerline at each established station .
locate the clearing limit on the ground as specified .
stake right of way limits every num feet on tangents every num feet on curves and at right of way breaks .
p. slope stakes and references .
slope stakes and stakes for setting other items will have reference stakes .
maintain the reference stakes until approved for removal .
establish and set slope stakes and references on both sides of centerline at crosssection locations at terrain breaks and changes in typical sections .
establish slope stakes in the field at the actual point of intersection of the design slope with the natural ground line .
record the following information on the slope stake cut or fill from catch to subgrade shoulder distance to subgrade shoulder distance to centerline and design slope e.g .
numhnumv .
set slope stake references outside the clearing limits .
include slope stake information on the reference stakes including the horizontal and vertical distance from the reference stake to the catch slope stake .
record the station on the back side of the slope and reference stakes .
record the actual as staked three dimensional position of the slope and reference stakes .
prepare field notes showing slope stake and reference information and provide to the engineer .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num direct staking of the theoretical computergenerated slope stake catch point requires prior approval .
if an automated slope staking routine is intended to be used the system will be able to perform the proper super elevation lane transitions and benching as well as duplicate other details in the design surface .
the system will record field modifications made to the final catch slopes .
any modifications will be recorded and provided to the engineer and the contractor and included on the record drawings as specified in num .
q. grade finishing stakes .
for grade elevations and horizontal alignment set gradefinishing stakes on centerline at the edge of each travel lane on each shoulder at roadway crosssection locations at each grade break line and between centerline and shoulder with maximum spacing not to exceed the width of the grading equipment .
set stakes at the top of subgrade and the top of each aggregate course .
for turnouts set stakes on centerline each normal shoulder and the turnout shoulder .
in parking areas set hubs at the center and along the edges of the parking area .
set stakes in ditches to be paved .
the maximum spacing between rows of stakes is num feet .
use brushes or guard stakes at each stake .
reset grade finishing stakes as many times as necessary to construct the subgrade and each aggregate course .
special situations or conditions may require tighter spacing of grade stakes to ensure grade and alignment as directed .
r. stockpile sites .
perform the work necessary for the initial layout and measurement of the stockpile site by one of the following methods num .
crosssection method .
establish a reference baseline project site limits and clearing limits .
survey and record original ground crosssections before placement of stockpile material .
take crosssections at maximum numfoot intervals grade breaks in the existing ground and at locations anticipated to be grade breaks in the completed stockpile .
survey and record final crosssections after completion of the stockpile .
take crosssections at all previous locations plus any additional locations necessary to accurately reflect size and shape of stockpile .
num .
digital terrain model dtm method .
establish instrument control stations project site limits and clearing limits .
survey and record original natural ground measurements .
use the proper placement of breaklines and regular terrain points .
record a minimum of num confidence points on original ground per stockpile surveyed .
verify instrument setup by recording elevation and backsight checks .
survey and record the stockpile surface measurements .
use the proper placement of breaklines and regular terrain points .
record a minimum of num confidence points on stockpile surface per stockpile surveyed .
verify instrument setup by recording elevation and backsight checks when using a total station or heights of the base and rover antenna before and at the end of the session when using surveygrade gps systems .
s. structure and process specific requirements .
num .
concrete paving .
unless the contractor uses automatic machine control systems concrete paving requires stringline on each side of the screed for each placement .
set stringline control with vertical and horizontal control points as needed but placed in at least numfoot intervals .
set stringline on both sides of the roadway .
profile surface at each edge of placement and adjust grades for smoothness as approved .
check pavement thickness every num feet and adjust as needed .
stake concrete joint locations .
if automatic machine control systems are utilized by the contractor for concrete paving then the department the contractor and the pls will discuss and agree upon the methodologies needed to meet specifications .
num .
drainage structures .
stake drainage structures to fit field conditions as approved .
the location may differ from the plans .
perform the following a .
survey and record the ground profile along centerline of structure .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b .
determine the slope catch points at inlets and outlets .
c. set reference points and record information necessary to determine structure length and end treatments .
d. stake ditches or grade to make the structure functional .
e. plot the profile along centerline of the structure to show the natural ground the flowline the roadway section and the structure .
f. before installation submit the plotted fielddesign profile crosssection final structure length and alignment .
g. mark guard stakes with the following when applicable num diameter length and type of culvert e.g .
num inch diameter by num foot long corrugated metal pipe .
num the vertical and horizontal distance from the hub to the invert at the end of the culvert or any intermediate point as needed or as directed .
num flowline grade of the pipe .
num pipe camber .
num station .
num elevation .
h. provide a reference at a maximum spacing of num feet for storm sewers and waterlines and reference pipe inverts at manholes .
num .
bridges .
set horizontal and vertical control and reference points for bridge substructure and superstructure components .
establish reference and submit the following a. bridge chord or the bridge tangent .
b. abutments and bridge piers .
c. elevations for footings pile cutoffs pile layouts pier caps bridge seats bridge beam profiles and screed elevations .
d. crosssections structure excavation sections .
e. deck grades and profile .
f. bridge approach grades and profile .
set intermediate slope stakes at bridge abutments to establish transitions .
place finish grade stakes on the centerline of abutment bearing and at the top of slope of bridge berms .
place finish grade stakes on each side at top midpoint of slope and toe of bridge berm .
num .
box culverts .
set horizontal and vertical control and reference points .
establish and reference the centerline back of parapet and the skew and flowline elevations at inlet outlet and breaks .
num .
paving near bridges and box culverts .
all paving within num feet of a bridge or box culvert requires stringline grade control .
set grade finishing stakes for grade elevations and horizontal alignment on centerline the center of each travel lane on each shoulder at roadway crosssection locations and between centerline and shoulder with a maximum spacing of num feet .
set stringline control with vertical and horizontal control points as needed but placed at no more than a maximum of numfoot .
as a minimum set num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num stringline grade control on both sides of the roadway and at centerline .
before paving profile each stringline at each edge of placement and adjust grades for smoothness as approved .
num .
retaining walls .
survey and record profile measurements along the face of the proposed wall and num feet in front of the wall face .
for each crosssection measure and record points every num feet and at major breaks in terrain .
set adequate references and horizontal and vertical control points .
num .
borrow sites .
perform the work essential for initial layout and measurement of the borrow site .
establish a referenced baseline project site limits and clearing limits .
survey and record initial and final cross sections and calculate and submit end area volume quantities .
num .
curb and gutter .
set curb and gutter staking at numfoot intervals on tangent and numfoot intervals on curve radii .
set line and grade for curb and gutter to the nearest num foot of the proposed or established grade line .
set radius points .
num .
guardrail .
stake barrier vertical and horizontal control at a maximum spacing of num feet on tangent sections and num feet on curved sections unless otherwise approved .
num .
scales .
perform the initial level check of scales and subsequent level checks weekly .
document the level checks and submit the documentation .
num method of measurement .
survey will be measured on a lump sum basis based on a percent complete as determined in consultation with the engineer and the contractor .
full payment will not be made on the survey contract pay item until all survey submittals are received and accepted .
directed surveying office computations will be measured and paid by force account as specified in num.c.num .
only hours documented in the diary as specified in num.b and num will be paid on this item .
directed surveying crew will be measured and paid by force account as specified in num.c.num .
only hours documented in the diary as specified in num.b will be paid on this item .
travel time to and from the project site is incidental .
num basis of payment .
payment for accepted work will be made as follows pay item pay unit survey ls directed surveying office computations ca directed surveying crew ca num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num record of existing pavement markings num description .
record the existing pavement markings in order to sufficiently replace them in the same location type and form after they are covered or removed by the work .
replacing the pavement markings will be as specified in num andor num .
num materials .
provide materials as specified in num andor num .
num construction requirements .
conduct field measurements record data with surveygrade equipment and standard survey methods and produce a complete accurate legible and toscale diagram of the existing pavement markings .
include on the diagrams all skip lines nopassing barriers tapers gores curves e.g .
circular reverse compound spiral turn lanes stop bars crosswalks lane text hashchevron marks wheel off tracking locations transitions tapers roundabout markings and any other existing standard or special pavement markings e.g .
yield bars bicycle boxes route shields arrows ada markings symbols miscellaneous messages pavement logos mile post pavement marks and permanent tubular marker locations .
measure linear markings on the long centerline of the mark .
measure double parallel line markings on the long centerline of the space between the marks .
dimension the width of lanes shoulders tapers transitions intersections and skip line intervals .
label pavement markings with dimensions and color .
where centerline and lane lines are parallel to the project alignment annotate lane widths from the alignment .
when pavement markings are not parallel to the project alignment annotate project stationing and offset each item included on the diagrams .
include on the diagrams the location and coordinates of at least num control points per mile of pavement markings as well as the coordinate system datum and project combination factor used .
submit diagrams for approval and paint reference locations at least num week before commencing any work that will alter remove or eliminate existing pavement markings .
work which will alter remove or eliminate existing pavement markings is prohibited until the record of existing pavement markings is approved .
use a produced diagrams surveygrade equipment and standard survey methods to reestablish temporary and permanent pavement markings as approved or as directed .
it is the contractors responsibility to ensure the pavement markings are correct and accurate .
reestablish the temporary pavement markings on each course layer of each day before allowing the traffic to travel on the roadway or as approved .
num method of measurement .
record of existing pavement markings will be measured by lump sum .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted record of existing pavement markings at the contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit record of existing pavement markings ls work by the department to reestablish the pavement markings when the record is inadequate to sufficiently replace all the pavement markings will be charged to the contractor and deducted from the contractors next progress payment .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num record drawings num description .
this work is for the preparation of record drawings .
revisions when applicable will include num .
horizontal and vertical roadway and bridge alignments typical ballast and slope sections .
num .
modifications to any dimensions lines grades locations or incorporated materials .
num .
drainage installations including materials and inlet and outlet locations and elevations .
num .
horizontal ties on lighting signalization and sign standards and controls as well as any modifications to materials and installations .
num .
any modification to materials or variation of bridge or other structure construction .
num .
utility installation and service access locations and depths .
num .
any changes to the demolition and removal items .
num .
final public and private drivewayapproach locations and types and ada access standards .
num .
work of any kind that encroaches upon the limits of the project right of way .
num .
all added or deleted work .
the intent is to capture all modifications of every kind made in the field during construction that otherwise would not be reflected in the original published design plans .
num materials .
use num clean complete set of departmentpublished plans .
num construction requirements .
the record drawings will document a complete accounting and detail of all approved modifications revisions and design changes from the published plans .
on the record drawings use these abbreviations and markings to denote deviations from the original plans as follows num .
asb for asbuilt .
the actual horizontal vertical dimension or quantity measured by survey or otherwise after it has been constructed .
num .
f.c .
for field change .
revision or change from the original design made in the field .
num .
deleted for not constructed .
num .
make profile changes with elevations or stationing only .
the profile line is not required to be redrawn unless the change is significant .
num .
mark asconstructed work in red ink or red pencil to clearly identify the changes to the original design .
locate all asconstructed marks logically and clearly on the respective drawings .
keep work neat legible and true to scale line thickness and line type .
num .
show a change deletion or omission with a straight line drawn through stationing elevations and notes followed with the appropriate symbol .
num .
crosshatch storm sewer water sanitary sewer gas lines or construction that has been deleted or relocated .
num .
record drawings will meet the survey tolerances listed in num.m .
num .
ensure crossedout information is legible .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction consolidate markings for all revisions and modifications onto num clean complete set of departmentpublished plans by an individual fluent in standard drafting practices .
this individual will work in conjunction with the subcontractors for obtaining documented modifications but will be under the contractors sole direction and responsibility .
keep the set of record drawings uptodate throughout the entire duration of the construction phase from the time of contract award until substantial completion .
label or stamp in red ink asconstructed in the upper right hand corner of the title page upon completion .
annotate date of submission under the words asconstructed .
submit the completed record drawings along with any necessary additional pages required for completeness and clarity within num calendar days following the substantial completion .
the record drawings must be complete and be approved before the project will be accepted and before the final payment will be made .
num method of measurement .
record drawings will be measured by lump sum .
num basis of payment the department will pay for accepted record drawings as follows pay item pay unit record drawings ls num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num materials num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num portland cement num general requirements .
provide portland cement as specified .
portland cement aashto m num type i ii or iii blended hydraulic cement aashto m num type ip il it or isnum do not use portland cement containing more than num percent total alkali .
obtain approval before using type iii cement other than for precast stringers .
use the product of only num mill or other brand and type of portland cement in a single structure component e.g .
abutments columns stringers deck .
the contractor may use limestone additions of up to num percent by mass of the cement provided the chemical and physical requirements of the finished cement meet aashto m num .
use naturally occurring limestone consisting of at least num percent by mass of num or more of the mineral forms of calcium carbonate caconum .
include the caconum content of the limestone the carbon dioxide conum content and calculated limestone content of the cement in the manufacturers mill test report .
calculate the limestone content in portland cement in accordance with astm cnum and tested in accordance with astm cnum .
num acceptance requirements .
the engineer will accept portland cement materials for use based on the manufacturers certification as specified in num and num .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num asphalt num asphalt .
provide asphalt binder that meets aashto m num except as follows num .
when polymer modification is specified or when the sum of the grade designation values exceed num perform the aashto t num test at num f num c on residue from the rolling thin film oven test rtfot .
the binder must have at least num percent elastic recovery .
provide asphalt for a specified use from num supplier .
if a change of supplier for asphalt binder is proposed or if blending of asphalt binder from more than num supplier is proposed the engineer will require mix design testing and verification before approved for use .
num polymermodified emulsified asphalts .
meet the following num .
provide aashto m num quickset polymermodified cqsnumhp emulsion .
test method of test requirement viscosity sf at num f aashto t num num num seconds residue by evaporation aashto t num num minimum residue softening point aashto t num num f minimum residue penetration at num f aashto t num num num before starting the emulsification process mill or blend the polymer material into the asphalt or emulsifier solution .
ensure water has no harmful soluble salts and is of a quality that will not cause the asphalt to separate from the emulsion before microsurfacing is in place .
require the emulsion manufacturer to supply the additives .
add the additives as approved by the manufacturer to the emulsion mix or any component materials to provide the quickset properties and increase adhesion .
the department will consider the additives included as part of the mix design and must be certified as to their compatibility with the other mix components .
num emulsified asphalts .
meet the following num .
aashto m num .
num .
aashto m num .
num .
ensure rapid setting emulsion grades are homogenous after thorough mixing within num calendar days after delivery .
num .
polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalts crsnumr and crsnuml are an emulsified blend of asphalt polymer water and emulsifiers .
num .
aashto m num for crsnuml emulsified asphalt .
num .
table num for crsnumr emulsified asphalt including asphalt binder thoroughly blended with at least num percent total rubber solids .
num .
table num for crsnump polymerized cationic emulsified asphalt .
mill the polymer into the asphalt or emulsion during the manufacturing of the emulsion .
num .
table num for special tack emulsion ste num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num crsnumr requirements specifications aashto test property minimum maximum number tests on emulsion viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num num t num storage stability test num hours percent num demulsibility num ml num dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate percent num particle charge test positive sieve test percent num distillation oil distillate by distillation oil distillate by volume of emulsion percent num t num residue by evaporation percent num t num method b test on residue from distillation penetration num f num c num g num seconds num num t num or t num table num crsnump requirements specifications aashto test property minimum maximum number tests on emulsion viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num num t num storage stability test num hours percent num demulsibility num ml num dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate percent num particle charge test positive sieve test percent num distillation oil distillate by volume of emulsion percent num num tnum a residue by evaporation percent num t num method b test on residue from distillation penetration num f num oz .
num seconds num num t num t num torsional recovery percentb num or elastic recovery percent at num f num c num t num a distillation modified to use num grams of an emulsion heated to num f plus or minus num f and maintained for num minutes .
b the torsional recovery test will be conducted in accordance with the california department of transportation test method num .
the torsional recovery test may be used instead of elastic recovery based on type of modifier used at the option of the supplier .
if the torsional recovery method is used for acceptance the supplier must supply test data verifying specification conformance .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num table num stenum requirements specifications aashto test property minimum maximum number tests on emulsion viscosity num f sfs num tnum storage stability num day num demulsibility num ml num dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate percent a num particle charge positive sieve test percent num distillation oil distillate by volume of emulsion percent num tnum test on residue percent num tnum penetration num f num num tnum ductility num f num cmminute cm num tnum solubility in trichloroethylene percent num tnum a perform the demulsibility test within num days from date of shipment .
num antistripping additive .
use liquid antistrip additive or hydrated lime as follows num .
treat pg binder products with a heatstable antistripping additive .
use num percent or num percent of anti stripping additive per ton of asphalt .
test samples of the treated asphalt in accordance with idaho it num .
remove material that does not show the presence of antistrip additive .
submit samples of the proposed liquid antistrip additive and asphalt for approval before use .
the engineer will test the material in accordance with idaho it num for acceptance .
num .
use hydrated lime as a plant mix additive that meets num .
num loading certificate .
accompany each shipment of asphalt with a copy of the loading certificate providing the following information num .
contractor and project number .
num .
refinery .
num .
supplier if other than refinery .
num .
car or delivery ticket number .
num .
type and grade of asphalt .
num .
specific gravity .
num .
temperature when loaded .
num .
shipment a .
truck .
individual certified weights of each loaded truck and trailer and the tare weight of each vehicle .
individual compartment asphalt weight must be certified for multiple compartment hauling units .
b .
railroad car .
certified volume of asphalt load .
compute the weight from the volume corrected as specified in num.a.num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
consistency of material a. saybolt viscosity of emulsified asphalt .
b .
performance graded binder .
with each lot change attach a copy of the itdnum form for pg binder suppliers certification as required by num .
num .
the authorized refinery or supplier representatives signature .
num .
when an antistripping additive is specified the percentage of additive by weight of asphalt and the brand grade or type of additive .
num .
lot number for pg binders .
num sampling and testing .
sample asphalt in accordance with aashto r num .
test asphalt in accordance with appropriate aashto and astm test methods for the type of asphalt .
check the presence of antistripping additive in accordance with idaho it num .
num temperature viscosity curve .
accompany each shipment of asphalt with a copy of the temperature viscosity curve .
num asphalt certification .
the department requires the contractors supplier to num .
annually submit a process control plan quality control plan to the central materials laboratory for review .
num .
certify the performance graded pg binder supplied meets the specified grade when tested in accordance with aashto m num and num and emulsified asphalts supplied meet num .
num .
perform qc testing for large bulk tanks of pg num at least monthly .
num .
perform at least num complete set of quality control tests for each storage tank of polymerized pg binder produced .
num .
for polymerized pg binder produced by inline blending outline consistency and specification compliance testing frequency in the suppliers quality control plan for the central materials laboratorys approval .
num .
perform complete specification testing for pg binder at least monthly and submit a copy of each test report to the central materials laboratory .
base the testing frequencies on consistent raw materials and production processes .
if a change occurs to the raw materials or the production process the department requires a new set of complete specification testing .
use only supplier blended polymerized pg binders .
do not introduce modifierspolymers at the asphalt mix plant unless a qcqa program has been submitted by the supplier and approved by the central materials laboratory .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num aggregates num general requirements .
provide aggregates that are reasonably without wood roots bark soft or disintegrated pieces or other detrimental matter .
aggregate sources must meet the requirements of num .
round the percent passing gradations to the nearest whole number except report the percent passing the no .
num sieve to the nearest tenth of a percent .
num concrete aggregate .
meet the following requirements for concrete aggregate a .
general .
use a fine and coarse concrete aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num general concrete aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained sodium sulfate soundness a aashto t num maximum num loss for fine aggregate and num loss for coarse aggregate after num cycles a perform sodium sulfate soundness testing when directed .
do not use limestone or fine or coarse aggregate in concrete wearing surfaces .
perform aashto t num aashto tp num astm cnum or astm cnum testing to determine the potential alkali silica reactivity .
the department will require mitigating measures for aggregates found to be potentially reactive in accordance with aashto t num aashto tp num astm cnum or astm cnum .
potentially reactive aggregates are those with expansion greater than num percent as determined by aashto t num or greater than num percent as determined by astm cnum or aashto tp num .
if astm cnum indicates an aggregate composition containing a percentage of the following materials greater than shown in table num the engineer will consider the aggregate potentially reactive .
table num aggregate reactivity mineral limit optically strained microfractured or microcrystalline quartz num max chert or chalcedony num max tridymite or cristobalite num max opal num max natural volcanic glass num max submit mitigation measures for approval .
the contractors mitigation measures may include the use of fly ash lithium admixtures or other approved material .
submit test results from astm cnum aashto tp num or crd c num that show the proposed mitigation used with the cement and aggregates will control the potential expansion .
do not use an aggregate source for concrete before approved .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction b .
fine aggregate for concrete .
meet the fine aggregate gradation requirements in table num .
table num fine aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing num in num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num a a num to num for concrete wearing surfaces pavements approach slabs and bridge decks except when the sand equivalent is at least num then num to num is acceptable .
use fine concrete aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num fine concrete aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements sand equivalent aashto t num modified alternate method no .
num prewet num minimum organic impurities aashto t num reject a color darker than the standard deleterious substances percent by mass aashto m num clay lumpsnum max coal lignitenum max others shale alkali mica coated grains soft and flaky particles.num max do not use recycled concrete in fine concrete aggregate .
perform idaho it num only when the samples meet requirements for fine concrete aggregate .
when aggregates are tested for mortar making properties apply the criteria in table num .
table num mortar properties cement type i and ii type iii age at testing num days and num days num days and num days comparative strength minimum num percent num percent num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. coarse aggregate for concrete .
meet the following gradation requirements for coarse aggregate for concrete in table num .
table num coarse aggregate size no .
and gradation percent passing sieve size num numa numb num num num num in num num in num num num num in num num num num in num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num use size no .
numa or numb when coarse aggregate size no .
num is required .
combine num or more coarse aggregates for sizes num and num .
provide a coarse concrete aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num coarse concrete aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum deleterious substances aashto m num coal lignite num max by mass clay lumps num max by mass clay lumps friable particles num max by mass material passing no .
num sieve num max by mass flat and elongated aggregate particles length to thickness ratio greater than num num maximum num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction e. combined aggregate gradation for concrete .
as an option to using coarse and fine graded aggregates for concrete aggregate gradation may consist of a combined gradation .
meet the material requirements for coarse and fine aggregates for concrete .
meet the following additional requirements table num combined aggregate size no .
and gradation individual percent retained sieve size numc numc numc numc numc num½ in num num in num num num num½ in num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num num num num in num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num pan num num num num num num num num num num the engineer will not accept material with more than num sieve sizes outside the above gradations or with adjacent failing sieves excluding the percent retained in the pan .
the amount retained in the pan can not exceed the amount specified in table num .
provide aggregate with a sand equivalent on the blended gradation meeting the following requirements num .
seventy num for all concrete or for concrete wearing surfaces e.g .
bridge desks pavements approach slabs with less than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num .
eighty num for concrete wearing surfaces with between num percent and num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num .
ninety num for concrete wearing surfaces with greater than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
the fineness modulus as calculated in the fop for aashto t num on the combined gradation will be within num of the gradation proposed in the concrete mix design .
num microsurfacing aggregate .
provide aggregate of num percent crushed stone without organic material clay balls or other deleterious materials .
provide aggregate meeting num and the following test method of test requirement l.a. abrasion aashto t num num maximum sand equivalent aashto t num num minimum num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num when tested by aashto t numt num ensure the mix design gradation meets the following sieve size percent passing stockpile tolerances num inch num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num quality control testing during production is the contractors responsibility .
quality control test reports for gradation and sand equivalent will be furnished .
num aggregate for untreated base treated base and road mix .
meet the following aggregate gradation requirements in table num table num nominal maximum size sieve size percent passing num in num in num in a num in b num in a num in b num in num½ in num num in num num num num½ in num num in num num num num num num num num ¾ in num num num num num ½ in num num num num num num num ⅜ in num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note use the b gradation unless otherwise specified .
use aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained sand equivalent aashto t num modified alternate method no .
num prewet num minimum if num or more of the material passes the no .
num sieve .
sand equivalent is not required if less than num passes the no .
num sieve or for aggregate to be used for lime or cementtreated base .
los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum rvalue idaho it num num or more num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction retained asphalt film aashto t num above num for road mix aggregate fractured face aashto t num method num untreated base at least num of the material retained on the no .
num sieve has at least num fractured face .
treated base and road mix at least num of the material retained on the no .
num sieve has at least one fractured face .
num aggregate for superpave hma pavement .
provide aggregate for mixes except sp num in at least num separate stockpiles .
use aggregate consisting of crushed stone or crushed gravel .
combine with other required aggregate fractions and fillers in the proper proportion so the resulting mixture meets the gradation required .
screen the aggregate used for superpave hma so num percent or less of the naturally occurring minus ½ inch material remains in the material used to produce the stockpiles .
crush the plus ½ inch material to produce the required gradation .
this requirement does not apply to sp num mixes or mixtures designated as nonstructural or temporary mixtures .
size grade and combine the fractions for the mixture in proportions so the resulting blend conforms to the grading requirements as defined in table numa and table numb .
use aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num superpave mixture requirements mix type sp num sp num sp num design esals a millions num num num num idaho degradation maximum loss num num num ethylene glycol minimum retained num num num rvalue num or more minimum num or more minimum num or more minimum la wear maximum loss num num num sodium sulfate soundness b maximum loss after num cycles num num num fractured face coarse aggregate c minimum num num num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate minimum num num num sand equivalent minimum num num num flat and elongated d maximum num num num a the anticipated project traffic level expected on the design lane over a num year period .
regardless of the actual design life of the roadway determine the design esals for num years .
b perform sodium sulfate soundness testing when directed .
c num denotes that num percent of the coarse aggregate has num fractured face and num percent has num or more fractured faces .
d this criterion does not apply to no .
num nominal maximum size mixtures .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num a denotes the sieves that will be used for mix design control points and quality analysis sieves for a class sp num mix .
b the combined aggregate gradation will be classified as coarsegraded when it passes below the primary control sieve pcs control point as defined in table numa and table numb .
other gradations will be classified as fine graded .
this classification is based on the contractors job mix formula and not individual gradation tests .
coarse graded mixtures will not pass through the restricted zone .
table numa nominal maximum aggregate sizecontrol points percent passing and vma requirements pcs control points for mixture nominal maximum aggregate size b num in num in num in sieve size restricted zone control points restricted zone control points restricted zone control points num in num in num to num num num in num max num to numa num num in num max num to numa num in num to numa num max num in num to numa num to numa no .
num num num no .
num num num to numa num num to numa num num to numa no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num no .
num num to numa num to numa num to numa vma num num num primary control sieve num in no .
num no .
num pcs control point passing num num num table numb nominal maximum aggregate sizecontrol points percent passing and vma requirements pcs control points for mixture nominal maximum aggregate size b num in num in num sieve size restricted zone control points restricted zone control points restricted zone control points num in num in num in num in num num in num to numa num num num in num max num to numa num to numa no .
num num max num to num no .
num num num to numa num num to numa no .
num num num num to numa no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num no .
num num to numa num to numa num to numa vma num num num primary control sieve no .
num no .
num no .
num pcs control point passing num num num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num aggregate for cover coat material .
meet the following aggregate gradation for class specified in table num .
table num gradation table num num num percent passing percent passing percent passing sieve size by weight class a class b class a class b num num ½ in num num num num ⅜ in num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num use aggregate that meets the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained cleanness value idaho it num num or more los angeles abrasion aashto t num grading c num maximum retained asphalt film aashto t num above num fractured face aashto t num method num at least num of the material retained on the no .
num sieve has at least num fractured face .
num aggregate for blotter and aggregate for choke sand .
use secondary rejects that meet the aggregate gradations specified in table num .
table num aggregate gradation percent passing sieve size blotter choke sand ⅜ in num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num use aggregate that meet the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num not required ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num aggregate for open graded base .
meet aggregate gradation requirements specified in table num in accordance with aashto t num excluding washing .
provide clean angular crushed quarry rock free of clay coatings lumps and soft or flaky particles material for rock cap .
table num aggregate gradation requirements percent passing by weight screensieve size class i rock cap class ii class iii num in num num in num num½ in num num num num num in num ¾ in a num num num num num num ½ in num num num num num num ⅜ in num num no .
num a num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num a num num a denotes the sieves that will be used for quality acceptance .
use aggregate that meet the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained rvalue idaho it num num or more los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum loss for class i num maximum loss for class ii iii flat elongated fop for astm num num for class ii iii fracture face fractured faces aashto t num num retained on num with num fractured faces for class ii num retained on num with num fractured faces and num retained on num with num fractured face for class iii num not specified .
num aggregate for antiskid .
meet the applicable aggregate gradation specified in table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num gradation table sieve size percent passing type num type num type num type num type num ⅜ in num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num num num use aggregate with the characteristics specified in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss for type num not required for others ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum loss for type num not required for others num aggregate for granular subbase .
meet the aggregate gradation specified in table num in accordance with aashto t num excluding washing .
table num gradation table sieve size percent passing num in num num in num num no .
num num num no .
num num num use aggregate with the aggregate criteria specified in table num .
table num aggregate criteria characteristic test method requirements idaho degradation idaho it num num maximum loss ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained rvalue idaho it num num or more los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum loss sand equivalent aashto t num modified alternate method no .
num prewet num minimum if num or more of the material passes the no .
num sieve .
sand equivalent is not required if less than num passes the no .
num sieve .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num sampling and testing .
sample and test aggregates in accordance with these standard methods sampling of aggregates aashto t num sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates aashto t num with amount of material finer than no .
num sieve aashto t num method a or b organic impurities in sands for concrete aashto t num dry preparation of disturbed soil and soilaggregate samples for test aashto r num effect of organic impurities in fine aggregate on strength of mortar aashto t num determining the percentage of fracture in coarse aggregate aashto t num method num evaluating cleanness of cover coat material idaho it num resistance to degradation of smallsize coarse aggregate by abrasion and impact in the los angeles machine aashto t num clay lumps and friable particles in aggregate aashto t num lightweight pieces in aggregate aashto t num plastic fines in graded aggregates and soils by use of the sand equivalent test aashto t num modified alternate method no .
numprewet methods of chemical analysis of limestone quicklime and hydrated lime astm cnum uncompacted void content of fine aggregate aashto t num method a standard test method for flat particles elongated particles or flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate fop for astm dnum ratio of length to thickness equal to or greater than num accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkali silica reactiona aashto t num a low alkali cement may be used .
modified aashto t num procedures are required for expansion mitigation testing using fly ash lithium or other additives .
num aggregate source material quality .
investigate sources in accordance with idaho ir num .
perform idaho it num on all sources and idaho it num on basalt sources .
perform the remaining applicable tests specified in this subsection and the cited tests for specific products on samples resulting from the investigation .
prepare a materials source plan for aggregate sources .
submit the materials source plan and include data from the testing for use by the department in determining the acceptability of aggregate sources and borrow sources when applicable .
for aggregate source approval purposes sample and test the material at the frequency indicated in idaho ir num .
to ensure the material meets the contract quality and design requirements the contractor may be required to maintain and verify the quality of the material by completing the following testing idaho degradation idaho it num method of test for disintegration of quarry aggregates ethylene glycol idaho it num investigation of aggregate and borrow deposits idaho ir num specific gravity and absorption of fine aggregate aashto t num specific gravity and absorption of fine aggregate using automatic vacuum sealing corelok method idaho it num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction specific gravity and absorption of coarse aggregate aashto t num specific gravity of soils aashto t num soundness of aggregate by use of sodium sulfate or magnesium sulfate use sodium sulfate aashto t num perform the tests below on the following categories of material num .
base course and granular subbase material compaction of soils and soil mixtures for the expansion pressure and hveem stabilometer tests rvalue idaho it num num .
asphalttreated material preparing and determining the density of hot mix asphalt hma specimens by means of the superpave gyratory compactor aashto t num superpave volumetric design for hot mix asphalt hma aashto r num coating and stripping of bitumenaggregate mixtures aashto t num percent air voids in compacted dense and open bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num maximum specific gravity of bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num bulk specific gravity of compacted bituminous mixtures aashto t num bulk specific gravity and density of compacted asphalt mixtures using automatic vacuum sealing method aashto t num resistance of compacted hot mix asphalt hma to moistureinduced damage replace d num and d num with aashto t num and aashto t num astm dnum compressive strength of hot mix asphalt hma aashto t num num .
borrow and granular borrow compaction of soils and soil mixtures for the expansion pressure and hveem stabilometer tests idaho rvalue idaho it num num .
fine aggregate for concrete fine aggregate for hydraulic cement concrete aashto m num measuring mortarmaking properties of fine aggregate idaho it num accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkali silica reaction aashto t num low alkali cement may be used .
baseline testing with cement and aggregate only is required .
num .
coarse aggregate for concrete coarse aggregate for hydraulic cement concrete aashto m num accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkali silica reaction aashto t num low alkali cement may be used .
baseline testing with cement and aggregate only is required .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num joint fillers and sealers num preformed expansion joint filler .
meet aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num or astm dnum .
num joint sealer for asphalt and concrete pavements .
meet astm dnum type ii .
num hot poured elastomeric type concrete joint sealer .
meet astm dnum type iii .
num neoprene compression seal .
meet aashto m num for concrete pavement and aashto m num for bridges .
provide adhesive lubricant that meets astm dnum for bridges and astm dnum for concrete pavement .
submit a manufacturers certification stating material meets the requirements and the manufacturers written requirements .
submit shop drawings and installation procedures for review as specified in num .
install the compression seal in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions using the proper size of installation tool as recommended by the manufacturer .
clean metal surfaces that will contact the seal in accordance with sspcspnum .
num silicone sealant .
meet astm dnum .
sample and test each lot of silicone sealant before use .
the department requires an independent laboratory perform sampling and testing .
do not place material from a given lot evaluated for compliance with typical properties listed in the manufacturers design information bulletins and approved for placement .
allow at least num days for testing .
perform the following specific tests num .
tensile stress at num percent elongationa .
num .
total elongationa and tackfree timeb .
a astm dnum method a die c num day cure at num f plus or minus num f and num to num percent relative humidity .
b astm cnum .
testing is incidental and the cost included in the contract unit price .
deliver silicone sealant in the manufacturers original sealed container .
each container must have an intact original manufacturers label with the following num .
legibly marked manufacturers name .
num .
trade name of the sealer .
num .
production lot number .
num .
expiration date of the manufacturers shelf life warranty .
retest expired sealant at no additional cost to the department and obtain approval before use .
do not use sealant if more than num months has elapsed since such retesting .
num elastomeric sheet .
fabricate the elastomeric sheet with nylon fabric embedded in a high quality vulcanized elastomeric compound using polymerized chloroprene as the only basic elastomer .
use a smooth elastomeric sheet that is without pinholes and surface blemishes shows no evidence of ply delamination and meets the physical requirements in table num .
provide methods and materials to install a leakproof sheet to the required length .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction accompany elastomeric sheet with a manufacturers certificate attesting compliance with the contract .
table num elastomeric requirements physical property test method performance requirements hardness durometer a astm dnum num num points tensile strength astm dnum num psi minimum elongation at break astm dnum num minimum brittleness temperature astm dnum num f tear resistance astm dnum die c num lbin minimum flame resistance astm cnum must not propagate flame resistance to heat aging change in original properties after num hr at num f num c hardness astm dnum num points maximum elongation astm dnum num maximum tensile strength astm dnum num maximum resistance to oil aging change in volume after num hr immersion in astm oil no .
num at num f num c astm dnum num maximum resistance to ozone condition after exposure to num pphm ozone in air for num hr at num f sample under num percent strain astm dnum no cracks resistance to permanent set compression set after num hours at num f num c astm dnum method b num maximum resistance to water change in weight after num days immersion at num f num c astm dnum num maximum num bridge deck joint seals general .
fabricate the elastomeric portion of each bridge deck joint seal in a single piece or have the individual pieces factoryvulcanized and the entire elastomeric element shipped as a single unit .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num grout and mortar num grout type a .
type a grout is portland cement and water containing an approved expansion admixture or compound .
the numday compressive strength of grout cubes must be at least num psi when cured and tested in accordance with aashto t num except confining cover plates are to be clamped on the molds immediately after filling and left on the molds for at least num hours .
a. portland cement .
provide portland cement as specified in num .
ensure cement used for grouting does not contain lumps or other indication of hydration or pack set .
b .
water .
use water that is potable clean and without injurious quantities of substances known to be harmful to portland cement aggregate or prestressing steel as specified in num .
c. admixtures .
use admixtures that impart the properties of low water content good flowability and minimum of bleed and expansion properties .
the grout must expand at least num percent but less than num percent as determined by expansion of grout above the mold during cure as measured at the center of the specimen .
make a separate unconfined specimen for this purpose .
use formulations that do not contain chemical in quantities that may have harmful effects on the prestressing steel or cement .
do not use admixtures containing chlorides fluorides sulphites and nitrates .
d. mixing of type a grout .
add water to the mixer first followed by portland cement .
mix the grout until a uniform thoroughly blended grout is obtained without excessive temperature increase or loss of expansive properties of the admixture .
continuously agitate the grout until it is pumped .
do not add water to the grout to increase flowability which has been decreased by delayed use of the grout .
base proportions of materials on tests made on the grout before grouting .
the water content must produce a flow time of at least num seconds as determined by astm cnum .
provide test reports from a commercial laboratory confirming properties of grout made with materials supplied .
num grout type b .
provide class as specified .
class i nonmetallic nonshrink .
obtain approval of the grout material before use and meet the following criteria num .
preblended commercial product with a numday compressive strength of at least num psi .
num .
nonmetallic nonshrink water mixing compound containing portland cement silica sand or other agents e.g .
water reducers plasticizers fillers .
num .
does not use chlorides fluorides sulphites or nitrates .
num .
meet astm cnum grade b or c and the following a .
when dried in air at num percent relative humidity for num days after standard numday moist cure present num percent or less expansion from beginning of cure .
b .
zero percent shrinkage .
c. submit test data report to verify compliance .
strictly observe the manufacturers written instructions regarding mixing maximum water content application curing temperatures and curing conditions .
sandblast grout areas .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction class ii metallic nonshrink .
obtain approval before use and meet the requirements of type b class i except the engineer may allow metallic aggregates .
do not use for pumping applications or where discoloration would be objectionable .
do not vibrate metallic aggregate grouts .
num grout type c. obtain approval before use .
type c grout is a num component num percent reactive epoxy system that is volumetrically stable .
minimum required compressive strength in num hours is num psi .
strictly observe the manufacturers written instructions as to mixing and blending aggregate gradation and dryness and application and curing temperatures .
sandblast grout areas .
num grout type d. type d grout is num part portland cement and num parts fine concrete sand by volume containing only enough water to permit placing and packing .
provide materials that meet num and num .
the engineer may waive the gradation requirements of num.b to allow a finertextured grout .
clean grout surfaces of loose or foreign material that would prevent a bond between the grout and the base concrete .
flush grout areas with water and dry surface before placing the mixture .
cure using water or other approved method as specified in num .
remove defective grout and replace at no additional cost to the department .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num pipe num general requirements for concrete pipe .
provide test results for strength absorption and hydrostatic pressure for concrete pipe from the manufacturer .
only use manufacturers of precast concrete products that hold current certification under the npca plant certification program the acpa qcast plant certification program or the pci plant certification program .
num concrete sewer pipe .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for round concrete pipe .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for elliptical concrete pipe .
num concrete pipe for irrigation or drainage .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for round concrete pipe .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for elliptical concrete pipe .
num reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for round concrete pipe .
meet aashto m num for the strength classes specified for elliptical concrete pipe .
add to aashto m num table num wall a internal diameter wall thickness a area steel a reinforcement type num in num⅞ in num innumft elliptical num in num⅛ in num innumft elliptical num in num¾ in num innumft elliptical num in num⅛ in num innumft elliptical a per unit length of pipe wall .
add to table num wall a of aashto m num minimum concrete strength is num psi .
internal diameter wall thickness a area steel a reinforcement type num in num in num innumft circular num in num in num innumft circular num in num in num innumft circular num in num in num innumft circular num in num in num innumft circular num in num in num innumft elliptical num in num in num innumft elliptical num in num in num innumft elliptical num in num in num innumft elliptical num in num in num innumft elliptical num in num in num innumft elliptical a per unit length of pipe wall .
num gaskets for concrete pipe .
meet aashto m num type a or b .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches .
meet aashto m num or m num with the following additions num .
provide special sections that are the same thickness as the conduit they are joined to and that meet aashto m num or m num .
num .
repair the damaged zinc or aluminum coatings on pipe with a repair compatible with aashto m num or m num .
num .
provide closeriveted pipe with the rivets on circumferential seams placed on approximate num inches centers with a maximum spacing of num inches .
num .
provide asphaltcoated pipe that meets aashto m num type a .
do not coat coupling bands .
num .
provide polymercoated pipe with one of the following a .
meet aashto m num except coating thickness will be num mils minimum on each side .
b .
meet aashto m num which has additionally been coated with material meeting polymer coating requirements of aashto m num .
num .
the engineer will waive the provisions of aashto m num section no .
num requiring testing of helicalwelded seam corrugated metal pipe in accordance with aashto t num for pipe with the ends successfully rerolled into annular corrugations .
num .
provide spiral rib corrugated steel pipe that meets aashto m num type ir with the following exceptions fabricate each pipe end with at least num annular corrugations for joining pipe sections with coupling bands .
provide coupling bands at least num inches wide having num corrugations spaced to seat in the second corrugation of each pipe without creating a gap greater than ½ inch between pipe ends .
provide gaskets that meet astm cnum section num or aashto m num section num .
num .
the engineer may approve coupling devices other than the standard configurations provided the contractors supplier submits test data confirming the device complies with joint performance criteria of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii section no .
num .
num metallic zinc or aluminum coated corrugated steel underdrains .
meet aashto m num .
num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains .
meet aashto m num .
num general requirements for plastic pipe .
all plastic pipe will meet a minimum pipe stiffness of num pii as determined by astm dnum .
num corrugated pe drainage tubing .
meet aashto m num .
num not specified .
num rubber gaskets for corrugated metal pipe .
meet astm dnum grade numcnum .
num acrylonitrile butadiene styrene abs or pvc composite sewer pipe .
meet astm dnum .
abs pipe is acceptable for drain laterals num inches and smaller .
num class ps num pvc pipe .
meet aashto m num .
limit size of ps num pvc to num inches maximum diameter .
num ribbed pvc pipe .
meet astm fnum or astm fnum .
limit size of ribbed pvc to num inches maximum diameter .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num corrugated pe pipe .
meet aashto m num for corrugated pe pipe nominal size of num to num inches in diameter .
limit size of corrugated pe to num inches maximum diameter .
use type s pe pipe .
num ribbed pe pipe .
meet astm fnum .
num steel reinforced ribbed pe pipe .
meet aashto mp num for srrpe pipe nominal size of num to num inches in diameter .
limit size of srrpe to num inches maximum diameter .
num polypropylene pipe .
meet astm fnum for double wall pipe up to num inches in diameter .
limit double wall pipe to num inches maximum diameter .
meet astm fnum for triple wall pipe from num inches to num inches in diameter .
limit triple wall pipe to num inches maximum diameter .
triple wall pipe can be substituted for double wall pipe in diameters below num inches when available .
num fittings for pe drainage tubing .
meet astm fnum .
num rodent protection devices for trench drain .
meet astm fnum .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num paint num general .
provide homogenous paint without contaminant and of a consistency suitable for use .
do not allow pigment to settle excessively cake or thicken in the container and become granular or curdled during the pigment dispersion in vehicle .
num paint formula .
follow formulations in accordance with federal paint specifications tt or the steel structures painting council sspc .
tint coatings sufficiently different to provide a contrast between coats .
match the topcoat colors as specified or according to color chip numbers in federal standard no .
num .
the engineer will not allow field tinting .
submit technical data sheets safety data sheets and specific application instructions for coatings .
submit the manufacturers quality control test results for each paint batch component used .
submit the weight per gallon viscosity percent solids by weight and finish coat color chips for the selected color .
submit the percent of metallic zinc by weight in the cured zinc primer coat and percent of metallic zinc by weight in the zinc pigment component for zinc rich primers .
the engineer will accept the applicable national transportation product evaluation program ntpep and the north east protective coating committee nepcoat qpl paint formulations for products applied to structural steel specified formulations and paint systems .
the engineer will still test qpl paints from these programs as specified in this subsection andor the manufacturers specification for acceptance in accordance as specified in quantities listed in the qa manual .
paints with volatile organic compounds voc of num pounds per gallon maximum are acceptable .
formula no .
num primer inorganic zinc rich specification aashto m num type i or sspc paint num type numc zinc dust astm dnum type ii .
meet class b requirements for slip coefficient and creep resistance .
formula no .
num primer organic zinc rich specification sspc paint num type ii zinc dust astm dnum .
meet class b requirements for slip coefficient and creep resistance when specified .
formula no .
num primer zinc rich moisturecure polyurethane specification sspc paint num zinc dust astm dnum type ii .
meet class b requirements for slip coefficient and creep resistance when specified .
formula no .
num primer high solids polyamide epoxy specification sspc paint num formula no .
num intermediate high solids polyamide epoxy specification sspc paint num formula no .
num intermediate moisturecured polyurethane micaceous iron oxide reinforced performancebased specification sspc paint num formula no .
num topcoat high solids polyamide epoxy specification sspc paint num formula no .
num topcoat high solids aliphatic polyurethane specification sspc paint num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num formula no .
num topcoat aliphatic moisturecured polyurethane specification sspc paint num formula no .
num micaceous iron oxidealuminum moisturecured polyurethane specification volume solids num percent minimum weight solids num percent minimum poundsgallon num minimum gloss flat formula no .
num primer latex exterior specification ttpnum .
the engineer will not accept paint containing lead chromium or cadmium pigments or lead driers .
formula no .
num paint latex exterior semigloss specification ttpnum .
the engineer will not accept paint containing lead chromium or cadmium pigments lead driers or mercurial compounds for fungicide .
formula no .
num concrete stain flat specification provide pigmented sealer that is semiopaque colored toner containing methyl methacrylateethyl acrylate copolymer resins toning pigments and solvent .
suspend toning pigments in solution with a chemical suspension agent .
provide toning pigments that consist of laminar silicates titanium dioxide and inorganic oxides .
the engineer will not allow lead or chromium compounds settling or color variation .
do not use vegetable or marine oils paraffin materials stearates or organic pigments in the coating formulation .
volume solids num percent minimum weight solids num percent minimum pounds per gallon num minimum gloss flat formula no .
num highway traffic line paint latex specification the departments qpl for waterborne traffic line paint formulations .
num certification .
submit a manufacturers certificate and quality control test data of each batch or lot as specified in num .
num identification and marking .
plainly mark each container with the following information num .
color .
num .
product or formula number .
num .
quantity .
num .
batch or lot number .
num .
date of manufacturing .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num metals num general .
when metal is placed in the work ensure it is without dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substance .
thin powdery rust and tight rust is not detrimental except in the case of prestressing reinforcement .
num reinforcing steel .
provide welded wire fabric for reinforcement that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
provide other reinforcing steel meeting aashto m num grade num or num .
the contractor may substitute deformed steelwelded wire reinforcement that meets aashto m num for aashto m num reinforcing steel or aashto m num welded wire fabric with approval .
provide epoxycoated metal reinforcement in accordance with astm anum .
do not use colors in shades of brown that inhibit visual detection of rust spots and damage .
coat reinforcing steel which is required to be epoxycoated in a plant certified by the concrete reinforcing steel institute crsi as a fusionbonded epoxy applicator .
num dowel bars .
provide smooth dowel bars meeting aashto m num except the steel material meeting aashto m num as an alternative may be provided by the contractor .
coat epoxycoated dowel bars in a plant certified by the crsi as a fusion bonded epoxy applicator .
num tie bars .
meet aashto m num grade num or num .
ensure tie bars are deformed and epoxycoated .
num prestressing steel .
use hightensile wire strand for prestressing steel meeting with astm anum or uncoated highstrength steel bars meeting with astm anum .
the department requires prestressing steel in the same direction transverse or longitudinal in individual members be of the same type .
ensure the assembled units have a tensile strength of at least the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength if bars are to be extended by the use of couplers .
failure of the sample to meet this requirement is cause for rejection of that heat of bars andor lot of couplers depending on the nature of failure .
obtain approval for the location of couplers in the member .
whenever threaded studs bolts nuts and washers are specified with astm anum astm fnum astm anum or astm anum and when galvanizing is required use hotdip zinccoated or mechanically zinccoated requirements .
num structural steel and related materials .
num .
structural steel .
provide structural carbon steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
provide structural low alloy steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
provide structural low alloy weathering steel in accordance with aashto m num grade numw .
provide structural highstrength steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
provide structural highstrength weathering steel in accordance with aashto m num grade numw .
fabricate structural steel rolled shapes and plates of structural carbon steel .
do not use rimmed or capped steel for structural carbon steel structural low alloy steel or structural low alloy weathering steel .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num submit proof of weldability before fabrication when using steel manufactured in accordance with aashto m num grade numw .
cut plates so the rolling direction is approximately parallel with the direction of tensile or compression stress .
show the rolling direction on the shop drawings .
provide base materials for fracture critical members fcms in accordance with aashto m num article num except replace paragraphs num num num num and num with the following num do not use welding to correct plate surface defects .
the contractor may condition plates by complete removal of imperfections or depressions on the top and bottom surfaces by grinding .
condition by grinding as follows a. flare num without abrupt change in contour .
b .
ensure the depth of the depression after grinding does not exceed num percent of nominal plate thickness or ⅛ inch whichever is greater .
c. ensure areas removed by grinding do not exceed num percent of the surface area of the face of the plate where the imperfections are found .
d. after grinding the net plate ensure crosssectional area is num percent or more of the nominal crosssectional area of the plate .
num the contractor may condition the edges of plates to remove injurious imperfections in accordance with the current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code paragraph num .
longitudinal charpy vnotch cvn tests are mandatory for acceptance on plates and shapes used for flanges and webs of main girders including their splice plates transverse and longitudinal stiffeners floorbeams and plate or shape identified as fracture critical .
submit sampling procedures in accordance with aashto t num .
use the heat h frequency of testing for structural steels in accordance with aashto m num grades num num and numw .
use the piece p frequency for steels in accordance with aashto m num grade numw and any plate or shape identified as fracture critical .
test in accordance with aashto t num .
the testing cost is incidental to the cost of the structural steel and included in the contract unit prices for structural steel .
provide cvn impact values in accordance with the zone requirements specified .
num .
bolts .
a .
general .
provide unfinished bolts ordinary machine bolts in accordance with astm anum .
use grade a .
use turned bolts or other special bolts made from structural carbon steel or as specified .
provide highstrength bolts in accordance with astmfnum .
do not galvanize grade anum type num and astm anum bolts .
provide anchor bolts in accordance with astm fnum grade num num or num .
if the grade is not specified use grade num .
ensure the maximum tensile strength is num ksi for bolts num inch or less in diameter and num ksi for larger bolts .
provide type num bolts when grade anum bolts are used unpainted and nongalvanized .
ensure nuts and washers used with type num bolts have comparable atmospheric corrosion resistance and weathering characteristics .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction when grade anum bolts are to be galvanized ensure the steel is in accordance with the aisi numxx series with a maximum yield strength of num ksi .
do not galvanize grade anum anchor bolts which are num inch in diameter or smaller and have a yield stress greater than num ksi .
grade anum anchor bolts may be used if painted with num coats of specified formula zinc rich paint consisting of num mils num inch minimum dry thickness per coat .
for galvanized fasteners overtap the nuts to the minimum amount required for the fastener assembly .
provide the amount of overtap in the nut that will allow free assembly on the bolt in the coated condition and meet the mechanical requirements of aashto m num .
the rotationalcapacity test for overtapping requirements in aashto m num paragraph num are maximum values instead of minimum values .
mark bolts nuts and washers with a symbol identifying the manufacturer as required in astm fnum section num astm anum section num and astm fnum section num .
the contractors supplier must provide the symbol and address of each manufacturer for the bolts nuts and washers supplied .
b .
testing .
num bolts .
test proof load in accordance with astm fnum method num .
test minimum frequency in accordance with astmfnum section num .
wedge tests fullsize bolts in accordance with astm fnum paragraph num .
if bolts are galvanized perform tests after galvanizing .
the minimum test frequency will be in accordance with fnum section num .
if galvanized bolts are supplied measure the thickness of the zinc coating .
take measurements on the wrench flats or top of the bolt head .
num nuts .
proof load tests in accordance with astm fnum paragraph num .
the minimum test frequency will be in accordance with in aashto m num paragraph num or aashto m num paragraph num .
if the nuts are to be galvanized perform tests after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
if galvanized nuts are supplied measure the zinc coating thickness .
take measurements on the wrench flats .
num washers .
if galvanized washers are supplied perform hardness tests after galvanizing .
remove coating before taking hardness measurements .
measure the zinc coating thickness .
num assemblies .
perform rotationalcapacity tests on black or galvanized bolt nut and washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor before shipping .
the department requires washers as part of the test even though they may not be required as part of the installation procedure .
apply the following a except as modified perform the rotationalcapacity test in accordance with astm fnum .
b test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
where washers are not required by the installation procedures do not include in the lot identification .
c assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
d the minimum frequency of testing is num assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num e construct the bolt nut and washer assembly in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device .
for bolts too short to be assembled in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator see astm fnum annex num paragraph anum .
f use the minimum rotation value in table num from a snugtight condition num percent of the specified proof load .
table num rotational value bolt length nut rotation numd num or num turn numd and numd num or num turn numd num or num turn d is nominal bolt diameter note these values differ from astm anum section num values .
g ensure the tension reached at the above rotation is num times or more of the required installation tension .
the installation tension and the tension for the turn test are in table num .
table num installation tension diameter in num num num num num num num num num required installation tension kips num num num num num num num num num turn test tension kips num num num num num num num num num h after the required installation tension listed has been exceeded take num reading of tension and torque and record .
ensure the torque value meets the following torque num pd where torque measured torque footpound p measured bolt tension pound d bolt diameter foot i the contractor may test bolts in a steel joint when they are too short to test in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator .
do not apply the tension requirement specified in num.g .
compute the maximum torque requirement as specified in num.h using a value of p equal to the turn test tension in table num .
num reporting .
a record the results of tests including zinc coating thickness and in the appropriate aashto specifications on the appropriate document and submit num copies .
b report location where tests are performed and date of tests on the appropriate document .
num witnessing .
the manufacturer or distributor performing the tests must certify the results recorded are accurate .
submit num complete bolt nut and washer assemblies from each lot and size to the engineer for qa testing .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction c. documentation .
num mill test report mtr .
submit a mtr for mill steel used in the manufacture of the bolts nuts or washers and where the material was melted and manufactured .
num manufacturer certified test report mctr .
the manufacturer of the bolts nuts and washers must submit a mctr for the item provided .
report the relevant information on each mctr as specified in this subsection .
include the following with the mctr rotationalcapacity test a the lot number of each item tested .
b the rotationalcapacity lot number .
c the results of the tests required in num.b.num .
d appropriate information required as specified in this subsection .
e a statement that mctr for the items are in compliance to this subsection and the appropriate aashto specifications .
f the location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
num distributor certified test report dctr .
include the mctr in the dctr for the various bolt assembly components .
report the rotationalcapacity test performed by a distributor or a manufacturer on the dctr .
show the results of the tests required in num.b.num .
show the appropriate information required in num.b.num .
show the rotationalcapacity lot number .
verify the mctr complies with this specification and the appropriate aashto specifications .
d. shipping .
num ship bolts nuts and washers where required from each rotationalcapacity lot in the same container .
if there is only num production lot number for each size of nut and washer the nuts and washers may be shipped in separate containers .
permanently mark each container with the rotationalcapacity lot number that can be identified before installation .
num the appropriate mtr mctr or dctr must be applied to the contractor or the owner as specified .
e. lubrication .
check galvanized nuts to verify that a lubricant is visible on the threads .
ensure black bolts are oily to the touch when delivered and installed .
clean and lubricate weathered or rusted bolts or nuts before installation .
retest recleaned or relubricated bolt nut and washer assemblies as specified in num.b.num before installation .
num .
direct tension indicators dti .
fabricate dtis in accordance with astm fnum and the following a .
mechanically galvanize dtis for unpainted structures in accordance with astm bnum class num .
after galvanizing coat the dti with a ppg power prime num f epoxy .
electrodeposit the dti with num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num the epoxy rinsed and baked at num f to num f for num minutes .
ensure the final thickness of epoxy is num millimeter and black in color .
b .
galvanize and epoxy coat the dti by the manufacturer or under their direct supervision .
c. the contractor may use type num dtis that meet astm fnum for weathering steel structures .
in addition manufacture these dtis from steel in accordance with the chemical requirements of astm fnum type num .
num .
stud connectors .
provide stud connectors made by cold heading cold rolling or cold machining .
ensure finished stud connectors are of uniform quality and without injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other defects .
ensure studs do not have cracks or bursts deeper than ½ the thickness from the periphery of the head of the shaft .
determine tensile strength of stud connectors by test of bar stock after drawing or of full diameter finished studs .
comply with the following strength requirements as specified in table num .
table num strength requirements provide stud connectors with arc shields ferrules of resistant ceramic or other suitable material for welding .
comply with qualifications welding and test procedures specified in ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num .
steel castings .
provide steel castings in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
heattreat castings by normalizing and tempering after the castings have been allowed to cool from the pouring temperature to below the transformation range .
determine charpy impact properties on each heat from a set of num charpy vnotch specimens made from a test coupon in accordance with astm anum methods and definitions and tested at num f and have at least num footpounds of energy .
an independent testing laboratory must inspect the entire base plates webs and pin sockets by radiographic and magnetic particle examinations .
perform magnetic particle examination in accordance with astm enum .
judge radiographic examination in accordance with astm enum and judge types and degrees of discontinuities in accordance with astm enum .
submit copies of radiographic negatives .
ensure the acceptable surface discontinuities and finish is in accordance with astm anum .
remove unacceptable visual discontinuities and verify the resultant cavities by visual examination .
defects that as determined by the engineer can not be removed without adversely affecting the casting will be grounds to reject the entire casting .
the contractor may repair defects that can be removed without injury to the casting by welding in accordance with astm anum .
submit a complete weld procedure for approval before starting repair work .
include the weld procedure for base metal preparations preheat electrode postheat and procedure qualifications .
the engineer may perform radiographic and magnetic particle examination on repair welding .
num .
steel forgings .
use steel forgings for pins rollers trunnions or other forged parts .
accurately turn forgings to the detailed dimensions smooth straight and flawless .
produce the final surface by a finishing cut .
machine final surfaces to a finish of asa num micrometers num micro inches or better .
tensile strength elongation reduction of area minimum num psi minimum num in num inches minimum num num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num wideflange guardrail posts .
manufacture wideflange wbeam and thriebeam guardrail posts in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
if corrosionresistant steel is required manufacture in accordance with aashto m num grade numw steel .
match the crosssection dimensions of a wnum or wnumxnum post in accordance with aashto m num .
after the section is cut and holes are drilled or punched zinccoat the component in accordance with aashto m num .
if corrosionresistant steel is used zinccoat the portion of the post to be embedded in soil in accordance with aashto m num and do not zinccoat paint or otherwise treat the portion above the soil .
num hbeam piles .
provide hbeam piles of structural steel in accordance with astm anum grade num or as specified .
submit num certified copies of ladle analysis and physical test records .
num barbed wire .
provide barbed wire in accordance with aashto m num .
num woven wire .
provide woven wire in accordance with astm anum except wire size and strength options are limited to the following subsections of astm anum table num num .
no .
num grade num no .
num grade num or no .
num grade num .
ensure fence height wire spacing and stay spacing are as specified .
num hardware for barbed or woven wire fence .
provide numgauge staples with a minimum length of num inches except numinch staples may be used in locust posts .
provide numgauge stay wire numgauge brace wire and numgauge tie wire and wire clamps .
provide stay wire brace wire tie wire and wire clamps in accordance with astm anum .
galvanize the wire if no coating class is specified .
num metal posts for barbed or woven wire fences .
provide painted or galvanized metal fence posts in accordance with aashto m num or astm anum .
the engineer will not accept punched lugtype posts .
num chainlink fence .
provide numinch diamond mesh woven chain link fabric from numgauge coated num inch wire .
ensure the weight of coating for galvanized fabric is num ounces per square foot .
provide posts braces tension wire fittings and other hardware as specified in table num .
table num chain link posts and braces fence height pipe section csection class does not apply minimum size od inchod minimum size inch minimum weight lbft line posts num ft num num x num num num ft but num ft num num x num num corner and end posts num ft num num ft but num ft num braces all heights num num x num num pipe lengths longer than those shown must comply with the weights relative to minimum outside diameter in accordance with astm fnum group numa or group numc .
the engineer will allow interpolation of the weights in accordance with in astm fnum .
pipe sections will meet astm fnum group numa or group numc .
use group numa or group numc posts and braces .
ensure csections have minimum yield strength of num psi .
ensure coating of csections are the same as group numa or group numc .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide tension wire num inch in diameter and num ounces per square foot of zinc coating .
for fencing fittings and hardware meet aashto m num .
num guardrail components .
provide galvanized wbeam or thriebeam that meet aashto m num class a or b type num except galvanizing the rail occurs after fabrication with fabrication to include forming cutting shearing punching drilling bending welding and riveting .
ensure the minimum average mass of zinc coating is num ounces per square foot of surface not sheet . .
galvanize anchor cables in accordance with aashto m num .
provide bolts nuts and washers used with guardrail in accordance with aashto m num a num a num or a num as specified .
rail splice bolts must be shoulder button head bolts per aashto m num .
provide galvanized bolts nuts washers and other hardware used with guardrail in accordance with astm anum .
num not specified .
num rigid posts for delineators snow poles and mileposts .
num .
provide posts for delineators and snow poles weighing num pounds per foot and that meet astm anum .
galvanize in accordance with astm anum or provide with green baked enamel finish .
num .
provide steel posts for mileposts that meet astm anum grade num minimum astm anum g num and astm anum .
num steel and aluminum sign supports .
a .
general .
galvanize structural steel in accordance with astm anum .
zinc coat miscellaneous steel hardware in accordance with astm bnum class no .
fezn num type iii coating .
galvanize steel square tubes type e sign posts in accordance with astm anum g num .
provide anchor bolts with num nuts and num washers .
galvanize the nuts washers and at least num inches of the threaded end of the anchor bolts in accordance with astm anum .
ensure the anchor bolt threads accept galvanized nuts without tools or causing removal of the protective coating after galvanizing .
b. groundmounted sign supports .
provide groundmounted sign supports as follows num .
steel for type a sign posts will meet astm anum grade num .
num .
steel for type b sign posts will meet astm anum grade b .
num .
steel posts for type e sign posts will meet astm anum grade num minimum astm anumm g num and astm anum .
enum posts are num gauge .
enum posts are num gauge .
num .
structural steel for brace angles and brackets will meet astm anum .
num .
highstrength bolts nuts and washers for sign posts will meet astm fnum .
num .
anchor bolts nuts and washers will meet astm fnum .
finish shop fabrication of steel supports brace angles and brackets with galvanizing .
the engineer will not allow field modification that damages the galvanization .
c. overhead sign structures .
provide overhead sign structures .
fabricate sign structure components from material meeting the specifications in table num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction table num overhead sign structure components steel structure aluminum structure astm anum except astm anum astm bnum alloy numtnum astm anum types e s grade b astm bnum alloy numtnum astm fnum astm bnum alloy numtnum astm fnum anchor bolts provide end poles mastarms or truss assemblies formed into a continuous shaft .
provide pole shafts uniformly straight with a permissive variation not to exceed num inch measured at the midpoint of the pole in place and unloaded .
provide aluminum bolts with an anodic coating num inch minimum thickness with a dichromate or boiling water seal coated with a suitable lubricant .
provide overhead sign structures fabricated entirely from steel or aluminum providing only num type .
manufacture structures alike .
the engineer will only approve splices for the overhead steel sign structure .
finish shop fabrication of overhead steel sign structures posts and brackets before galvanizing .
repair damaged galvanized surface as follows num .
thoroughly clean the damaged area and remove traces of welding flux and loose or cracked spelter .
num .
paint the cleaned area with num coats of zinc dustzinc oxide paint .
num hardware for signs .
provide zinccoated steel aluminum bolts nuts and washers and other hardware items used for fabrication and mounting of signs as follows electrodeposited coatings of zinc on iron and steel astm bnum class no .
fezn num type iii coating low or medium carbon steel externally or internally threaded standard fasteners sae jnum or sae jnum both grade num alloysteel bolting materials for lowtemperature service astm anum aluminumalloy sheet and plate astm bnum flat washers astm bnum alloy alclad numtnum aluminumalloy bars rods and wires astm bnum lock nuts alloy numtnum bolts and screws alloy numtnum or numtnum nuts num inch tap and under alloy numtnum nuts num inch tap and over alloy numtnum or numtnum spring lock washers alloy numtnum aluminumalloy rivet and coldheading wire and rods astm bnum blind rivets alloy numf numf or numf num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num illumination poles and bases .
manufacture lighting poles bases and appurtenances alike .
submit shop drawing for approval before fabrication begins .
use materials for fabricating poles in accordance with the applicable test methods as follows highstrength bolts and nuts astm fnum anchor bolts astm fnum mild to mediumstrength carbonsteel castings for general application astm anum cast steel parts grade num structural steel sheet astm anum astm anum and astm anum sheet steel for fabricating shafts anchor bars and nuts welded and seamless steel pipe astm anum steel pipe for lighting bracket arms galvanizing steel poles zinc hotgalvanized coatings on products fabricated from rolled pressed and forged steel shapes plates bars and strips astm anum gray iron castings for valves flanges and pipe fittings astm anum cast iron parts zinc hotdip on iron and steel hardware galvanizing anchor bolts and bracket arms astm anum aluminumalloy sand castings or permanent mold castings astm bnum m or b num aluminum base flanges and transformer bases alloy a numtnum aluminum die castings astm bnum alloy num aluminumalloy bars rod and wire astm bnum aluminum pole shafts and aluminum lighting bracket arms alloy numtnum specified catalog numbers are provided only to show general dimensions and configurations .
poles and appurtenances must be capable of supporting design loads within allowable stress ranges as set forth in the aashto latest version of standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals and weld in accordance with these aashto specifications .
form the pole into a continuously tapered shaft having uniform taper of approximately num inch per foot .
provide pole shafts straight with an allowable variation of num inch or less measured at the midpoint in place and unloaded .
cover the top of the pole shaft with a removable waterproof pole cap .
the maximum pole deflection allowed after loading excluding wind load is equal to num percent of the pole shaft length .
secure a removable anchor bolt cover or covers to the base plate .
provide a handhole in the pole shaft with a reinforcing frame and cover .
locate the handhole num to num degrees from the bracket arm .
provide a bonding device in the lower half of the handhole reinforcing frame for grounding purposes .
ensure materials components and hardware for each pole assembly is compatible with the type of pole used .
fabricate steel pole shafts from sheet steel .
permanently show the pole wall thickness on each pole near the base .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction galvanize poles after welding is complete .
provide aluminum poles with a natural finish and without defects .
form anchor bases for aluminum poles from aluminum alloy secured to the bottom of the shaft so the full strength of the shaft is developed .
galvanize at least num inches of the threaded end of the anchor bolts nuts and washers .
ensure the anchor bolt threads accept galvanized nuts without requiring tools or causing the removal of the protective coating after galvanizing .
provide threaded hubs for steel poles made of forged steel in accordance with astm anum .
ensure the end of the hub inserted into the pole shaft has a minimum num inch round beveled end or edge to prevent insulation stripping during wire pulling operations .
do not use half pipe coupling tank spud or similar material .
provide numbolt configuration safety slip bases .
design the base to meet necessary design loading requirements and as a minimum meet the current breakaway requirements of the aashto lrfd standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
design breakaway support couplings to meet necessary design loading requirements and as a minimum meet the current breakaway requirements of the aashto lrfd standard specifications for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
limit use of the couplings to pole assemblies weighing less than num pounds and poles providing num feet or less nominal luminaire mounting heights .
surround the support coupling with a num inch aluminum skirt fastened with no .
num by num inch stainless steel sheet metal screws .
num structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches .
a .
aluminum .
aluminum for corrugated metal pipe and pipearches must comply with the requirements of aashto m num or astm bnum .
aluminum for structural plate pipe pipearch and box structures must meet the requirements of aashto m num or astm bnum .
the engineer will accept aluminum bolts meeting astm fnum or standard strength steel bolts meeting astm anum .
b .
steel .
steel for corrugated metal pipe and pipearches must comply with the requirements of aashto m num or astm anum .
steel for structural plate pipe pipearch and box structures must meet the requirements of aashto m num or astm anum .
steel for deep corrugated structural plate must comply with the requirements of aashto m num or astm anum .
the engineer will accept high strength steel bolts meeting astm anum .
the engineer will accept hotdipped or mechanically galvanized bolts and nuts provided they meet aashto m num or astm anum .
provide polymercoated pipe that meets aashto m num astm anum or astm anumm except the coating may be shop or field applied after corrugation and coating thickness must be at least num inch on each side of the sheet .
after tightening coat exposed portions of bolts and nuts on soil side and water side of pipe with the same material used on the pipe .
the contractor may substitute polymercoated pipe for bituminouscoated pipe .
when yielding seam keyhole slotted pipe is specified to be bituminouscoated or polymercoated do not coat mating surfaces in the overlap portion of the joint unless authorized in writing by the pipe manufacturer .
num metal aprons .
meet aashto m num or m num .
num manhole covers and rings grates catch basins and inlets .
meet aashto m num class num for gray iron .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num to num .
not specified .
num extruded aluminum .
meet astm bnum alloy numtnum for reflective sheeting backgrounds .
ensure extrusions are flat and true within a tolerance of num inch per num feet of panel length .
prevent deviation from flat surface across the width of the panel before coating from exceeding num inch per inch of width .
provide continuous extruded sections for the length of the signs .
num sheet aluminum .
meet astm bnum alloy numtnum or numhnum with an alodine num finish .
num caps for right of way and street markers .
cast caps from brass or bronze .
ensure the top of the finished casting is without blowholes pits cracks corrugations or other surface roughness to render completely legible the standard identification and other letters or numerals which may be subsequently stamped .
stamp each cap or cast as specified .
num steel shell piles .
provide cylindrical cylindrical with a taper or steptapered steel shell piles .
provide cylindrical shell piles with an outside diameter as specified .
provide tapered piles with outside tip diameter at least num inches and the outside butt diameter at least as what is specified .
provide steel shell piles driven without a mandrel of sufficient strength and rigidity to permit driving to the specified resistance without distortion .
ensure the steel minimum yield strength is num psi .
submit an electronic copy of a certified test report showing compliance with yield strength requirements .
ensure the minimum wall thickness is num inch .
ensure steel shell piles in exposed pile bents in water have a minimum wall thickness of num inch .
equip shells driven without a mandrel with driving points flat plates or other suitable end closures adequately fixed and of sufficient thickness and strength to permit driving without distortion and remain watertight or as specified .
provide steel shell piles that when driven with a mandrel of sufficient thickness the pile will hold its original shape after the mandrel is withdrawn and shows no harmful distortion after it and the adjacent piles have been driven .
num permanent metal concrete forms .
meet astm anum m ss designation with coating designation znum and meet requirements relevant to steel permanent metal forms and the placing of concrete as specified .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num concrete curing materials and admixtures num membraneforming curing compound .
meet system num .
astm cnum type numd class b with fugitive dye .
system num .
astm cnum type num class b white pigmented .
num concrete admixtures general .
if more than num admixture is used use the same brand from the same manufacturer and ensure it is compatible and can be dispersed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
do not use admixtures containing chlorides flourides sulphites and nitrates .
num airentraining admixtures .
meet aashto m num .
num set retarding admixtures .
meet astm cnum .
num waterreducing admixtures .
meet astm cnum .
num lithium nitrate admixtures .
provide lithium nitrate admixture consisting of a num percent aqueous lithium nitrate solution .
use the same brand and from the same manufacturer in the mix design and used in the concrete alkali silica reaction mitigation testing for the lithium nitrate admixture used in the concrete .
follow the manufacturers written instructions .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num timber and preservatives num structural timber and lumber .
provide douglas fir or larch structural timber and lumber of the grade specified .
ensure grade of structural timber and lumber is determined using the current version of the western wood products association wwpa standard grading rules of western lumber .
ensure wood is incised and treated to meet the american wood preservers association awpa standardunum commodity specification a sawn products .
num wood sign posts .
provide sign posts surfaced four sides snums and free of wane and decay .
ensure ends are cut square and the post incised on all num sides before treating .
checks will not be more than num inch in width .
the engineer will not accept twisted pieces .
ensure sweep is limited to num inch per num feet .
incise in accordance with awpa unum commodity specification a sawn products and pressure treat as specified in num .
provide treated and graded douglas fir or hemfir sign posts .
use the current version of the west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib or the wwpa to meet the following grades and requirements species grade douglas fir num by num num percent of the sign posts free of heart center .
structural light framing no .
num grade in accordance with wclib paragraph numc or wwpa paragraph num .
num by num num percent of the sign posts free of heart center .
structural joists and planks no .
num grade in accordance with wclib paragraph numc or wwpa paragraph num .
num by num or num by num posts and timbers no .
num grade in accordance with wclib paragraph numb or wwpa paragraph num .
hemfir num by num or num by num posts and timbers select structural in accordance with paragraph numa wclib or paragraph num wwpa .
provide posts inspected and certified in accordance with the designated current grading and dressing rules of the wclib or the wwpa .
submit a certificate of inspection executed by the wclib the wwpa or the pacific lumber inspection bureau plib at the time of delivery .
ensure certificates of inspection identify the destination or fob for which the material is intended and each piece is inspected certified and stamped with an inspection mark .
such certification or grade marking does not constitute final acceptance of the material and the engineer may reject lumber or timber that does not meet specifications .
num timber guardrail posts and timber blockouts .
provide rough surfaced num sides snums or numsided snums wood guardrail posts and wood blockouts .
do not exceed the size tolerance of plus or minus num inch for rough sawed blocks .
provide incising that meets awpa unum commodity specification a sawn products and pressure treat as specified in num .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction grade guardrail post and blockouts using wwpa standard grading rules for western lumber and the following species grade douglas fir or larch no .
num grade hemfir no .
num grade pine lodgepole ponderosa idaho white and southern no .
num grade western red cedar no .
num grade the engineer will reject an otherwise acceptable guardrail post with a thorough check shake or end split in the same plane or parallel plane as the bolt hole and extending from the top of the post to within num inches of the bolt hole unless it is provided with a tight fastening across the separation centered num inches below the top of the post .
use a galvanized bolt fastener num inch in diameter with a galvanized washer under the bolt head and the nut .
treat holes for fastening in accordance with awpa mnum .
num service poles for power .
meet ansi no .
num .
the contractor may use all species of douglas fir larch hemlock and pine .
treat poles as specified in num .
num timber piles .
num .
provide first quality timber piles douglas fir or western larch that meet astm dnum .
num .
treated piles .
treat as specified in num .
num .
untreated piles .
provide untreated piles with a high heartwood content and a diameter of heartwood at least eighttenths of the diameter at the butt .
num .
dimensions .
provide piles with a diameter at a section num feet from the butt and at the tip as specified in table num below .
num .
material used in or over aquatic environments will be produced in compliance with the western wood preservers institutes wwpi best management practices for the use of treated wood in aquatic and wetland environments .
material produced in compliance with the wwpis bmps will require certification by an independent third party inspection agency as specified in the bmps .
the engineer will measure the diameter of the piles after peeling .
when the pile is not exactly round the engineer will use the average diameters or the circumference divided by pi num to determine the diameter .
for structures provide pile with the butt diameters and length as uniform as practical .
num service poles for illumination .
provide poles thoroughly seasoned and treated num feet long rated class num machine peeled and that meet ansi num except the number and size of knots and the sweep of the pole can be twothirds that allowed by the ansi specification .
provide treated poles as specified in num .
table num bolt diameter length of piles feet butt diameter inch tip diameter inch minimum under num num num num num num over num num num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num pole keys .
provide thoroughly seasoned and treated pole keys num feet long have a numinch minimum dimension and a minimum crosssectional area of num square inches .
treat pole keys as specified in num .
num posts for barbed or woven wire fence .
provide line posts with a minimum post circumference of num inches and install a minimum distance between opposite faces or between faces and an opposite corner of num inches .
provide posts for corner terminal or braces with a minimum circumference of num inches and install a minimum distance between opposite faces or between faces and an opposite corner of num inches .
pressure treat wood posts as specified in num .
the contractor may use any species of douglas fir western larch cedar or pine .
num preservative treatment .
provide treated timber and lumber requiring preservative treatment that meets the federal insecticide fungicide and rodenticide act fifra requirements as registered preservatives aashto m num and awpa standards and specifications .
these specifications include the following num .
storing and curing the timber and lumber .
num .
wood preservatives .
num .
preservative treatment process .
num .
documenting the results of the treatment .
num .
inspection .
num .
testing .
num .
identification of properly treated timber .
treat timber and lumber in accordance with awpa cnum .
perform cutting boring chamfering routing surfacing and trimming before treating .
treat with num liberal applications of a compatible preservative after field drilling or cutoff in accordance with awpa mnum .
charges must consist of pieces of the same species that are similar in form size moisture content and receptivity of treatment .
the pieces in the charge must be separated to ensure contact of treating medium with surfaces .
test to determine the retention of the preservatives .
include the following information in the certificate of treatment chemically treat timber and lumber to be used in aquatic environments using bmps .
the producer of the chemically treated products must supply a written certification the bmps were used including a description and appropriate documentation of the bmps used .
include this information with or on the certificate of treatment record .
num .
name and location of the wood preserving company .
num .
customer identification .
num .
date of treatment and charge number .
num .
type of chemical used and the amount of retention .
num .
treating process and identification of the specifications used .
num .
description of material that was treated .
num .
signature of a responsible plant official .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction pressure treat sign posts and fence posts with ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate acza chromated copper arsenate type c ccac copper naphthenate or pentachlorophenol in accordance with awpa standards but ensure the minimum preservative retention in the wood meets the awpa standards .
provide pressure treated guardrail post and blockouts with acza chromated copper arsenate cca copper naphthenate or pentachlorophenol in accordance with awpa pnum pnum pnum and cnum but ensure the minimum preservative retention in the wood as determined by awpa standards .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num roadside improvement material num to num .
not specified .
num riprap .
material for riprap consists of natural or quarry stones from an approved source which are durable angular sound hard without seams and other structural defects resistant to weathering and water action and meet the testing requirements of either set of criteria in table num .
table num rip rap quality testing criteria nonapproved source approved source property test method requirement property test method requirement apparent specific gravity aashto t num num minimum idaho degradation idaho it num num max loss absorption aashto t num num maximum los angeles abrasion aashto t num num maximum coarse durability index aashto t num num minimum ethylene glycol idaho it num num minimum retained num seed .
provide seed collected or harvested within num years of the targeted seeding date .
provide all seed in pure live seed pls unless otherwise directed .
submit current certification documents and seed test results including seed purity germinationviability and free of noxious weeds .
seed will be true of genus and species and will meet all provisions of the state of idahos pure seed law and noxious weed rules num idaho code and idapa num respectively and the federal seed act num cfr part num .
test all seed for prohibited and restricted noxious weed seed before delivery .
the supplier must hold a current and valid idaho seed dealers license .
the engineer will review requests for species or cultivar substitutions genus substitution is not allowed .
substitution requests need to be submitted a minimum of num calendar days in advance of delivery .
ensure each bag or container of individual seed species has labeling indicating seed classification genus and species lot number purity germination percentage of weeds found percentage of noxious weeds found and test date .
provide a seed analysis report for each species issued from the idaho state department of agriculture isda or association of official seed certifying agency aosca .
the seed analysis report will include num .
test date .
a .
seed germination tested within num months of the target seeding date .
b .
seed purity and noxious weed tested within num months of the target seeding date .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num .
pls .
seed germination percentage and purity percentage .
minimum allowable rates for seed by species material pls rate a all grass seed num all legume seed num all native wildflower and forb seed num big sagebrush num antelope bitterbrush num rabbitbrush num oregon grape num snowberry num woods rose num a contact the engineer for the minimum seed testing requirements for other shrub species .
for certified or noncertified seed num .
noxious weed seeds prohibited .
num .
less than num percent by weight weed seeds including restricted noxious weed seed .
num .
less than num percent by weight of allowable cheat chess or downy brome seed .
to obtain the pls rating use this formula pls rating purity x germination num to obtain the bulk seed needed bulk pounds of seed needed per acre pls lbacre required pls rating a .
approval .
the engineer will verify that all seed test results and laboratory reports are valid and comply with certification tags for each species before approval .
once approved deliver seed to the project site unopened in original and individually packaged bags or containers according to species type i.e .
one species per bag or container .
if seed is received in opened packages packages without certification tags or packages or containers containing multiple species the seed will not be approved for use .
b .
random sampling .
the engineer may conduct random onsite sampling to verify species purity percentage germination percentage and restricted and prohibited noxious weed seeds .
the engineer will weigh seed according to size approximately num gram samples of mostly native seed num gram samples of grain or similar size seed from unblended and individually packaged seed containers of each species .
samples will be submitted to the isda for analysis and verification .
the engineer will reject seed not meeting specifications .
do not plant until the seed is accepted and the application method is approved .
measure and mix individual unopened seed packages onsite in the engineers presence at the specified proportions .
num plants .
provide plants that meet the applicable requirements of the current american standard for nursery stock .
ensure plants are true to type and name in accordance with standardized plant names prepared by the num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
ensure plants are grown from seed or stock collected within num feet elevation of the project site .
provide plants that are sound healthy vigorous well branched and densely foliated when leaves are present and without disease or insects including adult eggs pupae or larvae .
provide plants without damaged root systems disfigured limbs or containing knots limb scars sun scald abrasions of the bark wind or freezing damage or other disfigurements .
do not cut back plants from larger sizes to meet specified sizes .
the engineer will reject plants with noxious weeds in the containers or at the source .
provide nursery grown plants unless collected plants are specified .
provide plants that are grown or conditioned to an environment similar to the project site including elevation annual precipitation soil conditions and climate .
the term nursery grown consists of plants collected in the forest or natural seedling trees and shrubs provided these trees and shrubs have been growing continuously in one nursery for the minimum time periods specified in table num .
table num plant age plant material time in nursery trees num growing seasons shrubs evergreens num growing seasons shrubs deciduous num growing season wetland plants num growing seasons vines num growing season provide trees with straight trunks wellbranched with symmetrical tops and no unhealed scars more than ¾ inch in diameter .
provide well established containerized plants with a root system sufficiently developed to keep its shape and hold together when removed from the container .
the engineer may reject plants that are pot bound or have kinked circling or bent roots .
provide plants in pots or containers of sizes specified .
deciduous plants may be supplied bareroot unless specified otherwise .
provide bareroot plants that are one size group larger than the sizes specified before pruning and packed in moistureretaining material .
provide broadleaf evergreen plants and conifers balled and burlapped bb or in suitable containers .
provide bb plants except seedlings in firm natural earth balls of standard size in accordance with the american standard for nursery stock with the root collar located within the top num inches of the soil ball and wrapped with burlap firmly held in place by a cord or wire wrapping .
handle bb plants by the earth ball only and protect against drying and freezing .
the engineer will reject broken or loose earth balls or plants without an adequate root system .
do not dig collected plants until they have been inspected .
dig collected plants with a greater earth ball or root spread for the applicable plant type in accordance with the american standard for nursery stock .
pack and ship the plants in accordance with the american standard for nursery stock .
submit required state and federal plant shipment inspection certificates .
notify the engineer in writing within num weeks of target planting date if any specified plant is not obtainable or available .
the engineer will evaluate the plant availability and may consider allowing the nearest available size and similar variety with corresponding adjustment to the contract unit price .
provide plants labeled in accordance with size and scientific plant name with durable and legible tags .
deliver plants with labels securely attached to plants bundles and plant material containers .
submit the actual or a copy num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction of the inspection certificate for injurious insects plant diseases and other plant pests for each plant material shipment or delivery .
write the name address and stock source on the certificate .
leave the labels on at least num plant of the same species for each group plantings and on each plant for individual plantings during and after planting operations within the same area .
acceptable antitranspirants include polymer gels wetting agents spray on chemicals or natural products .
num commercial fertilizer .
provide natural organic commercial fertilizer products that include nitrogen phosphorus potassium natural nutrients and micronutrients or combinations that improve soil structure and have a salt index of num or less .
materials may also consist of class a biosolids plant nutrients derived from plant or animal residue byproduct or natural material deposits lime and gypsum organic wastederived material or combinations that are currently registered in idaho by the idaho state department of agriculture .
provide fertilizer that is safe for the environment and does not infiltrate or pollute water sources including ground water lakes ponds rivers and wetlands .
provide fertilizer in containers or packages marked with the weight andor volume along with the product label listing all ingredients and the manufacturers guaranteed content analysis .
ensure dry fertilizer products do not have material lumps or clumps .
num commercial soil conditioner .
provide natural organic mineral material nutrients and micronutrients or combinations that improve soil structure enhance vegetative growth increase plants ability to take in nutrients and have a salt index of num or less .
materials may include organic acids compost peat moss vegetative waste material sedge peat gypsum lime diatomaceous earth clay vermiculite wetting agents absorbent polymers biosolids or other approved natural or organic materials that are free of wood substances and contain num percent organic matter by weight .
wastederived products will have certification and product label stating the concentration of metals or metalloids .
provide a laboratory report or other documentation verifying the levels of the metals or metalloids in the soil or plant amendment product .
provide soil conditioner certified in the state of idaho by an authorized or approved state agency and declared noxious weed free .
submit a product inspection certificate from an approved commercial or state laboratory or manufacturers certification .
ensure the source is approved before shipping .
num not specified .
num mulch .
provide mulch material made from natural or organic based material consisting of grain straw grass hay wood fiber coir or coconut fiber or other certified natural and organic plant material .
provide mulch products that have been evaluated and meet testing specifications through ntpep .
provide mulch products that have approximately num percent of the material exceeding num⅞ inches in length where they are to be anchored by mechanical crimping .
provide mulch products listed on the qpl .
provide mulch that is water soluble and contains defibrated organic fibers .
provide mulch with a life expectancy and functionality of a minimum of num months and up to a maximum of num months as specified .
ensure mulch is certified in the state of idaho by an authorized or approved state agency and declared noxious weed free .
ensure the mulch source is approved before shipping .
ensure bark mulch granular and ornamental type is reasonably free of strips and splinters .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide manufacturer certification or documentation that the materials used are nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms aquatic and plant life and will not interfere with or impede seed germination or vegetative growth and establishment .
provide shredded bark with a shredded or stringy texture .
apply wood and paper fiber to form a blotterlike ground cover .
num rolled erosion control products recp .
provide recps that have been evaluated and meet testing specifications through ntpep .
ensure recps are certified noxious weed free in the state of idaho by an authorized or approved state agency .
ensure compliance with the specifications for rolled erosion control products as outlined by the erosion control technology council ectc .
provide recp products listed on the qpl .
submit manufacturer certification or documentation that the materials used in recps are nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms and aquatic and plant life and will not interfere with or impede seed germination or vegetative growth and establishment .
provide recps in premanufactured rolls made from num percent biodegradable materials .
provide recps with longevity appropriate for the work construction schedule desired slope protection and specifications .
ensure material including netting has a life expectancy of approximately num year .
num turf reinforcement mats trm .
provide trms that have been evaluated and meet testing specifications through ntpep .
provide trms that consist of geotextiles plastic or durable synthetic materials .
ensure compliance with the specifications for trm products as outlined by the erosion control technology council ectc .
provide trm products listed on the qpl .
submit manufacturer certification that the materials are nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms aquatic and plant life and will not interfere or impede seed germination or vegetative growth and establishment .
num irrigation water .
provide an approved source for irrigation water that is without oil acid salt pesticides or chemicals or other substances harmful to plants .
num and num .
not specified .
num mulch tackifier .
mulch tackifiers are natural or organic based material consisting of crosslinked hydro colloidal polymers crosslinked tackifiers guar gum cellulose gum xanthan gum polyacrylamide starch psyllium or other natural fiber blends that create a physical bond of fibers or matrix with polymer application when added to mulch .
tackifiers physically bind to mulch and soil and do not allow the mulch to wash or blow away after application .
use organic biodegradable nonpolluting nonvolatile and nontoxic tackifier that is transparent flexible and retains flexibility after curing water soluble and makes a porous latticelike membrane structure within the upper soil layer .
use tackifier that is mixable in water and nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms aquatic and plant life and does not interfere with or impede seed germination vegetative growth and establishment and is nonstaining to concrete or painted surfaces .
use tackifier products listed on the qpl .
ensure the tackifier is not reemulsifiable when cured .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num mulch plus tackifier .
mulch plus tackifier or mulch with tackifier is a hydraulically applied blend of natural fibers natural or manufactured organic materials or other natural ingredients or combinations combined with a natural or organicbased tackifier or binding agent .
provide organic biodegradable nonpolluting nonvolatile and nontoxic mulch and tackifier that is transparent flexible and retains flexibility after curing water soluble and makes a porous latticelike membrane structure within the upper soil layer .
obtain mulch and tackifier or mulch with tackifier products listed on the qpl .
use a mulch plus tackifier as a premixed prepackaged wood fiber mulch with a tackifier blended before application .
mix in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
provide mulch plus tackifier as specified in num and num .
num soil amendments .
soil amendments are natural or manufactured organic materials .
provide a soil amendment that is a commercially available prepackaged hydraulically applied blend of natural fibers regional specific mycorrhizal species growth stimulants and other biologically active material designed to improve seed germination and vegetation establishment .
soil amendments will be processed thermally and mechanically from straw and flexible flax fibers sphagnum peat moss and other biological additives at the following volumes num .
num percent by volume of thermally and mechanically processed straw and flexible flax fibers .
num .
num percent by volume of professional grade sphagnum peat moss .
num .
num percent by volume of other biological additives including trace minerals sugars starches proteins folic acid vitamin a triacontanol and triacontanol growth stimulantsregulators .
num .
less than percent by volume of fungal mycorrhizal and plant beneficial bacteria .
provide a prepackaged commercially available powder tackifier specifically designed and manufactured for use with the specified hydraulically applied soil amendment .
the tackifier will be formulated from long chain and cross linking molecules in conjunction with a hydrocolloid vegetable gum .
provide a continuous and uniform cover a minimum of num inches thick over seeded areas .
supplement thin or bare soil areas with additional soil amendment at no additional cost .
num mulch mixture .
mulch mixture is a hydraulically applied blend of qualified weedfree organic mulch natural or manufactured organic fibers qualified proteinrich nutrient source biological soil stimulant soil microorganisms humic substance other plant nutrient ingredients or combinations combined with a natural or organic lightduty tackifier a heavyduty soil binder or tackifierbinder reinforcing fibers as a complete package .
each product is specified based on its own ability to perform in combination with the other specified products .
provide mulch mixture that is a commercially available prepackaged hydraulically applied blend of natural fibers growth stimulants biological soil stimulants soil microorganisms bonding fibers tackifiers reinforcing fibers or combinations as specified .
provide organic biodegradable nonpolluting nonvolatile and nontoxic mulch biological soil stimulants protein rich nutrient source and binding agents and tackifier that is transparent flexible and retains flexibility after curing water soluble and makes a porous latticelike membrane structure within the upper soil layer .
obtain mulch mixture products listed on the qpl .
num fiber wattles .
provide fiber wattles that consists of certified noxious weed free material and is manufactured from natural straw coir coconut composted material wood fibers or a combination of these and wrapped in approved degradable netting made of plastic or natural fiber e.g .
jute sisal cotton hemp burlap .
ensure material including netting has a life expectance of approximately num year .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num provide fiber wattles with a minimum num inch diameter .
ensure fiber wattles that are num to num inches in diameter have a minimum weight of num pound per linear foot .
ensure fiber wattles with a diameter greater than num inches have a minimum weight of num pounds per linear foot .
secure ends tightly with degradable twine .
num compost socks .
provide compost socks with a minimum num inch diameter that is without preservative .
provide a clean evenly woven compost sock made of a mesh tube oval to round in crosssection and free of encrusted concrete or other contaminating materials .
ensure sock is without cuts tears broken or missing yarns and does not have thin open or weak places .
provide sock with a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
provide sock composed of degradable plastic or polyester netting or is composed of biodegradable jute sisal burlap or coir fabric .
ensure sock has at least a num year durability after installation .
ensure compost products used in compost socks meet the compost requirements in num .
num hydraulic erosion control products hecp .
hecps are hydraulically applied blends of erosion control mixtures that consist of certified hydraulic mulch stabilized mulch matrix bonded fiber matrix and fiber reinforced matrix .
provide hecps made of certified straw cellulose fiber wood fiber coir or coconut fiber or other certified natural and organic materials that meet certified life expectancy or longevity requirements .
provide hecps that have been evaluated and meet testing specifications through ntpep or other authorized thirdparty laboratories .
ensure hecps are certified noxious weed free in the state of idaho by an authorized or approved state agency .
ensure compliance with the specifications for rolled erosion control products as outlined by the erosion control technology council ectc .
obtain hecp products listed on the qpl .
submit a manufacturer certification that the materials are nontoxic to animals soil microorganisms aquatic and plant life and will not interfere with or impede seed germination or vegetative growth and establishment .
num inlet protection .
use approved inlet protection .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num signing materials num plywood for type e signs .
meet u.s .
product standard for construction and industrial plywood .
num retroreflective sheeting .
supply retroreflective sign sheeting meeting astm dnum standards for classification color and performance .
num .
sheet aluminum and plywood signs .
provide type ix minimum direct applied retroreflective sheeting .
if legend is retroreflective it must be of the same type as the background sheeting .
num .
extruded aluminum sign panels .
provide type ix minimum direct applied retroreflective sheeting for the background and legend .
num .
temporary traffic control devices .
provide type iv minimum direct applied retroreflective sheeting .
num .
delineators and snow pole reflectors .
provide type iv minimum direct applied retroreflective sheeting .
num to num reserved .
num silk screen opaque inks .
apply opaque silk screen inks in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions waterproof for outdoor use and dry within num hours to a film without running streaking bubbling or sagging .
visually match opaque colored silk screen inks within the limits of the current color tolerance charts prepared by the fhwa .
num silk screen transparent inks .
apply transparent silk screen inks of the desired color onto reflective sheeting background meeting the requirements of num .
num direct applied nonreflective sheeting and direct applied transparent films .
direct applied nonreflective sheeting consists of flexible glossy sheeting .
direct applied transparent films consist of transparent acrylic colored films .
use solvent resistant sheeting and films that are precoated with class num pressure sensitive tackfree adhesive on the back side .
ensure the sheeting and films are applied in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions to form a durable bond with the background enabling it to withstand severe weather conditions .
num flexible posts for delineators .
provide flexible posts for delineators as follows num .
white or as otherwise specified .
num .
drivable with a steel stub or sleeve .
num .
flexible nonwarping nonmetallic durable composite material .
num .
resistant to damage due to impact ultraviolet light ozone hydrocarbons and other effects of atmospheric weathering .
num .
resistant to overturning twisting and displacement from wind and impact forces .
num .
maintain flexibility for a numyear minimum design life .
num flexible snow poles .
provide orange poles meeting the following a .
one and one quarter num¼ inches wide by ⅜ inch thick and a length as specified .
b. nonwarping nonmetallic and durable fiber reinforced composite material .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num c. resistant to impacts as a result of snow plowing or twisting .
d. resistant to displacement from wind ultraviolet light ozone hydrocarbons and other effects of atmospheric weathering .
maintain flexibility for a numyear minimum design life .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num illumination and traffic signal materials num led luminaries .
provide led luminaries for roadway underpass and sign lighting meeting the following requirements a .
testing and compliance by the manufacturer .
num .
listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory nrtl as being suitable for use in wet locations .
num .
restriction of hazardous substances rohs compliant light source and drivers .
num .
compliance with electromagnetic interference emi requirements as defined by the federal communications commission fcc regulation in num cfr chapter num subchapter a part num .
num .
manufactured in an iso num certified facility or the manufacturer must submit a copy of the manufacturers workmanship standards andor quality manual .
num .
manufacturer must have a website with downloadable specification sheets and photometric data illuminating engineering society ies files .
photometric files must be per ies lmnum specifications and requirements .
b. fixture construction .
num .
housing and heat sink constructed out of aluminum .
num .
all hardware will be corrosion resistant .
num .
finish will withstand at least a numhour salt spray test per astm bnum .
num .
fixture will not weigh more than num pounds when fully assembled .
num .
design will not trap water when installed .
num .
when installed provide access to internal components e.g .
terminal block driver surge protector with hand tools .
num .
mounting for roadway fixture .
num or numbolt slip fitter type mounting on nominal num inch diameter num outside diameter pipe brackets .
slip fitter mount will allow num inches of the pole bracket to be inserted in the luminaire mounting assembly and allow for any necessary adjustment .
num .
mounting for underpass fixture as specified .
num .
mounting for sign fixture .
capable of top or bottom mounting to sign structure .
if provided angle adjustment should be clearly labeled and able to be locked in place .
num .
compliant with ansiieee cnum table num roadway lighting equipment luminaire vibration for bridge and overpass applications numg rated .
num .
only passive cooling method can be used to manage thermal output of the led light engine and power supply .
num .
a label must be clearly visible on the inside of the luminaire stating the operating voltage current range part number and unique identifier to allow traceability in the event of failure .
num .
a completely sealed optical system with an ip rating of num or greater .
c. electrical requirements .
num .
luminaire will fully operate in an ambient temperature range of negative num f to num f. num .
power supplyies electronic driver will be mounted inside the fixture .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
the power supplyies electronic driver will operate within the following voltage range num to num plus or minus num percent vac rms at num hz .
num .
the power supplyies electronic driver will have a power factor of num or greater and a total harmonic distortion of num percent or less at full load .
num .
power supplyies electronic driver with a rated life of num hours with a luminaire operated at an average ambient temperature of num f. num .
the power supplyies electronic driver will have thermal overload protection .
num .
the power supplyies electronic driver will have selflimited short circuit protection .
num .
the power supplyies electronic driver will have an international protection ip num rating or greater .
num .
a surge protection device that is separate from the power supply electronic driver but still contained within the luminaire housing and meeting these requirements a .
matched to driver voltage requirements .
b .
fail to an open state .
c. meets ansiieee cnum category c high requirements numkvnumka .
num .
a terminal block that will accommodate num through num awg wire for terminating pole wiring to the luminaire is required .
num .
a nema numpin twist lock photoelectric control receptacle with shorting cap .
d. led performance requirements .
num .
correlated color temperature cct between num and num k. num .
nominal color rendering index cri of num or greater .
num .
intensity and chromaticity must be confirmed by a national voluntary laboratory accreditation program nvlap photometric laboratory .
num .
the average of all possible distributions and driver currents for the luminaire must equal num lumens per watt or better .
num .
capable of a minimum lumen output range from num to num lumens .
num .
will deliver an average num percent of initial lumens after num hours of operation based on ies tmnum data at an average ambient temperature of num f. e. warranty .
the entire luminaire assembly including material workmanship finish photometrics power supplyies and led modules will have a minimum of a numyear manufacturers warranty from the date of purchase .
num .
not specified .
num rigid steel conduit .
galvanize or sherardize conduit to protect against corrosion .
num plastic conduit .
provide schedule num pvc or hdpe smoothwall suitable for direct burial as a minimum for plastic conduit .
the conduit can be rigid or coiled and have a solid wall .
the manufacturer will certify the conduit meets the minimum requirements of the applicable ul nema or astm specifications for direct burial electrical conduit .
num concrete junction boxes .
construct bottomless concrete junction boxes of vibrated concrete .
provide a ⅜ inch minimum thickness steel diamond plate lid with a locking device to hold the lid securely in place and painted num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction with corrosion preventive type paint gray in color .
weld a ⅜ inch by num inch plated bolt to the bottom of the steel lid .
place a numinch section of num awg green thwn wire with ring connector on the bolt and attached with a ⅜ inch nut .
size junction boxes as follows num .
size a has inside dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inches deep and a nominal wall thickness of num inches .
num .
size b has inside dimensions num inches by num inches by num inches deep and a nominal wall thickness of num inches .
num .
size c has inside dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inches deep and a nominal wall thickness of num inches .
num .
size d has inside dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inches deep with a nominal wall thickness of num inches and will be reinforced by a ⅜ inch round reinforcing bar hoop num inches below the top of the box and no .
num welded wire mesh continuously within the walls .
provide a b and c junction boxes with metal tops and reinforced walls with continuously welded wire .
submit detailed shop drawings for approval of a size d junction box .
num composite junction boxes .
provide composite junction boxes meeting the following requirements num .
polymer concrete reinforced by a fiberglass weave .
num .
constructed bottomless .
num .
nondeliberate traffic junction boxes and covers tested and certified to the provisions of the ansiscte num num by a nationally recognized third party independent test firm e.g .
ul intertek etl .
num .
numyear minimum manufacturers warranty .
num .
nondeliberate traffic junction box covers rated for a tier num application .
emboss tier num rating in the top surface of the cover .
num .
secure cover to junction box using stainless steel hex head with selfcleaning threads e.g .
coil bolt or num num lag thread .
num .
type pgd junction box is to have a numpiece box cover .
num .
embed a general purpose electronic marker system ems marker in the junction box cover .
num .
mold logos in the junction box cover .
num .
a minimum applied force of numpound rating for the pull slots .
num .
color junction boxes and covers concrete gray .
num .
size junction boxes as follows a .
size pgb has nominal inside dimensions of num ½ inches by num¼ inches by num inches deep .
b .
size pgc has nominal inside dimensions of num½ inches by num½ inches by num inches deep .
c. size pgd has nominal inside dimensions of num¾ inches by num¾ inches by num inches deep .
num electrical conductors and cables .
provide electrical conductors and cables ul listed and labeled awg or equivalent stranded copper meeting the requirements of the insulated power cable engineers association ipsea publication snum or current nema publication wcnum section num type b and the following a .
multiple conductor signal cable .
num .
the number of conductors per cable as specified .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
conductors are numvolt no.num uncoated annealed stranded copper wire with pe insulation .
num .
cable labeled as meeting the requirements of international municipal signal association specifications no .
num for polyvinyl chloride sheath or no .
num for pe sheath .
b .
multiple conductor loop cable .
num .
no .
num awg stranded num conductor waterproof instrumentation cable .
num .
provide color coding of the num conductors in accordance with the published ipcea or nema standards .
num .
high density pe jacket with a water blocking filler between conductors suitable for direct burial equal to canoga controls num clifford of vermont numcnumbnumnsf independent pdsnum or atlas wire and cable corp. anum .
c. multiple conductor loop leadin cable .
num .
no .
num awg shielded stranded num conductor wire with a pe jacket .
num .
provide color coding of the num conductors that is in accordance with the published ipcea nema standards .
num .
highdensity pe jacket with a water blocking filler between conductors is suitable for direct burial equal to clifford of vermont numcnum bnum osf or canoga controls num .
d. video detection cable .
num .
ul listed and labeled .
num .
meeting the requirements of the video equipment manufacturer .
num signal poles .
provide poles that have a num inch by num inch frame and cover located num degrees to the right of the mastarm location .
permanently display the signal mastarm shaft gauge thickness in inches on each mastarm near the attachment plate nonstandard poles only .
provide signal poles that meet the requirements for standard or nonstandard mastarm traffic signal poles pedestal signal poles and pedestrian pushbutton poles with materials as specified in num and the following additional requirements num .
standard mastarm traffic signal pole requirements a .
maximum nominal pole height including luminaire extension of num feet .
b .
maximum luminaire mastarm length of num feet .
c. maximum signal mastarm length of num feet .
d. use department approved signal pole designs .
e. meet additional standard mastarm traffic signal pole criteria as specified .
f. provide num steel anchor bolts of the manufacturers recommended size with each pole .
fit each bolt with num nuts and num washers .
g. submit shop drawings and calculations for approval before fabrication .
num .
nonstandard mastarm traffic signal pole requirements a .
designed in accordance with the current aashto lrfd standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
b .
design life is num years .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction c. design wind speed is num mph .
d. for signal mastarm length greater than num feet or luminaire mastarm length greater than num feet use fatigue category i design criteria fatigue design will include natural wind gust periodic galloping forces and truckinduced wind gust loads based on a truck speed of num mph .
e. provide num steel anchor bolts of the manufacturers recommended size with each pole .
fit each bolt with num nuts and num washers .
include num extra anchor bolt per batch for destructive testing .
f. submit shop drawings and calculations for approval before fabrication .
num .
pedestal signal pole requirements a .
a numinch rigid galvanized conduit with national pipe tapered npt threads .
b .
a square frangible cast aluminum base that is num fifteen num inches high .
num nominal dimension of num inches by num inches .
num four num slotted holes for anchor bolts .
num heat treated to industry standards .
c. num anchor bolts washers and nuts supplied by the base manufacturer .
num .
pedestrian pushbutton pole requirements a .
a numinch rigid galvanized conduit with npt threads .
b .
a round cast iron pipe flange that is num nominal flange thickness of num inch .
num nominal outside diameter of num inches .
num bolt circle diameter of num½ inches .
num minimum of four ⅝ inch diameter holes for anchor bolts .
num cold zinc treated .
c. num anchor bolts washers and nuts .
d. galvanized pipe cap .
num illumination poles .
provide standard and nonstandard poles that meet the requirements of num and num .
standard illumination pole a. nominal luminaire mounting heights of num num and num feet .
b .
maximum luminaire mastarm length of num feet .
c. use department approved luminaire pole designs .
d. anchor base design to use steel necked breakaway couplers meeting nchrp num requirements unless the lighting unit pole mastarm and luminaire exceeds num pounds .
e. provide num steel anchor bolts or num base breakaway devices of the manufacturers recommended size with each pole .
fit each bolt with num nuts and num washers .
f. meet additional highway lighting on traffic detail criteria as specified .
g. submit shop drawings and calculations for approval before fabrication .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
nonstandard illumination pole a .
for luminaire mounting heights greater than num feet or for luminaire mastarm lengths greater than num feet or multiple mastarms .
b .
designed in accordance with the current aashto lrfd standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num design life is num years .
num design wind speed is num mph .
num importance factor is num .
num fatigue category i design criteria natural wind gust and vortex shedding only .
c. anchor base design to use base breakaway device meeting nchrp num requirements unless the lighting unit pole mastarm and luminaire exceeds num pounds .
d. provide steel anchor bolts or base breakaway device of the manufacturers recommended size with each pole .
when using anchor bolts fit each bolt with num nuts and num washers .
include num extra anchor bolt per batch for destructive testing .
e. submit shop drawings and calculations for approval before fabrication .
num base breakaway device .
provide a base breakaway device with num steel necked couplers and female anchors meeting nchrp num requirements and certified for loads up to num pounds .
provide the base breakaway device with an aluminum skirt and associated hardware .
num signal heads .
provide signal heads meeting the following requirements num .
vehicular signal heads a. adjustable oneway type with the number of sections as specified .
b. uv stabilized polycarbonate signal housing with top and bottom reinforcement plates .
c. vehicular signal head assembly exteriors that are traffic signal green .
d. terminal block in the center section of the signal head .
e. lamp module wires with terminal connectors fastened to the terminal block .
f. optically programmed signal heads allow the visibility zone of the indication to be determined optically and require no hoods or louvers .
the projected indication may be selectively visible or veiled anywhere within num degrees of the optical axis .
g. indication can not result from external illumination or from one lamp module illuminating another .
h. led lamp modules that comply with the current institute of transportation engineers ite vehicle traffic control signal head vtcsh requirements except green indications require a clear polycarbonate lens .
i .
tunnel visors for each signal face that are num onepiece polycarbonate .
num eight num inches for numinch lens and num to num inches for numinch lens .
num inside of visors that are flat black and exteriors that are traffic signal green .
num approved to be mounted on the provided signal head without field modifications .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction j .
signal backplates that are num five num inches onepiece polycarbonate .
num flat black finish on the front and signal green on the back .
num conforming to the signal head outline .
num approved to be mounted on the provided signal head without field modifications .
num .
pedestrian signal heads a. oneway illuminated led lamps .
b. pedestrian signal housing that is num nominally num inches high by num inches wide .
num one num piece .
num uv stabilized polycarbonate or powdercoated aluminum .
num traffic signal green exteriors .
c. flat black tunnel visors .
d. terminal block in the pedestrian signal head housing .
e. lamp module wires with terminal connectors and fastened to the terminal block .
f. countdown pedestrian timer .
g. led lamp modules that comply with the current ite pedestrian traffic control signal indicator ptcsi requirements .
h. filled handman symbols .
num signal head covers .
provide signal head covers that meet the following requirements num .
opaque light in color e.g .
yellow tan a .
with a transparent center section or port for partial viewing of individual lens indications for circuit testing .
b .
full opaque covers for blanking out or restricting the visibility of an unwanted signal display .
num .
at least num percent contrast to the signal housing and signal back plate .
num .
sized to cover the appropriate signal head faces .
num .
weather and uv light resistant material .
num .
method to securely attach to prevent accidental removal or being dislodged by winds up to num mph .
num electrical service pedestals .
provide underground service pedestal that is the type specified and as follows num .
numvolt single phase .
num .
underground feed .
num .
nema numr enclosure .
num .
twelve num gauge galvanized steel construction .
num .
white powdercoated interior and exterior .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num .
meet additional underground service pedestal detail criteria as specified .
num signal controllers and cabinet assemblies .
provide traffic signal controller cabinet and auxiliary equipment that is the type specified or as directed .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num secondary cementitious materials num general requirements .
protect secondary cementitious materials scm from exposure to moisture until used .
tightly seal and adequately separate containers used for transport or storage from other material containers to prevent seepage or mixing of materials .
provide equipment used for discharge with positive shutoff controls at the point of discharge .
scm used as a partial substitute for portland cement may cause a delay in strength gain and may require more curing time before the concrete is exposed to loadings .
the engineer may accept scm for use on the basis of the manufacturers certification as specified in num and num .
submit the manufacturers certification indicating material class and compliance to material specifications .
num fly ash .
provide natural pozzlans and fly ash that meets aashto m num class f except loss of ignition loi must not exceed num percent .
when fly ash is used for mitigation of asr do not exceed num percent available alkalis as nanumo and do not exceed num percent calcium oxide cao content .
when fly ash is used as a mineral admixture use fly ash meeting the class f requirements with a maximum cao limit of num percent .
the engineer will not apply the available alkalis limits .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag .
provide ground granulated blast furnace slag that meets aashto m num grade num .
num silica fume .
provide silica fume that meets aashto m num with a maximum available alkali of num percent and num percent or less retained when wetsieved on the no .
num screen .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num section num gabion and revet mattress num mesh .
fabricate gabion panels for the base ends sides diaphragms and lids from welded or twisted wire mesh .
use only num type of wire mesh within a structure .
meet the requirements in table num below for individual wires of welded or twisted mesh table num wire criteria characteristic test designation requirements minimum tensile strength astm anum num psi wire size wire diameter minimum galvanizing us steel wire gauge astm anum and astm anum num num in num in num ozftnum wire size wire diameter minimum galvanizing us steel wire gauge astm anum and astm anum num num in num in num ozftnum provide welded wire mesh that meets astm anum except num pounds force for numgauge and num pounds force for numgauge wires on the weld shears .
wire gauges are united states steel wire gauge usswg after galvanizing .
manufacture gabion panels of the welded wire mesh from numgauge or numgauge wire .
provide mesh to form a nominal num inch by num inch square grid pattern made by resistance welding in accordance with astm anum .
ensure the maximum diagonal dimension of a grid opening is num inches .
manufacture gabion panels of twisted wire mesh from numgauge wire with numgauge selvedge wires .
form a uniform hexagonal pattern and with a nonraveling twist .
do not exceed num inches on the major axis maximum line dimension of hexagonal openings .
num fabrication .
fabricate gabions so the sides ends lids and diaphragms can be assembled at the project site into a rectangular or square basket of required sizes .
construct gabions as a single unit .
weave the base ends and sides into a single unit or num edge of these members connected to the base section of the gabion so strength and flexibility at the point of connection is at least equal to that of the mesh .
where the length of the gabion exceeds its horizontal width equally divide the gabion by diaphragms of the same mesh and gauge as the body of the gabion into cells whose length does not exceed the horizontal width .
provide the gabion with the necessary diaphragms secured in proper position on the base section so additional tying at this juncture will not be necessary .
securely selvedge or bound perimeter edges so the joints formed by tying the selvedges have the same strength as the body of the mesh .
num packing and marking .
ship gabions folded flat in bundles weighing less than num pounds .
ensure each bundle contains gabions of num size except odd numbers necessary to complete an order may be made into a bundle of less than the uniform number .
clearly mark this bundle to distinguish it from others .
clearly mark each gabion by color code or some other readily identifiable means to show size .
handle bundles without lifting the gabion mesh to avoid damage to wire or galvanizing .
num dimensions .
provide gabion meshes with the specified dimensions .
the dimensions are subject to a tolerance limit of plus or minus num percent of manufacturers stated sizes .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num joints .
provide wires used to form joints in accordance with astm anum for zinccoated galvanized carbon steel wire and that meet the requirements in table num .
table num wire criteria characteristic test designation requirements minimum tensile strength astm anum num psi wire size wire diameter minimum galvanizing us steel wire gauge astm anum and astm anum num num in num in num ozftnum wire size wire diameter minimum galvanizing us steel wire gauge astm anum and astm anum num num in num in num ozftnum ensure spiral binders have a num inch separation between continuous successive loops .
provide internal connecting wires or preformed stiffeners with at least numgauge .
meet the minimum specification requirements with each wire .
alternate fasteners may be used if approved .
alternative fasteners must form a closed loop with an overlap of at least num inch when the ends are brought together and properly closed .
ensure the closed loop has an inside area that is large enough to enclose up to num selvedge wires .
provide fasteners that meet astm anum with the same weight of coating in accordance with astm anum .
provide stainless steel that meets astm anum for applications involving pvccoated gabion baskets .
ensure the fastener resists a direct tension force across any axis of at least num pounds force while remaining closed .
submit random samples of fasteners for testing at least num business days before construction of gabions .
submit num formed and num unformed fasteners .
assemble the num formed fasteners at the project site and witnessed by the engineer .
space fasteners at intervals of num to num inches with at least num fastener per gabion mesh opening .
num gabion fill material .
the fill material for the gabion baskets is rock ranging in size from at least num inches to a maximum of num inches both measured in the greatest dimension .
provide rock that is sound durable well graded and does not disintegrate on exposure to water or weathering during the life of the structure .
obtain rock for gabions from an approved source .
ensure the minimum unit weight of a rockfilled gabion is num pounds per cubic foot .
verify the gabion unit weight when directed .
num geotextile .
meet the requirements of num .
num testing .
when directed test gabions which have not been previously tested and approved as follows num .
cubicalcelled gabions .
test wire mesh of gabions with a num foot by num foot square crosssection for sufficient strength and flexibility when assembled and filled with rock as follows a. loading and configuration .
place an approximate numpound line load over the center of a num foot long gabion perpendicular to the long axis which is unsupported under the middle num feet and anchored at each end .
a piece of concrete pipe numfoot diameter or less with a weight about num pounds can be used to impose the required line load on the gabion .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num b .
requirements deflection at the unsupported mid span of num foot or less .
visible reduction of wire size in a panel loss of internal rock and unraveling of twistedmesh or weld breaks in welded mesh is not allowed .
num .
mattressstyle gabions .
test wire mesh of gabion mattresses num foot or num foot high for sufficient strength and flexibility when assembled and filled with rock as following a. loading and configuration .
initially support the base of a numfoot wide by numfoot long gabion num feet above the ground .
a load will not be placed on the mattress .
remove about num feet of support from the end of the mattress .
b .
requirements .
the cantilevered unsupported end may sag and touch the ground .
visible reduction of the wire size in a panel loss of internal rock and unraveling of twistedmesh or weld breaks in weldedmesh is not allowed .
the engineer may accept gabion systems which have been previously tested and approved .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num geotextiles num general requirements .
use geotextile consisting of a long chain polymeric filaments or yarns oriented into a stable network that retains its relative structure including selvedges during handling placement and design service life .
ensure that at least num percent by weight of the long chain polymers are polyolefins polyesters or polyamides .
ensure the geotextile has no defects or tears .
the engineer may reject geotextile if dimensional stability or resistance to ambient temperatures acid or alkaline conditions and microorganismsinsects are unsatisfactory .
provide geotextile in accordance with the properties indicated for each specified use .
provide the geotextile without treatment or coating which might adversely alter its physical properties after installation .
num certification .
submit the geotextile manufacturers certification consisting of certified test results showing the geotextile and factory seams meet the specifications .
ensure the certification includes the named product and representative samples have been delivered and tested as specified .
include the following information in the certification for each geotextile to be used num .
manufacturers name and current address .
num .
full product name .
num .
geotextile roll number .
num .
proposed geotextile uses .
num .
certified test results .
submit the name and address of the testing agency and the test date on the identification certification .
provide a means to identify the geotextile including a lot number that can be used to ensure the product delivered is the certified product .
submit a certified copy of the test results including each test result each mean roll value the calculated standard deviation for each lot and the manufacturers coefficient of variation for test results .
submit duplicate certification with num copy sent with the shipment to the engineer and num copy sent to the central materials laboratory .
num samples .
the engineer will sample geotextiles for qa testing .
cut the geotextile samples from the roll with scissors sharp knife or by another suitable method that produces a smooth edge and does not cause ripping or tearing .
do not take samples from the outer wrap of the geotextile roll or from the inner wrap of the core .
the minimum dimension for each sample is num feet by the full roll width .
submit num sample for each lot .
label the samples with the lot and batch number date of sampling project number specifications manufacturer and product name .
the department defines a lot as geotextile rolls within the same consignment or shipment that a manufacturer produced with the same product name or designation .
before installing geotextiles submit samples of sewn seams to the central materials laboratory .
sew the seam sampling using the same equipment and procedures as will be used to sew the production seams .
if production seams are sewn in both the machine and crossmachine directions provide sewn seams for sampling oriented in both the machine and crossmachine directions and at least num feet long in each direction .
if the seams are sewn in the factory the engineer will obtain samples of the factory seam at random from the rolls to be used .
num testing .
the department may perform tests as necessary to determine the geotextile properties are in accordance with the values specified for the intended application .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num geotextile property requirements specified are minimum average roll values .
determine the tensile strengths in both machine and crossmachine directions .
num drainage geotextile property requirements .
provide nonwoven or monofilament woven geotextiles .
the engineer will not accept slit film or slit tape geotextiles for drainage applications .
meet the requirements in table num below .
table num drainage geotextile criteria minimum average roll values in weaker principal direction geotextile property test method type i a type ii b grab tensile strength lb astm dnum num num grab elongation astm dnum puncture strength lb astm dnum num num apparent opening size aos standard sieve astm dnum num or finer permittivity secnum astm dnum num note strength properties of drainage geotextiles placed on level or near level surfaces e.g .
under drain blankets on subgrade must meet those specified in num. a type i refers to protected conditions .
protected conditions include trench depth of num feet or less rounded aggregate or crushed aggregate less than num inch size and relatively smooth trench walls .
other conditions are unprotected .
b type ii refers to unprotected conditions .
num ripraperosion control geotextile property requirements .
provide nonwoven or monofilament woven geotextiles .
the engineer will not accept slit film or slit tape geotextiles for ripraperosion control applications including installation behind gabions .
meet the requirements in table num .
table num ripraperosion geotextile criteria minimum average roll values in weaker principal direction geotextile property test method type i a type ii b grab tensile strength lb astm dnum num num grab elongation astm dnum num num puncture strength lb astm dnum num num trapezoidal tear lb astm dnum num num apparent opening size aos standard sieve astm dnum num or finer permittivity secnum astm dnum num ultraviolet uv radiation stability astm dnum num strength retained num hours a type i refers to low to moderate survivability geotextiles .
the contractor may use type i behind gabions less than num feet high without an aggregate cushion .
b type ii refers to higher survivability geotextiles .
use a type ii geotextile in severe conditions where stones will be larger than num pounds or drop heights can not be practically reduced .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num subgrade separation geotextile property requirements .
provide nonwoven or woven geotextiles except only nonwoven geotextile can be used for type iii .
meet the requirements in table num .
table num subgrade separation geotextile criteria minimum average roll values in weaker principal direction geotextile property test method type i a type ii b type iii bc grab tensile strength lb d astm dnum num num num grab elongation d astm dnum num num puncture strength lb d astm dnum num num num trapezoidal tear strength lb d astm dnum num num num apparent opening size aos standard sieve astm dnum num or finer num or finer num or finer permittivity secnum astm dnum num num num a type i refers to moderate survivability conditions .
moderate survivability is low to moderate ground pressure equipment num psi or less with num to num inch initial lift thickness or high ground pressure equipment greater than num psi with more than num inch initial lift thickness .
b type ii and type iii refers to high survivability conditions .
high survivability is low to moderate ground pressure equipment with num to num inch initial lift thickness or high ground pressure equipment with num to num inch initial lift thickness .
c type iii is used when subgrade separation geotextile will also function in a drainage application .
d the dual values for strengths for each geotextile type are related to the grab elongation .
for geotextiles with elongation which is less than num the first strength values are applied .
for geotextiles with elongation which is equal or greater than num the second strength values are applied .
higher strength is required for geotextiles with lower elongation .
the subgrade condition is assumed to be cleared of rocks stumps and large limbs and graded reasonably smooth .
if subgrade preparation or clearing is not as stated or cover material is angular shot rock even higher survivability geotextiles may be necessary .
num pavement overlay geotextile property requirements .
provide only nonwoven geotextiles .
meet the requirements in table num .
table num overlay geotextile criteria geotextile property test method minimum average roll values in weaker principal direction grab tensile strength lb astm dnum num grab tensile elongation astm dnum num trapezoidal tear strength lb astm dnum num asphalt retention galydnum astm dnum num num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num temporary siltfence geotextile property requirements .
meet the requirements in table num .
table num temporary siltfence geotextile criteria geotextile property test method minimum average roll values in weaker principal direction grab tensile strength lb astm dnum num grab tensile elongation at num of minimum tensile strength num lb astm dnum num max a permittivity secnum astm dnum num apparent opening size aos astm dnum num or finer ultraviolet uv radiation stability retained astm dnum num strength retained num hours a for wiresupported silt fence geotextile elongation requirements are not applicable .
num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction section num miscellaneous num water for concrete grout and mortar .
the contractor may use water from municipal drinking water supplies for concrete grout or mortar .
the contractor may use water from other sources provided it is reasonably clear without oil contains less than num parts per million of chlorides and less than num parts per million of sulfates in accordance with astm cnum .
if a water source other than a municipal drinking water supply is proposed submit independent laboratory test reports verifying compliance with these chemical requirements .
submit reports that are less than num years old before using a nonmunicipal drinking water supply .
num elastomeric bearings .
num .
description .
elastomeric bearings include unreinforced pads consisting of elastomer only and reinforced bearings with steel laminates .
the engineer will not allow stacking of individuallylaminated pads .
provide bearings with the dimensions material properties elastomer grade and type of laminates specified .
show the design load specified and testing requirements .
provide grade num bearings with a shear modulus of num ksi steel reinforced and subjected to the loadtesting requirements .
num .
materials .
the raw elastomer consists of virgin neoprene polychloroprene or virgin natural rubber polyisoprene .
provide the elastomer compound classified as being of lowtemperature grade num num num num or num .
the grades and other material properties are defined in the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num and aashto m num .
a higher grade of elastomer may be substituted for a lower one .
num .
fabrication .
fabricate bearings in accordance with aashto m num .
num .
testing .
subject materials for elastomeric bearings and the finished bearings to the tests described in aashto m num section num .
num .
installation .
the contractor may place elastomeric bearings without external load plates directly on a concrete or steel surface provided that it is flat within a tolerance of num of the nominal dimension for steel reinforced bearings and num of the nominal dimension for others .
place bearings on surfaces that are horizontal to within num radian .
correct the lack of parallelism between the top of the bearing and the underside of the girder that exceeds num radian by grouting or as directed .
do not weld exterior plates of the bearing unless at least num inches of the steel exists between the weld and the elastomer .
do not allow the elastomer or the bond to be subjected to temperature higher than num f. num polytetrafluoroethylene tfeptfe bridge bearing pads .
provide tfeptfe pads and stainless steel mating surface where specified that meet aashto specifications for highway bridges .
if filled tfeptfe sheet is used only glassfiber filler will be approved .
num epoxyresinbase bonding systems for concrete .
meet astm cnum with the classification type and grade of the system selected as specified .
the contractor and the contractors supplier with approval will determine the class after work conditions have been established .
provide materials and applications that meet applicable aci standards num num num or num .
submit the manufacturers certification verifying compliance to material specifications .
num recycled glass .
provide recycled glass whole bottles or crushed glass for use in roadway fills and crushed glass for use in granular borrow granular subbase or aggregate base meeting the requirements of aashto m num .
certify in writing the glass is from a waste stream generated in idaho .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num num hydrated lime .
provide hydrated lime as follows num .
quicklime for cold inplace recycled pavement .
meet astm cnum .
num .
hydrated lime for plant mix additive .
meet aashto m num type i .
num recycled asphalt pavement rap .
prepare and maintain a rap processing and stockpiling quality control plan and make these records available to the department .
num .
rap categories .
provide rap that complies with one of the following categories a .
category num .
the department defines this material as being from a department project or is traceable to another public agency sponsored project .
the engineer will accept category num rap for use provided the contractor submits a letter stating the rap is from a specific pavement including the route and mile post .
do not add material from other sources during stockpiling and submit certification of this from the producer on a stockpilebystockpile basis .
category num rap may consist of asphalt material removed from interstates united states highways primary routes secondary routes airfields or local projects .
b .
category num .
the department defines this material as not being from department projects or is not traceable to a department project .
produce uniform rap stockpiles when category num material originates from different sources .
the engineer will accept category num rap for use as category num rap if the contractor performs tests as specified in num and submits test results and materials that show the rap meets the specifications and is verifiable by the department .
submit test results within num calendar days before mix design submittal .
do not use category num rap that does not meet these requirements as category num rap .
category num rap is num production returns .
asphalt material generated from plant waste e.g .
startupshut down material .
num random rap .
crushed and screened asphalt material removed from private paving projects plant overruns rejected loads or combination .
num .
rap processing .
the contractor may use processed rap as follows a .
processed rap .
rap that is processed by crushing and screening to produce a uniform gradation from coarse to a fine and a uniform binder content in the rap before use in a recycled mix .
provide processed rap with num percent passing the ⅝ inch sieve on entry into the mixing plant .
the contractor may recycle processed rap in superpave hma at the percentages shown below num category num rap is limited to num percent .
num category num rap is allowed up to num percent when used in the top lift and is limited to num percent maximum when used in a lower lift .
processed rap stockpiles may contain rap from sources as indicated by the category and may be replenished with rap from sources of that same category .
num .
rap testing and test frequency .
perform the following tests at the specified testing frequencies for each category and provide the data to the department as soon as test results are available a .
category num .
establish an extraction correlation .
determine the asphalt binder content and aggregate gradation in accordance with the fop for aashto t num and aashto t num at the num of num num itd standard specifications for highway construction minimum frequency of num test per num tons for the first num tons and num test per num tons thereafter .
then perform at least num tests for stockpiles less than num tons .
perform chemical binder extractions in accordance with aashto t num to reclaim the binder from the rap when blending charts are used .
determine the pg binder grading of the recycled binder as specified in num at the frequency of num test per num tons with at least num test per stockpile .
b .
category num .
asphalt binder content aggregate gradation and binder grade testing requirements are the same as category num .
in addition test the aggregate recovered from the rap by the extraction process aashto t num or aashto t num or aashto t num to determine the aggregate quality .
test rap aggregate quality as follows num aashto t num and idaho it num tested on extracted aggregate as specified at a frequency of num test per stockpile .
num aashto t num aashto t num and astm dnum at the minimum frequency of num test per num tons for the first num tons and num test per num tons thereafter .
perform at least num tests for stockpiles less than num tons .
meet the applicable aggregate quality requirements in table num and num for the combination of virgin and rap aggregate .
use the rap as category num rap unprocessed if it was not tested .
asphalt binderaggregate correlation factor .
perform at least num aashto t num or aashto t num chemical extraction tests and aashto t num gradation tests and num aashto t num burn tests and aashto t num gradation tests to establish a correlation factor for asphalt binder and aggregate gradation .
prepare num identical pairs of samples and test num sample of each pair in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num and test the other sample in accordance with aashto t num .
the standard deviation of the correlation test results must be less than num .
if the standard deviation for the correlation test results exceeds num the engineer will require additional aashto t num or aashto t num and aashto t num testing until the standard deviation for the correlation testing falls below num .
bulk specific gravity of the rap aggregate .
test rap material for gsb according to idaho it num at the rate of num test per num tons for the first num tons and num test per num tons thereafter .
perform a minimum of num tests per stockpile .
provide the test results on a spreadsheet with the mix design submittal and update the spreadsheet if additional rap is produced before producing hma .
for testing after stockpiling submit a sample plan and test the rap pile either insitu or by restockpiling for approval .
meet the minimum frequency required and detail the procedure used to obtain representative samples throughout the stockpile for testing .
num .
rap stockpiles and record keeping .
place rap stockpiles on a base with adequate drainage and construct in layers to minimize rap segregation and ensure a workable face .
construct separate stockpiles for each source of rap based on the category of rap the quality of aggregate type and quantity of asphalt binder and size of processed material .
identify rap stockpiles on a map of the stockpile areas and place signs in or near each stockpile .
maintain a record system at the plant site for rap stockpiles that includes at a minimum the following a .
stockpile identification and a sketch of stockpile areas at the plant site .
b. rap category project state route plant waste rejected loads .
c. origin or dates milled and approximate number of tons in the stockpile .
d. chemical extraction and aashto t num burn test results .
num itd standard specifications for highway construction num of num make the rap stockpile records available at the plant site .
the engineer will reject by visual inspection stockpiles that are not kept clean and free of foreign materials .
the engineer will reject rap containing contaminants e.g .
earth brick sand concrete pavement fabric joint sealants .
the contractor may reprocess the rejected rap stockpile to meet requirements or remove the stockpile from use .
