standard specifications for road and bridge construction num edition adopted by the montana department of transportation and the montana transportation commission table of contents division num general provisions section num definitions and terms num num general num num acronyms and abbreviations num num definitions num section num bidding requirements and conditions num num jointventure bids num num contents of bid package num num contractor registration num num issuance of proposals num num quantities of work in the proposal num num examination of documents and site of work num num bidding requirements num num rejection of bid proposals num num proposal guaranty num num delivery and public opening of proposals num num withdrawal of proposals num num debarment num num materials guaranty num num reserved num num venue num num consent to contract provisions num num public works contract num section num award and execution of contract num num consideration of proposals num num award of contract num num assignment of claims num num cancellation of award num num release of proposal guaranty num num contract bond num num execution and approval of contract num num failure to execute contract num num bid documents num section num scope of work num num intent of contract num num differing site conditions suspension of work and significant changes in the character of work num num extra work num num miscellaneous work num num maintenance of work num num material and property rights num num final cleaning up num table of contents num edition num value engineering proposals num section num control of work num num authority of the engineer num num contractor furnished drawings and submittals num num conformity with plans and specifications num num coordination of contract provisions num num cooperation by contractor num num cooperation with utilities num num cooperation between contractors num num construction stakes lines and grades num num authority and duties of project manager num num authority and duties of inspectors num num inspection of work num num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work num num reserved num num reserved num num component inspection num num claims for adjustment and disputes num num project finalization num section num control of material num num source of supply and quality requirements num num local material sources num num certification of compliance num num plant inspection num num field laboratory num num qualified products list num num handling and storage of materials num num department furnished material num num domestic materials num num mix designs and testing of material sources num section num legal relations and responsiblities to the public num num laws rules and regulations to be observed num num permits licenses and taxes num num patented devices materials and processes num num restoring surfaces opened by permit num num federal aid participation num num public convenience and safety num num railwayhighway provisions num num load restrictions num num reserved num num protection and restortation of property and landscape num num environmental protection num num forest protection num num insurance requirements num num edition table of contents num third party beneficiary clause num num responsibility for damage claims num num opening sections of project to traffic num num contractors responsibility for work num num contractors responsibility for utility property and services num num furnishing right of way num num personal liability of public officials num num no waiver of legal rights num num protection of archeological and historical findings num num discovery of underground storage tanks num num discovery and removal of unknown hazardous materials num num access to contractors records num num liability for cerclacecra claims num num diesel fuel used on the project num section num prosecution and progress num num subcontrating or assignment of contract num num notice to proceed num num prosecution of work num num limitation of operations num num character of workers num num methods and equipment num num determination of compensation and extension of contract time for excusable noncompensable and compensable delays num num failure to complete on time num num default of contractor num num termination for public convenience num section num measurement and payment num num measurement of quantities num num scope of payment num num compensation for altered quantities num num payment for extra work num num deleted or terminated work num num partial payments num num stockpiled materials num num reserved num num mobilization num num overpayments num num fuel price adjustment num division num earthwork section num clearing and grubbing num num description num table of contents num edition num reserved num num construction requirements num num general num num clearing num num grubbing num num clearing and grubbing num num disposal num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num removal of structures and obstructions num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num removal of bridges and major drainage structures num num removal of minor drainage structures num num removal of pavement concrete and masonry num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num excavation and embankment num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num excavation num num embankment num num moisture and density requirements num num sloping and finishing num num maintenance of constructed roadway num num topsoil salvaging and placing num num limitation on grading operations num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num blasting num num description num num material num num production blasting num num blasting professional num num use of explosives num num master blasting and safety plan num num blasting test sections num num safety num num presplitting rock slopes num num blasting operations num num scaling num num records num num edition table of contents num survey num num noise and debris control num num controlled blasting num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num detours num num description num num reserved num num construction num num general num num design num num submittals num num maintenance num num removal num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num culvert excavation and trench excavation num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num general num num culvert excavation num num trench excavation num num excavation for appurtenant structures num num shoring num num foundation preparation num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num water pollution control and aquatic resource preservation num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num water pollution control num num aquatic resource protection num num seeding num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num structure excavation num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num general num table of contents num edition num treatment of foundation materials num num cofferdams num num pumping water from cofferdams num num inspection num num backfilling num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num equipment use num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num general requirements num num motor graders num num dozers num num rollers num num watering equipment num num test trailer transport and setup num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num obliterate roadway num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num division num aggregate surfacing and base courses section num aggregate surfacing num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num sampling testing and acceptance num num equipment num num reject num num crushed aggregate course num num aggregate surfacing construction num num shoulder gravel num num traffic gravel num num aggregate treatment num num bridge end backfill num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bituminous pavement pulverization num num description num num edition table of contents num materials num num construction requirements num num pulverization num num equipment num num mixing num num compaction num num testing and acceptance num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num stockpiled surfacing aggregate num num description num num materials num num aggregate stockpiling methods num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num cement treated base num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num aggregate production testing and acceptance num num weather limitations num num subgrade preparation num num mixing and placing num num compaction num num finishing num num construction joints num num protection and curing num num curing period num num maintenance num num surface smoothness and thickness requirements num num use of trimmed material num num testing and acceptance of ctb num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num division num bituminous pavements section num plant mix surfacing num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num mix design num num hamburg wheel track testing hamburg num num test procedures num num composition of mixtures num table of contents num edition num acceptance commercial plant mix surfacing num num acceptance of noncommercial plant mix surfacing qa num num quality incentive allowance num num equipment num num safety requirements num num burner fuel restrictions num num dry warm mix additive hydrated lime feed system num num flow rate meter num num production monitor recorder num num plant mix preparation num num roadway equipment num num existing surface preparation num num tack coat num num surface conditions weather limitations and paving dates num num spreading and finishing num num constructing joints num num compaction compaction control testing and density acceptance testing num num pavement repair num num surface tolerance for flexible pavement num num rumble strips num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bituminous materials num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num materials source num num sampling num num shipping num num testing num num acceptance num num loading and application temperatures num num alternate type or grade of bituminous materials num num performance graded asphalt binder pgab num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num crack sealing num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num routing num num cleaning num num edition table of contents num sealing num num temperature limitations num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num tack coat num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num weather limitations num num equipment num num application of emulsified materials num num maintenance of surface num num traffic control and protection of highway structures num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num seal coat num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num sampling testing and acceptance num num aggregate and bituminous material application rates num num seal coat limitations num num protection of traffic and highway structures num num surface preparation num num reserved num num application of seal coat materials num num warranty num num application of blotter material num num sweeping and brooming num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bituminous surface treatment num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num equipment num num existing surface preparation num num sweeping num num application of bituminous material num num application of cover material num num rolling num num curing and cleaning num num completion num num protection of traffic and highway structures num table of contents num edition num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num cold milling num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num equipment num num general num num milling num num salvage of pavement millings num num replacing removed pavement num num traffic control num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num division num rigid pavement and structures section num portland cement concrete pavement num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num equipment num num prepaving conference num num aggregate sampling and testing num num aggregate production num num acceptance of aggregate num num mixing num num transporting concrete num num placing and finishing concrete num num protection of concrete from rain num num evaluation and repair of raindamaged concrete num num curing num num handling and placing reinforcement num num joints num num surface test num num correcting spall and cracks num num opening to traffic num num integral curb num num weather and night limitations num num protection of concrete num num pavement thickness num num accelerated paving techniques num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num hydraulic cement concrete num num edition table of contents num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num classification num num composition of concrete num num batching mixing handling and sampling num num transporting concrete num num placing concrete num num weather and temperature limitations num num curing concrete num num testing and acceptance of concrete num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num concrete structures num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num foundations num num falsework num num forms num num placing concrete num num depositing concrete underwater num num construction joints num num joints for bridge approach slabs num num cold weather concreting num num curing concrete num num removal of forms and falsework num num concrete finish num num installation of expansion and contraction joints num num placing anchor bolts num num setting shoes and bearing plates num num drainage holes and weep holes num num pipes conduits and ducts num num loading of piers and abutments num num silane sealer num num bridge deck crack sealing num num opening to traffic num num acceptance num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num prestressed concrete members num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num table of contents num edition num fabrication num num fabrication drawings num num design of concrete mixtures num num forms num num placing reinforcing steel num num prestressing equipment num num pretensioning num num final tensioning num num placing concrete num num curing num num transfer of prestress num num posttensioning num num bonding steel num num concrete surface finish num num workmanship and tolerances num num storage and transportation num num placing num num bearing and anchorage num num precast prestressed deck sections num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num precast concrete products num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num fabrication drawings num num design of concrete mixtures num num sampling handling batching and mixing num num forms and forming num num placing concrete num num curing and testing concrete num num coldweather concreting num num form removal num num finish on exposed surfaces num num handling transporting and storage num num placement num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num reinforcing steel num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num protection of material num num fabrication num num edition table of contents num placing and fastening num num splicing num num reinforcing steel material guaranty and random sampling num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num steel structures num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num prequalification for steel fabricators num num submittals num num mill and shop inspection num num storage and handling of materials num num quality control num num pilot and driving nuts .
num num bolts and bolted connections num num bolted connections hightensilestrength bolts num num welded stud shear connectors num num field welding num num assembling steel num num marking and shipping num num painting num num erection num num falsework num num bearing and anchorage num num placing anchor bolts num num straightening bent material num num pin connections num num misfits num num cleanup num num rejections num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num steel bridge railing num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num fabrication drawings num num fabrication num num erection num num painting num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num drilled shafts num table of contents num edition num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num submittals num num shaft preconstruction meeting num num geotechnical logging num num shaft excavation num num shaft locations alignment and tolerances num num sloughing and caving num num permanent casing .
num num temporary casing num num obstructions num num cleaning num num installation of crosshole sonic logging csl tubes num num reinforcing steel num num concrete placement record num num drilled shaft concrete num num shaft testing and acceptance num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num piling num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num equipment for driving pile num num evaluation of pile driving equipment num num pile bearing resistance num num pile driving location and alignment num num service pile num num cutting off steel pile or steel pipe pile num num steel pipe pile num num painting steel pile or steel pipe pile num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bridge deck milling num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num submittals num num equipment num num procedures num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bridge deck repair num num edition table of contents num description num num materials num num construction requirements num numsubmittals num num equipment num num location and inspection of repair areas .
num num concrete removal num num reinforcing steel num num placing and finishing concrete class a and b repair num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num modified concrete overlay num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num submittals num num preplacement conference num num surface preparation num num mobile mixing equipment num num concrete placement num num curing num num phased construction num num acceptance num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num structure tolerances num num description num num reserved num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num bearing devices num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num bearing and anchorage num num ptfe bearings num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num division num miscellaneous construction section num water service lines num num description num table of contents num edition num materials num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num remove and relay pipe culvert num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num culvert removal num num relaying culverts num num restoration and maintenance of existing pavement num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num culverts storm drains num sanitary sewers stockpasses and underpasses num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num excavation and foundation preparation num num installation num num backfilling num num restoration and maintenance of existing pavement num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num excavation num num backfill num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num guardrail and concrete barrier rail num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num installing posts num num metal beam guardrail erection num num stiffened guardrail sections num num box beam guardrail num num edition table of contents num cable guardrail num num concrete barrier rail num num reserved num num raise guardrail num num remove guardrail num num revise guardrail elements num num nested wbeam guardrail sections num num reset guardrail items num num optional terminal sections num num guardrail end terminal section widening num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num fences num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num fence preparation num num constructing chain link fence num num constructing barbed and woven wire fence num num temporary fence num num remove and reset fence num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num concrete sidewalks num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num subgrade and forms num num concrete num num detectable warning devices num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num curbs and gutters num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num foundation and forms num num castinplace curb and gutter num num slipformed concrete curb and gutter num num precast concrete curbs num num bituminous curbs num num painting curbs num table of contents num edition num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num roadside revegetation num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num furnished topsoil num num seeding fertilizing and mulching num num sodding num num erosion control blanket num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num cattle guards num num description num num materials num num construction requirments num num excavation num num placing concrete bases num num placing cattle guards num num painting num num resetting cattle guards num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num structure finishes num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num submittals num num surface preparation num num painting num num weather conditions num num steel components num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num riprap and slope and bank protection num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num riprap num num bank protection num num concrete slope protection num num concrete drainage chute num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num num edition table of contents section num retaining walls num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num foundations num num concrete retaining walls num num bintype retaining walls num num backfill num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num irrigation facilities and headwalls num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num conduits and pull boxes num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num plastic conduit num num steel conduit num num pull boxes and manholes num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num traffic signals and lighting num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num equipment lists and drawings num num maintenance of signals num num excavation and backfilling num num removing and replacing improvements num num foundations num num standards num num luminaires num num advanced flashing beacons num num conductors and cable num num service and control assembly num num photoelectric controls num num control cabinet pedestals num num traffic and pedestrian signals num table of contents num edition num loops num num radio antennas num num pedestrian push buttons num num span wiremounted signals num num bonding and grounding num num conduit and pull boxes num num field test num num salvaging and reinstalling electrical equipment num num road closure gate assemblies num num overheight detectors num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num traffic control num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num purpose and prosecution of work zone traffic control num num traffic control plan num num traffic control conference num num traffic control reviews num num traffic control general requirements num num access breaks num num crossing entering and using roadways num num traffic control at dropoff areas num num traffic control for paving and milling operations num num reserved num num traffic control for seal coat operations num num traffic control for striping operations num num traffic control device location and installation num num flagging operations num num pilot car operations num num water for dust control num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num signs and delineators num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num definitions num num design calculations and shop drawings num num fabrication and erection num num inspection num num sheet aluminum overlay num num replace reuse sign face and reset num num edition table of contents num installation date tags and route markers num num delineators num num flexible delineators num num acceptance num num permanent barricade num num breakaway system num num remove signs num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num pavement marking application num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num layout of pavement markings num num equipment num num surface preparation and weather limitations num num temporary striping num num interim pavement markings num num final pavement markings num num concrete curbs num num marking protection num num marking removal num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num remove reset and adjust facilities num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num geotextiles num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num separationstabilization geotextile num num subsurface drainage geotextile filter num num permanent erosion control geotextile num num silt fence num num method of measurement num num .
basis of payment num section num mailboxes num num description num table of contents num edition num materials num num construction requirements num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num section num welding num num description num num materials num num construction requirements num num general num num welder qualifications num num submittals num num method of measurement num num basis of payment num division num materials section num aggregates num num aggregate for concrete num num fine aggregates for concrete num num coarse aggregate for concrete num num optimized gradations for concrete num num aggregate for surfacing num num general requirements num num select surfacing num num sand surfacing num num crushed base course type a num num crushed base course type b num num crushed top surfacing type a num num crushed top surfacing type b num num crushed cover aggregate cover material num num aggregate for ctb num num aggregate for bituminous mixtures num num general requirements num num aggregate for plant mix surfacing num num foundation and bedding material for structures num num filter material num num riprap num num bank protection num num sandgravel cushion num num backfill for metal bintype retaining walls num num drain aggregate num num glass cullet for soilaggregate filler num num digout and subex replacement material num num bridge end backfill num section num bituminous materials num num edition table of contents num bituminous materials num num testing and acceptance num section num lighting signal materials num num general num num conduit num num pull boxes num num standards and posts num num conductors and cable num num service and control assembly num num control equipment num num traffic and pedestrian signals num num loops num num pedestrian push buttons num num luminaires num num photoelectric controls num num radio antennas num num class num treated timber poles num num overheight detector num section num signing materials num num material for signs num num sheet aluminum num num aluminum sheet increment num num plywood num num aluminum and steel posts num num reserved num num treated wood posts and poles num num reserved num num overhead structures num num concrete num num retroreflective sheeting num num reserved num num paint num num hardware num num fabrication of signs num num flexible delineators num section num guardrail num num guardrail num num wire rope and connecting hardware num num wood treatment and painting num section num treated and untreated timber num num structural timber and lumber num num reserved num num poles and posts num num treated timber and lumber num table of contents num edition section num joint materials num num concrete joint fillers num num culvert sealers num num sheet copper rubber and plastic waterstops num section num concrete plastic and fiber pipe num num reinforced concrete pipe num num concrete pressure pipe num num perforated concrete pipe num num porous concrete pipe num num pvc gravity sewer and drain pipe num num pvc pressure water pipe num num corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe num num high density polyethylene pipe num section num metal pipe num num ductile iron and steel water pipe num num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num num steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches num num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches and steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches num num precoated galvanized steel culverts and underdrains num num corrugated steel pipe for underdrains num num corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts num num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains num num seamless steel pipe num num copper pipe num num slotted corrugated steel pipe num num type ii aluminized corrugated steel pipe num section num paints num num pigments vehicles and thinners num num paints and enamels num num powder coating prequalification and certification num num antigraffiti coatingpermanent num section num reinforcing steel structural steel hardware and miscellaneous structure items num num reinforcing steel num num structural steel num num structural steel tubing num num pins and rollers num num welding electrodes num num high tensile strength bolts num num bolts and nuts num num galvanized metal num num welded stud shear connectors num num steel piling num num edition table of contents num prestressing steel num num castings num num bearing assembly anchor bolts for bridges num num elastomeric bearing devices num num compression joint seals num num fiber reinforced pads num num metal bintype retaining walls num num mechanical rebar connectors num num metric plate substitution num num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe num section num fencing materials num num chain link fence num num wire fence num section num miscellaneous materials num num water num num hydrated lime num num chlorides num num cement grout num num topsoil num num reserved num num reserved num num reclamation seed num num fertilizer num num mulch num num sod num num rolled erosion control products num num compost num section num pavement marking materials num num temporary striping tape num num temporary striping tabs num num temporary waterborne traffic paint num num waterborne traffic paint num num high durability waterborne traffic paint num num epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint num num preformed plastic pavement marking material num num reflective glass beads num section num traffic control devices num num signs and channelizing devices num num construction sign support assemblies num num advance warning arrow panels num num warning lights num num advance flagger ahead warning signs num section num geotextiles num num general physical requirements num table of contents num edition num separation geotextile num num stabilization geotextile num num subsurface drainage geotextile filter num num permanent erosion control geotextile num num temporary silt fence geotextile num section num concrete sealants num num concrete curing materials num num bridge deck sealants num index num tables num num section num definitions and terms num general the standard specifications are written to the contractor .
they define the contractors responsibility in meeting each specification .
the short sentences written in the active voice explain what the contractor must do .
the specifications outline the expectations of the department and explain what the contractor must provide the department .
unless otherwise noted all actions are to be performed by the contractor .
will statements mean the department is responsible or will perform the action .
the standard specifications are written in dual units with english units first followed by metric units in parenthesis .
the contract will be in one of the two units .
all submittals and documentation provided to the department must be in english or metric units as shown in the contract .
the active voice writing style is recommended by the federal highway administration technical advisory num .
examples of the writing styles are as follows a .
passive voice the contractor shall construct the temporary detour as specified in the contract .
b .
active voice construct the temporary detour as specified in the contract .
the titles and headings of the sections subsections and subparts are for the convenience of reference and do not necessarily have a bearing on their interpretation .
when a publication is specified it refers to the most recent date of issue including interim publications before the date of bid receipts for the project unless the issue of a specific date or year is specified .
num acronyms and abbreviations whenever the following acronyms and terms are used in the contract the intent and meaning is interpreted as follows aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america aisc american institute of steel construction inc. aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standards institute inc. ara american railway association area american railway engineering association arm administrative rules of montana artba american road and transportation builders association asc activities schedule chart asce american society of civil engineers asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials attsa american traffic safety services association awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association bmp best management practice num definitions and terms num edition num cas construction administration services ces construction engineering services cfr code of federal regulations cmp corrugated metal pipe co change order coe u.s. army corps of engineers cpm critical path method crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute ctep community transportation enhancement program cuf commercially useful function cwi certified welding inspector da dust to asphalt ratio dbe disadvantaged business enterprise dce district construction engineer deq montana department of environmental quality dms district materials supervisor dnrc montana department of natural resources and conservation ebs electronic bid system eeo equal employment opportunity epa environmental protection agency esal equivalent single axle load fets flared end terminal section fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards fwp montana department of fish wildlife and parks hdpe high density polyethylene pipe ies illuminating engineering society imsa international municipal signal association ite institute of transportation engineers mash manual for assessing safety hardware mca montana code annotated mdt montana department of transportation mpdes montana pollutant discharge elimination system msds material safety data sheet mt montana test method mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nbs national bureau of standards nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electric code nema national electrical manufacturers association noi notice of intent npdes national pollutant discharge elimination system ohv off highway vehicles osha occupational safety and health administration pcc portland cement concrete pccp portland cement concrete pavement pci prestress concrete institute pgab performance graded asphalt binder ptw presently traveled way num edition definitions and terms num num pvc polyvinyl chloride pipe qaquality assurance qa contractors question and answer forum qpl qualified products list rap recycled asphalt pavement rcp reinforced concrete pipe row or rw .. right of way sae society of automotive engineers shpo state historic preservation office spa stream protection act sspc society for protective coatings swppp storm water pollution prevention plan tesc temporary erosion and sediment control tmecc test methods for evaluating compost and composting tmp traffic management plan trm turf reinforcement mat ul underwriters laboratory usasi united states of america standards institute ve value engineering vfa voids filled with asphalt vma voids in mineral aggregate vtm voids in the total mix washto western association of state highway transportation officials waqtc western alliance for quality transportation construction wn written narrative wwpa western wood products association the department uses the following abbreviations in the schedule of items for the respective units of measurement num definitions and terms num edition num table num measurement abbreviations english metric english metric length area inch in .
millimeter mm square inch innum square millimeter mmnum foot ft. square foot ftnum yard yd .
meter m square yard ydnum square meter mnum mile mi .
kilometer km acre acre hectare ha course mile cr .
mi .
course kilometer cr km square mile minum square kilometer kmnum volume weight cubic inch innum cubic millimeter mmnum ounce oz .
gram g cubic foot ftnum pound lb .
kilogram kg cubic yard ydnum cubic meter mnum ton t. metric tonne mt liquid measure temperature ounce fl .
oz .
milliliter ml degree fahrenheit f degree celsius c gallon gal .
liter l speed pressure miles per hour mph kilometers per hour kph pounds per square inch psi kilopascals kpa num definitions actual cost the cost incurred by the contractor in the performance of work .
actual cost includes labor material actual ownership cost of equipment determined from the owners records or invoiced rental rates and administrative overhead .
addendum or amendment contract revisions developed after advertisement and before opening proposals .
additional work additional work is an increase in the quantity of a contract item .
administrator the district administrator or the authorized representative is responsible for the administrative oversight of the project .
advertisement the public announcement inviting proposals for the advertised work .
num edition definitions and terms num num award the acceptance of a proposal by the commission .
aquatic resources aquatic resources may include but are not limited to wetlands springs streams perennial ephemeral and intermittent drainages rivers lakes ponds reservoirs agricultural irrigation systems and associated riparian areas .
base one or more layers of specified material placed on the subgrade to support the surface course .
bidder any individual or entity submitting a proposal for advertised work .
bid documentation any writings working papers computer printouts computer generated andor computer stored information electronically stored information charts schedules of any kind e.g .
cpm bar chart etc .
and any data compilations computerized or not used by the bidder to determine the bid submitted for a contract .
bid documents includes but is not limited to the following bidder equipment internal rates for ownership bidder overhead rates labor rates cost coding equipment and manpower loading of activities efficiency or productivity factors scheduling calculations review or analysis of the site of work analysis of how the work should be performed arithmetic extension worksheets used to prepare the bid identifying by name and edition any software programs used to prepare them and all quotations to the extent that these items were used in formulating and preparing the amount of the bid .
bid documents also includes identification of all manuals used by the bidder in preparing the bid for this contract referenced by title author edition date and page or section number .
the term does not include bid documents provided by the owner e.g .
plans specifications etc .
for use by the bidder in preparation of the bid proposal .
convert electronic information into paper copies for submittal purposes .
bridge a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and a length measured along the center of roadway exceeding num feet num m between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
the bridge length is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing between backs of abutment backwalls or between ends of the bridge floor but never less than the total clear opening of the structure .
the bridge roadway width is the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or in the case of multiple heights of curb between the bottoms of the lower risers .
num definitions and terms num edition num business day all days are considered business days except saturdays sundays and holidays .
calendar day every day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
change order a written order issued to the contractor covering changes to the original contract and establishing the agreedupon basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
chief engineer the highways engineering division administrator is designated chief engineer for the department who establishes engineering policy resolves technical issues and resolves contractor disputes .
claims review board the board consists of the chief engineer the preconstruction engineer and the chief counsel with the ces engineer as secretary to the board .
the fhwa field operations engineer and construction engineer are nonvoting members .
commission as provided by section num mca as amended the transportation commission is a quasijudicial board assigned to the department of transportation for administrative support only .
completion date the fixed calendar date that all work on the project is to be complete .
conformity is compliance with a .
reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction tolerances where working tolerances are not specified or b .
the specified working tolerances .
contract the written agreement between the commission and the contractor detailing the obligations of the parties for the performance of the prescribed work .
the contract includes the proposal contract form contract bond specifications general and detail plans detailed drawings notice to proceed materials manual and all change orders extra work orders including authorized contract time extensions that are required to complete the project .
contract bond the approved security on the departments form executed by the contractor and its surety or sureties guaranteeing the complete execution of the contract and all supplemental agreements thereto and payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
contract item pay item a specific unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
contract time the number of working days calendar days or the fixed completion date allowed for completing the contract including authorized time extensions .
num edition definitions and terms num num contractor or prime contractor the individual or legal entity contracting with the commission to perform the prescribed work .
when used in the specifications prime contractor has the same meaning as contractor .
culvert any structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under the roadway .
delay any event action force or factors that causes the contract work to extend beyond the specified contract time .
a. compensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to additional compensation .
b. excusable noncompensable delay .
a delay to the contract or milestonephase completion date that was beyond the contractors control and for which a contract or milestone time extension may be granted .
c. nonexcusable delay .
a reasonably foreseeable delay to the contract completion date within the contractors control .
no monetary compensation or time extension will be granted .
department of transportation the state of montana department of transportation acting through the director and the commission when the state is the awarding authority .
where department is used alone it means the montana department of transportation .
the departments mailing address is montana department of transportation num prospect avenue p.o .
box num helena mt num .
detailed drawings an edition of special drawings including necessary detailed instructions that pertain to certain items of work contained in department projects .
differing site conditions subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site that a .
differ materially from those indicated in the contract or b .
differ materially from conditions normally encountered or those conditions generally recognized as inherent in the nature of the work required in the contract or c. unknown physical site conditions of an unusual nature .
this does not refer to non physical conditions e.g .
working relationships etc .
director the chief administrative officer of the department as established by law and the directors authorized agents .
engineer the highest ranking professional engineer in the district office usually the administrator dce or their authorized representative responsible for engineering and administrative supervision of the project .
equipment all machinery tools apparatus and supplies necessary for the upkeep maintenance construction and completion of the project .
equitable adjustment an adjustment in the contract price or time .
num definitions and terms num edition num extra work work added to the original contract required for the completion of the contract .
extra work order a written agreement amending the contract that identifies work to be paid for at agreed prices or by force account under subsection num .
force account work a basis of payment to perform extra work when procedures of negotiation are unsuccessful .
force account work will be paid for under subsection num .
holidays legal holidays are defined in the state of montana laws section num mca .
all holidays are defined as no work days unless approved by the engineer .
inspector the engineer or project managers authorized representative assigned to make inspections of work and materials furnished .
invitation for bids the advertisement for proposals for work or materials on which bids are requested .
the advertisement goes out to interested parties to allow potential bidders an opportunity to examine the site material sources etc .
it will indicate the estimated quantities and location of the work to be done or character and quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of proposals .
joint venture an agreement between two or more persons or entities to be jointly and severally responsible for the performance of a contract .
laboratory the department testing laboratory or other testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
major item individual bid items having an original contract value equal to or exceeding num of the total original contract amount .
manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd the fhwa manual on uniform traffic control devices its current edition and its revisions .
it includes the basic principles for the design and use of traffic control devices but recognizes that engineering judgment is essential to the proper use of traffic control devices .
the manual may be supplemented by standard or supplemental specifications special provisions and by project circumstances when approved by the engineer see mutcd section numa.num standardization of application .
materials substances specified for use in the construction of the project .
furnish new materials unless otherwise specified or approved .
median the portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions .
separation may be by open ground raised median or paint not including centerline stripping .
num edition definitions and terms num num no work days no work days are holidays sundays or during the winter shutdown .
work on holidays or sundays must be approved by the engineer .
travelway maintenance stormwater bmp maintenance and providing protection for the public are exempt and this work may be accomplished on no work days without assessment of contract time .
do not work after num noon on friday or on saturday and sunday prior to memorial day last monday in may and labor day first monday in september .
do not work after num noon on friday or on saturday or sunday prior to independence day july numth when july numth is on a saturday sunday or monday .
notice to proceed written notice to the contractor to proceed with the contract work including the starting date of contract time .
offhighway vehicle a vehicle that exceeds legal weight limits or can not be legally registered or licensed to operate on public roadways .
pavement structure the combination of base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
plans the approved contract drawings showing the location type dimensions and details of the work required under the contract .
profile grade the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
project the specific section of the highway or location on which construction is to be performed under the contract .
project manager the project manager is the authorized representative of the engineer .
the project manager is responsible for direct oversight and documentation of the project .
the project manager is the contractors first contact for all project related issues unless another person or agency is specifically stated in the contract .
project records all correspondence reports proposals minutes articles logs calendars diaries computations tabulations computer printouts bills statements invoices vouchers bills of lading schedules purchase orders contracts agreements accounts checks tape recordings photostats video recordings photographs sketches drawings charts graphs transcripts and other similar objects any of which pertains to a project or project costs of a contractor and its subcontractors .
proposal a written offer by a bidder on department furnished forms to complete the project at the quoted prices within the specified contract time .
also called bid proposal .
num definitions and terms num edition num proposal form the approved form on which bids must be prepared and submitted .
proposal guaranty the security furnished with a proposal to guarantee that the bidder enters into the contract if its proposal is accepted .
quality assurance a .
acceptance plan .
a statistically based procedure for evaluating acceptance test results .
b .
lot .
a discrete quantity of material evaluated for acceptance .
c. price reduction .
a preestablished decrease in payment to the contractor for a contract bid item in which the quality and workmanship determined by statistical means is at the lower limit of the acceptance range .
d. quality assurance .
a statistical based process to determine the acceptability of a given product .
also known as lot by lot or lot basis or system .
e. quality incentive allowance .
a preestablished increase in payment to the contractor for a contract bid item in which a superior level of quality and workmanship determined statistically was performed .
f. random sampling .
a selection procedure in which all potential samples have an equal chance of being selected for testing .
quality control a .
quality control .
operational techniques and activities used to control the quality of a product or service in order to satisfy given requirements .
b .
quality control plan .
a contractor prepared plan describing the type and frequency of contractor inspection sampling and testing necessary to measure and control the various properties governed by the contract specifications .
rental rates hourly rates approved by the department for furnishing and operating various types of construction equipment .
resources the labor equipment and material necessary to perform work on a contract bid item or other contract work element .
responsive bid a bid that meets all requirements of the proposal and instructions to bidders .
responsible bidder a bidder that the department determines has the skill ability and integrity to perform the project .
the departments standards of responsibility are in section num arm .
rightofway land property or interest acquired for or devoted to a highway .
road highway or street a public way for vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
roadbed the graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
num edition definitions and terms num num roadside the areas between the outside edges of the shoulders and the rightofway boundaries and other areas within the right of way not intended for motorized travel .
roadside development those items necessary for a .
the preservation of landscape materials and features b .
the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching composting and the placing of other ground covers and suitable plantings and c. other improvements that increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
unless specified different in the contract the following are the roadside areas a .
area num .
areas with slopes of num and flatter .
b .
area num .
areas with slopes steeper than num .
c. area num .
a numfoot num m wide strip adjacent and parallel to the finished pavement along both roadsides .
roadway the portion of a highway within the limits of construction .
shoulder the portion of the roadway adjacent to the traveled way for accommodation stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk that portion of the right of way constructed for pedestrian use .
special provisions modifications to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project .
specifications the compilation of provisions in this book the supplemental specifications and special provisions for the performance of the project .
state the state of montana acting through its authorized representative .
structures bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features that may be encountered in the work .
subcontractor an individual or legal entity to which a contractor subcontracts assigns or otherwise disposes of any part of the work .
this includes subcontractors at any contract tier such as sub subcontractors etc .
subgrade the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
num definitions and terms num edition num substructure all of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
superintendent the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
superstructure the entire structure except the substructure as defined in this section .
supplemental specifications approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
surety the legal entity or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor see section num mca .
surface course one or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer is sometimes called the wearing course .
titles or headings the titles or headings of the divisions sections and subsections are for convenience of reference and do not have any bearing on their interpretation .
topsoil topsoil under section num is soil that supports normal plant growth .
topsoil under section num is soil that supports normal plant growth and meets subsection num requirements .
traveled way or present traveled way the existing paved or graveled roadway section in use including the shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
also referred to as the ptw .
unbalanced bid a. materially unbalanced .
a bid that generates a reasonable doubt that award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid results in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
b .
mathematically unbalanced .
a bid containing lump sum or unit bid items that do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
unusually severe weather unusually severe weather is weather that is more severe than the adverse weather anticipated for the season or location involved .
winter shutdown all calendar days from november numth through april numth inclusive .
work the furnishing of all resources necessary to complete the project .
num edition definitions and terms num num working day all days are considered working days except saturdays no work days and days on which the contractor is specifically required by the contract to suspend construction operations .
working days will be charged during no work days for each day construction activities occur that have any impact on the traveling public exclusive of traffic flowing unimpeded on approved detours or emergency and maintenance repairs to the project when the time requirements under subsection num are met .
working drawings stress sheets shop drawings erection plans falsework plans framework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or other supplementary plans or similar data that the contractor is required to submit to the project manager .
num definitions and terms num edition num num section num bidding requirements and conditions num jointventure bids execute a declaration of joint venture and power of attorney form available from the departments contract plans bureau to submit bid packages for highway construction as a joint venture .
designate the joint venture business name and specifically authorize a person to execute all bid packages and contracts with the transportation commission on behalf of all individuals and legal entities of the joint venture .
authorize this person to receive all monies due under the contract and issue binding receipts and releases with the department .
include joint venture affidavits in the proposal .
joint venture firms do not need to separately incorporate .
num contents of bid package the bid package ordinarily includes the following num .
proposal num .
dbe requirements num .
schedule of items num .
special provisions num .
current supplemental provisions num .
wage rate schedules num .
other documents included by reference but not attached num .
fhwa form num required contract provisions for federalaid construction contracts when applicable num .
eeo affirmative action requirements on federal and federalaid construction contracts and num .
contract plans .
num contractor registration montana law requires all contractors to register with the montana department of labor industry .
register before executing a contract on federalaid projects .
register before submitting a bid on statefunded projects .
contact the department of labor industry at num num for more information .
num issuance of proposals the department reserves the right to refuse to issue a bid package to a bidder for any of the following reasons a .
uncompleted work that the department determines might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work b .
default under previous contracts c. failure to reimburse the department for an overpayment made on any contract or contracts after written notification of the overpayment that is due d. failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all bills due for labor and material on any contract in force at the time of issuance of proposals e. unsatisfactory performance on a previous or current contract or f. misconduct that is of such a serious nature as to adversely affect the contractors ability to perform future work .
request bid packages from the department .
num bidding requirements num edition and conditions num pay the department the sum stated in the invitation for bids for each copy of the bid package .
num quantities of work in the proposal submit unit bid prices for the estimated quantities .
estimated quantities may be increased or decreased under the contract .
payment is made for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished and accepted under the contract .
num examination of documents and site of work examine the proposed work site including the existing field staking and documents before submitting a proposal .
submitting a proposal is an affirmative statement by the bidder that the bidder has examined the site and is satisfied with the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and the bid package requirements .
the department is not bound by any statement or representation concerning conditions or description of the work unless included in the bid package .
do not rely on oral explanations or instructions given by department employees or agents before award of the contract .
accept these as nonbinding oral explanations or instructions and relying on them is solely at the bidders risk .
mass diagrams and dirt runs are for informational purposes only and are not part of the contract .
the department does not guarantee the accuracy of these documents .
the information contained in the mass diagrams and dirt runs are only one example of how the project can be built .
the contractor is responsible for using its own means and methods for determining how the job is to be built .
the contractors reliance on these documents is at their own risk .
immediately submit any request for an explanation of the meaning or interpretation of the bid package to the departments q a forum found at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov .
the records of any subsurface investigation conducted by the department are available for inspection as a public document .
when not included in the bid package inspect available records at the materials bureau bridge bureau in helena or the district where the project is located .
the records of subsurface investigations are not a part of the bid package or contract but are available to all bidders for informational purposes only .
there is no warranty or guaranty either expressed or implied that the subsurface investigation records disclose the actual conditions that will be encountered during the performance of the work .
department subsurface investigation results may differ from a bidders independent subsurface evaluation due to different sampling techniques the date of the investigation etc .
using or relying on department subsurface investigations is at the bidders risk .
the bidder must perform and rely on its independent subsurface evaluation made before submitting a bid proposal .
submittal of a bid is an affirmative statement that an independent subsurface evaluation was made and department subsurface investigations were not relied on .
individual test boring log data included in the departments subsurface investigation records apply only to that particular boring taken on the date indicated .
the character of any material or conditions between or around test borings on the date of the site examination is not conclusive .
submission of a bid waives any potential claim of the above including a claim of justifiable reliance on such information or materials .
do not take advantage of an apparent error omission or ambiguity in the bid package .
upon discovery immediately submit the discovery to the departments q a forum found at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov if an error omission or ambiguity exists and why it appears erroneous omitted or ambiguous .
advise bidders submitting a subcontract quotation of this obligation and num edition bidding requirements num and conditions num clarify their responsibility to include this information with their subcontract quotation .
the department will clarify the error omission or ambiguity and if necessary and possible issue an addendum to all prospective bidders before opening bid packages .
do not submit a bid proposal or a subcontract quote without receiving clarification .
failure to provide written notification is a waiver of the error omission or ambiguity and additional compensation or contract time will not be allowed .
the department for most projects prepares preliminary bid packages plans and special provisions to provide advance notice to prospective bidders of the general requirements for those projects .
preliminary packages are not in final form and there may be substantial changes between the preliminary and final bid package released for bid letting .
use the preliminary packages only for general familiarization with the project .
request final bid packages for use in bidding .
do not base any bid on a preliminary package .
num bidding requirements submit bids only using the electronic bid system ebs that generates the required proposal schedule of items dbe requirements and indicates acknowledgement of addenda if applicable .
a .
distribution procedures .
the department will make electronic bid files and addendum files available to prospective bidders .
bidders may obtain ebs packages free of charge from the departments contractors system internet site httpwww.mdt.mt.gov .
hardcopy bid packages are available for a fee from the contract plans bureau .
b .
bidding requirements .
ensure bids submitted using the ebs format contain a proposal guarantee an ebs generated proposal schedule of items and dbe requirements when applicable .
ensure the ebs schedule of items is a single continuous printout for each individual bid evidenced by all schedule of items sheets having the same check number .
written changes to the schedule of items or a bidders nonsubmission of every page from the expedite bid ebs file including all schedule of items pages and all dbe pages automatically renders the bid nonresponsive and the bid will not be read or considered .
acknowledge addenda using the amended ebs project file to generate the proposal schedule of items and dbe requirements .
the printout indicates acknowledgment of receipt of addenda when the correct project file is used .
return a computer disk containing the complete project files for all projects bid with the bid package .
it is the bidders responsibility to ensure that they acquire and apply addenda files when applicable .
c. determination of bid responsiveness .
bids are opened at the designated time and inspected to determine if the following requirements are met num .
schedule of items .
unit prices are provided for all required bid items .
a complete and verifiable schedule of items is provided .
each sheet of the schedule of items must contain the same check number to ensure that the unit bid prices correspond with the total .
there are no written changes to the schedule of items .
num .
proposal guarantee .
the bid bond is on the most current version of the department furnished form is signed and sealed in the proper places a copy of the agents power of attorney for the insurance company is attached and contains the correct and complete project number all signatures are original stamped signatures are unacceptable .
if using bid submission via internet and bid expresstm a qualified surety company must verify the contractor bond .
num bidding requirements num edition and conditions num an electronic bid bond may be filed in lieu of completing the paper bid bond area of the proposal bid form .
submit on the most current departmentprovided hard copy electronic bid bond form cpb_num_num .
num .
addenda .
all addenda are acknowledged by using the correct electronic file .
num .
proposal .
the proposal is signed and notarized in the designated places or in acceptable digital format and all signatures are original stamped signatures are unacceptable .
a bid is nonresponsive if any of the above requirements is not met .
for nonresponsive bids only the contractors name and the reason for the non responsiveness determination will be announced at the letting .
the department retains nonresponsive bids .
submission of a bid is a statement by the bidder that sufficient time was available to adequately prepare a proposal and conduct a complete investigation of the work site and all contract documents .
num rejection of bid proposals the commission reserves the right to reject bid proposals waive technicalities or advertise for new proposals .
a proposal is irregular and will be rejected as nonresponsive for any of the following a .
failure to complete the bid bond form or proposal provided by the department by all specified persons including notaries in the correct blocks .
b .
there are unauthorized additions conditional or alternate bids or irregularities that make the bid package incomplete indefinite or ambiguous .
c. the proposals for two or more projects advertised separately are connected or made contingent one upon the other so that the proposal for one project carries a provisional deduction in the bid price on one or more of the other projects .
d. any unauthorized provisions are added reserving the right to accept or reject an award or to enter into a contract pursuant to an award .
e. more than one proposal for the same work from an individual firm corporation partnership or joint venture under the same or different name is submitted using the same format .
f. evidence of collusion among bidders exists .
participants in collusion will not receive recognition as bidders either singly or as a joint venture for future department work until reinstated as qualified bidders .
g. bidder fails to properly complete and sign by original signatures on the most current departmentfurnished proposal and appropriate bid bond forms .
stamped signatures are not authorized .
h. failure to acknowledge receipt of electronic addenda by using the correct electronic files .
i .
failure to provide a complete schedule of items or an unverifiable schedule of items .
each sheet of the schedule of items must contain the same check number to ensure that the unit bid prices correspond with the total .
j .
the bidder does not submit all pages from the expedite bid ebs file .
a bid proposal is considered irregular and may be rejected as nonresponsive for any of the following a .
the departmentfurnished proposal is altered .
b .
bidder fails to include a name and mailing address .
c. the unit prices contained in the proposal are mathematically andor materially unbalanced .
d. information entered in the proposal by the bidder is not legible .
num edition bidding requirements num and conditions num e. there are changes in the proposal such as erasures strikeouts and whiteouts that are not initialed in ink .
f. noncompliance with the dbe requirements .
if bid expresstm software indicates an error the department will determine if the proposal is nonresponsive .
num proposal guaranty make the proposal guaranty unconditionally payable to the department for no less than num of the proposal .
provide the guaranty by bid bond with the proposal .
the guaranty must be a bid bond executed by a surety corporation authorized to do business in the state of montana .
num delivery and public opening of proposals bid proposals are opened and read publicly at the place time and date specified in the invitation for bids .
deliver by the date and hour set for the opening of bid proposals to the department officials conducting the bid opening .
bid proposals received after the specified time are returned to the bidder unopened .
the clock designated by the department bid opening officials determines the bid opening time .
do not submit bid proposals by facsimile machines .
a proposal not properly addressed and identified is returned to the bidder after it is opened .
a .
bid submission by sealed envelope .
place the bid proposal in a sealed envelope plainly marked to indicate the contents .
proposals must be received by the departments official conducting the bid opening before the bid opening time .
bids may be delivered to montana department of transportation contract plans bureau num prospect avenue helena montana .
if mailed the departments mailing address is montana department of transportation contract plans bureau p.o .
box num helena montana num .
the contractor is solely responsible for the proposals delivery to the departments official conducting the bid prior to bid opening .
b. internet bid submission via the internet and bid expresstm .
optional bid submission procedure num .
access to the electronic bidding information is available on bid expresstm at www.bidx.com and the mdt contractors system internet site at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov .
num .
when installing the bid program enter the vendor code that was issued by the department .
before running the electronic bidding programs read the online help documentation for the expedite software .
num .
acknowledge all addenda in the electronic bid submitted .
num .
select tools and then check bid from the windows expedite menu to check the bid and ensure there are no errors prior to submitting the electronic bid .
the electronic bid may be changed and resubmitted electronically to bid express tm as many times as desired before the advertised cutoff time .
the last bid submitted for a given bid opening as of the cutoff time will be the only bid considered .
if a bidder chooses to submit proposal using bid expresstm and also submits a hard copy bid the electronic copy of the bid controls .
num .
make no claim against the department in the event it is unable to submit its bid to bid expresstm andor bid expresstm is unable to submit the bids to the department .
the department reserves the right to postpone or cancel the public opening and reading of bids in the event of internet bid expresstm or department technical difficulties .
num bidding requirements num edition and conditions num num withdrawal of proposals submit withdrawal requests to the department in writing before the time set for opening bid proposals .
a bidder may withdraw any proposal in person or through an authorized agent before any bid proposal on that project is read .
if a bidder discovers a material factual not judgmental mistake in its bid after the bids have been opened the bidder understands and agrees that it may either perform the contract as originally bid or request permission from the transportation commission to withdraw its bid .
the request must be received by the contract plans bureau no later than num p.m. num business days after the day of the bid opening not counting the day of the opening .
the notice must be by a notarized affidavit under penalty of false swearing signed by the bidder and accompanied by all worksheets used in the preparation of the bid requesting relief from forfeiture of the bid bond and the responsibilities of award .
the affidavit must describe the specific errors how they were made and who made them and must certify that the worksheets provided are those that were used in preparing the erroneous bid .
the department will make its recommendation to the commission who will review the request to determine if a mistake occurred was material and factual and whether the bid should be allowed to be withdrawn .
if the commission does not concur in the error or determines that the error has not been sufficiently proven it may award the contract .
if the bidder refuses to execute the contract as it was bid the bid bond will be forfeited as stated under section num mca .
num debarment federal statutes and regulations adopted pursuant to federal statutes require that any firm or individual submitting a bid on a federalaid project certify compliance with part xi of fhwa form num required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts and that firm or individual must obtain and furnish the department certification that all subcontractors material suppliers vendors and other lower tier participants used are in compliance with part xi of fhwa form num .
make certification part of each subcontract material supply agreement purchase order and other covered lower tier transaction .
covered lower tier transactions include primary material purchases for contract items incorporated into the work .
the departments debarment policies and procedures begin at section num arm .
num materials guaranty the successful bidder may be required to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples to be tested for conformance with the contract requirements .
include the costs of furnishing the statements and samples in the bid .
num reserved num venue in the event of any dispute concerning a project whether over its advertisement bidding award execution or claim any litigation filed by or against the department has venue only in lewis and clark county .
num consent to contract provisions the submission of a bid is an affirmative statement that the bidder and its proposed subcontractors consent to the entire bid package provisions upon which the bidder has submitted its bid .
that consent extends to all portions of the bid package and applies to all the bidders subcontractors .
do not submit a bid proposal unless consent to all the bid package provisions is given .
num edition bidding requirements num and conditions num num public works contract department projects under these specifications are public works contracts .
projects under these specifications require contractors to provide all resources necessary to complete the project fully complying with its plans and specifications .
they are not sales nor are they sales of goods as those terms are used in montanas uniform commercial code ucc .
the ucc particularly its chapter num does not apply to these projects and the contractor concurs with that by submitting its bid .
num bidding requirements num edition and conditions num num section num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals bid proposals will be compared on the basis of the summation of the item total prices shown in the bid schedule .
num award of contract the contract will be awarded within num calendar days after the bid opening to the lowest responsive responsible and qualified bidder whose bid proposal complies with all the requirements .
the successful bidder will be notified in writing of the acceptance of the proposal and the award of the contract .
if the contract is not awarded within num calendar days all bid proposals are void .
the commission can extend the numday time period .
in the event two or more qualified bids are exactly equal for the lowest bid the successful bidder will then be determined by totaling the major bid items listed on their schedule of items .
the contract will be awarded to the bidder having the lowest total of major bid items .
a major bid item is defined in subsection num .
num assignment of claims in consideration of being awarded the contract the contractor on its own behalf and on behalf of its subcontractors assigns to the department all claims or causes of action for any antitrust law violations or damages arising there from as to goods materials and services purchased under the terms of the contract or any change order that may result from the contract .
num cancellation of award the award of the contract may be canceled at any time before the execution of the contract by all parties without liability against the department .
num release of proposal guaranty all proposal guaranties will be void immediately following opening and checking of the proposals .
the successful bidders proposal guaranty will be void after a satisfactory contract bond has been furnished and the contract has been executed .
num contract bond furnish an executed contract bond or bonds in a sum equal to the contract amount under subsection num .
use a form provided by the department and executed by a surety company authorized by law to transact business in the state .
the contract bond will remain in effect until the certificate of completion is executed and the contract is accepted by the commission plus any time period specified by montana law .
the statutory time for filing claims against the contract bond is num calendar days from the date of the commission acceptance of the project .
see sections num to num mca .
num execution and approval of contract return to the contract plans bureau in helena no later than num p.m. on the numth calendar day after receipt not counting the date of receipt of the contract documents num .
the signed contract and num .
the contract bond .
a proposal is not binding unless all the above requirements have been satisfied .
do not begin work before a .
the contract is executed b .
contract bond is completed and num award and execution num edition of contract num c. evidence of the required insurance is provided .
the contract bond and insurance are subject to legal approval after execution by the contractor and surety .
num failure to execute contract upon failure to execute the contract and file acceptable bonds within num calendar days after receipt of the contract under section num mca the award will be canceled and the proposal guaranty forfeited .
award may then be made to the next lowest responsive responsible and qualified bidder or the work may be readvertised .
if due to circumstances entirely beyond the control of the bidder the bidder is unable to file acceptable bonds and insurance policies within the time specified above the commission at its sole discretion may waive cancellation of the award and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty .
num bid documents num general the following requirements apply when submission of bid documents is required by the contract .
the department agrees to safeguard the bid documents and all information contained therein against disclosure to the fullest extent permitted by law .
num bid documentation inventory affidavit and escrow agreement use the most current department form csbnum_numa bid documentation inventory affidavit with the bid documentation .
follow all directions for the bid documentation listed on form csbnum_numa .
use the most current department form csbnum_numb escrow agreement when completing the bid documents escrow procedure .
follow all directions for the escrow procedure listed on form csbnum_numb .
modified versions of the escrow agreement provided by the escrow agent may be used with written approval by the ces engineer .
the forms must be signed by an authorized agent for the bidder .
these forms are available at the following web page httpwww.mdt.mt.govpublicationsforms.shtmlcontract .
num escrow of bid documents once identified as the apparent low bidder on a contract requiring submission of bid documents submit all bid documents to an approved escrow agent located in helena montana .
convert electronically formatted information into paper copies .
include these paper copies as part of the bid documentation .
provide written notification including copies of the bid documentation inventory affidavit and the escrow agreement to the contract plans bureau within num business days including the day of bid opening .
the copy of the escrow agreement submitted to the contract plans bureau must contain signatures from the escrow agent and representative of the bidder .
the department will review the documents and return a copy of the escrow agreement with a signature of a department representative to the escrow agent .
an approved escrow agent includes any business such as a banking institution or other bonded storage facility which provides a deposit box vault or other secure accommodation .
place the bid documents and completed bid documentation inventory affidavit in the container provided by the escrow agent .
clearly label the face of the container bid documents and include the bidders name the date of submittal the contract name and the contract number .
if the apparent low bidder for whatever reason is not awarded the contract the apparent second low bidder will be told they have num business days from the date of its verbal notification followed immediately in writing to comply with the above requirements .
num edition award and execution num of contract num num bid responsiveness the copies of the bid documentation inventory affidavit and escrow agreement submitted as part of the escrow notification will be reviewed for completeness and responsiveness .
if the forms are incomplete or are not submitted the bid will be considered nonresponsive .
the second low responsive responsible bid will then be reviewed and the bidder will be required to meet the above requirements .
num release of bid documents to the department the bid documents in escrow are and will remain the property of the contractor unless a certified claim is filed by the contractor or litigation or arbitration is initiated under the contract .
in the event that the contractor submits a certified claim or litigation or arbitration is initiated under the contract the bid documents included in the escrow become the property of the department for its use specifically including use in preparing for and conducting of all claims disputes arbitration or litigation .
failure to submit all bid documents as defined in subsection num and the bid documentation inventory affidavit as required or failure to include the items indicated by the bidder on the bid documentation inventory affidavit in the documents that are placed in escrow will be a material breach of the contract is a failure to comply with a condition precedent to filing a claim or lawsuit acts as a total and final waiver of all claims or disputes involving matters that would have been included e.g .
claims of delay changed site conditions loss of productivity etc .
and subjects the contractor to action under section num arm et seq .
upon the departments receipt of the bid documents the contractor will be notified and must have a representative present during the opening unless the representation is waived .
failure to appear at the date and time designated for the opening will be considered a waiver .
num release of bid documents to the contractor except as provided for in subsection num the bid documents will remain in the storage location during the life of the contract .
after a certificate of completion has been issued for the contract the department will notify the escrow agent and the contractor that the bid documents may be released .
it is the contractors responsibility to obtain necessary signatures and retrieve the bid documents from the escrow agency .
num method of measurement and basis of payment escrow of bid documents is measured and paid as lump sum .
payment will be made on the first progress estimate .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work under the contract .
num award and execution num edition of contract num num section num scope of work num intent of contract furnish all resources required to complete the work under the contract within the specified time and for the amount bid .
num differing site conditions suspension of work and significant changes in the character of work num differing site conditions during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions must promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the project manager will investigate the conditions .
if the project manager determines that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the project manager will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for any effects caused on unchanged work .
num suspensions of work ordered by the project manager if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the project manager in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation andor contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor must submit to the project manager in writing a request for adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment in the request .
upon receipt the project manager will evaluate the contractors request .
if the project manager agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the project manager will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the project managers determination as to whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of the contract .
num significant changes in the character of work the project manager reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete num scope of work num edition num the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations do not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit on unperformed work will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment must be agreed upon before the work is performed .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the project manager may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
the term significant change applies when one or more of the following circumstances is met a .
when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction .
b .
when a major item of work as defined in subsection num is increased in excess of num or decreased below num of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity will apply only to that portion in excess of num of the original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num to the actual amount of work performed .
c. when an item of work not defined as a major item in subsection num is increased in excess of num or decreased below num of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity will apply only to that portion in excess of num of the original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num to the actual amount of work performed .
num change orders change orders will include the following information a .
a description of the altered increased or decreased work or description of other change necessitating the change order b .
an estimate of the types and quantities of work to be performed and a listing of the agreed prices and contract unit prices at which payment will be made and c. contract time adjustments in accordance with subsection num .
change orders must be executed by both parties to the contract and become a part of the contract .
payment for the work will be made for the actual quantities of work performed at the prices specified in the change order .
num extra work perform unanticipated work not included in the contract if the work is related to the contract items and is ordered before the final acceptance date .
perform extra work as directed .
payment for extra work is made in accordance with subsection num .
num miscellaneous work this is any minor work or material that is necessary to the work .
miscellaneous work as provided for in the contract is measured by the respective unit for either the material or work performed as directed in writing by the project manager .
payment for miscellaneous minor work is at agreed prices or on a force account basis .
num edition scope of work num num num maintenance of work num general perform maintenance work on completed and uncompleted parts of the project until approval in accordance with subsection num .
maintenance includes but is not limited to the following num .
patching chuck holes with asphalt mix num .
reshaping the subgrade side slopes ditch sections or aggregate courses as necessary num .
cleaning debris from drainage courses culverts and inlets num .
removing rocks or earth from the roadway and ditch sections num .
removing debris resulting from construction activities num .
providing access to residences businesses and roads and keeping the present accesses open num .
repair or replace minor damaged parts of the work num .
repair or replace extensive damage not by contractor negligence in accordance with subsection num num .
maintenance of the constructed roadway in accordance with subsection num num .
disposing of removed matter num .
maintenance of irrigation water in accordance with subsection num and num .
other maintenancetype work not specifically described but necessary for the maintenance and protection of traffic or of completed and uncompleted portions of the project .
maintenance work performed before approval in accordance with subsection num is incidental to other contract items .
num failure to properly maintain roadway or structure the project manager will immediately notify the contractor if it fails to maintain the project .
failure to begin to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours of notification may result in the department performing the required repair .
the cost of the repair will be deducted from monies due or to become due to the contractor or otherwise be billed to the contractor .
contract time being charged .
contract time will be charged starting on the day of the departments initial notification and will continue until the repairs are made and the project manager approves the repairs .
num maintenance for traffic and detours a .
maintenance for traffic .
keep the road open to traffic during the work or provide detour roads as specified or directed .
maintain the work under construction to accommodate traffic .
construct and maintain all accesses to parking lots garages businesses residences farms etc .
the cost of this work is incidental to other items of the contract .
provide traffic control meeting the approved traffic control plan section num and the mutcd .
b .
special detours .
when the contract has the bid item detour construct maintain and remove it includes constructing and maintaining the detour including constructing and removing temporary bridges pipes and associated work and obliterating the detour road .
do not use all or any portion of an existing structure as defined in subsection num without the engineers approval .
do not modify existing structures or construct temporary num scope of work num edition num structures without department approval before starting work .
this work is incidental to the contract item .
the department will provide the rightofway for temporary detours or bridges specified in the contract .
num maintenance for traffic during work suspensions a .
temporary suspension .
make passable and open to traffic all portions of the project connections and temporary roadways before temporary work suspensions .
maintain parts of the project connections temporary roadways and detours under traffic at contractor expense during work suspensions .
b .
winter suspension .
be responsible for all traffic control and maintenance during winter weather shutdowns including the time between november numth and april numth .
be responsible for all snow removal sanding and deicing for all roadways not completed through the first lift of plant mix surfacing .
furnish all necessary supervision personnel and equipment to maintain the road in a safe condition and at the highest level of service to traffic .
the department is not responsible for any repairs or maintenance to the project that results from snow plowing sanding and deicing on any roadway not completed through top lift of plant mix surfacing .
the contractor may request that the department furnish all resources to perform snowplowing and sanding deicing during winter suspension .
this work would be detailed in a written agreement .
be responsible for all maintenance traffic control or other work not detailed in the agreement .
reimburse the department under an accounts receivable for all department plowing sanding and deicing expenses according to the terms of the signed agreement .
attend a meeting scheduled by the department to review the project to develop the agreement details prior to the winter suspension .
inspect the project at least once every num calendar days .
submit form csbnum_num_num to the project manager within num calendar days of the inspection .
failure to maintain the project under these requirements will invoke subsection num .
repair or replace all work and materials lost or damaged due to temporary use of the project .
maintenance work for acts of god or acts of the public enemy or that are outside the contractors control during work suspensions is paid for at contract unit prices or as extra work .
num reserved num maintenance of irrigation water construct or move irrigation structures boxes channel changes and culverts to maintain irrigation water flow at contractor expense .
do not shut off irrigation water in an irrigation ditch without the watermaster or ditch owners written permission .
num material and property rights num rights in and use of materials found on the project apply for and obtain the project managers written approval prior to using excavated materials for other contract items .
designate in the request which contract item the second payment is for .
only one item will be eligible for payment when more than one field measurement by the department would be required .
replace the removed material with acceptable material at contractor expense .
num edition scope of work num num num use of department property do not use department property outside the project limits for contractor operations such as staging without department approval .
submit an encroachment permit to the departments maintenance division for approval .
the encroachment permit request form is available from the departments website or the project manager .
be responsible for all requirements within the encroachment permit and obtain associated environmental permits prior to the use of the property .
restore the property in accordance with the contract and encroachment permit requirements no later than the encroachment permit end date .
obtain seed blend mix designs and allowed seeding time frames from the project manager for any revegetation required to the area .
repair damaged areas in a timely manner .
the department will revoke the use of department property if the requirements of the contract or the encroachment permit are not being met .
the use of department property outside the project limits including any required restoration or repair work is not measured for payment .
contractor failure to fulfill the encroachment requirements is cause for the department to perform or have corrective actions performed and deduct those costs from monies due or that may become due the contractor .
num final cleaning up clean the highway borrow pits and all ground used in performance of the work of all rubbish debris excess materials temporary structures and equipment before final acceptance .
meet the requirements of subsection num for final cleanup of borrow and aggregate sources .
the final cleanup work of the project area and the pits borrow areas or quarries is not paid for directly but is incidental to other contract items .
specify the conditions for final cleanup in all landowner agreements .
complete all cleanup conditions before final project acceptance .
num value engineering proposals cost savings generated on the contract from cost reduction proposals offered by the contractor and approved by the department will be shared .
the contractor is encouraged to submit proposals for modifying the contract that reduces the total cost of construction .
the cost reduction proposal must not impair the essential functions or characteristics of the project including but not limited to service life economy of operation ease of maintenance reliability desired appearance and safety .
submit the proposal in writing and include the following information num .
a description of both the existing work and proposed changes for performing the work with a discussion of the comparative advantages and disadvantages num .
an itemization of the necessary changes to the contract if the proposal is accepted num .
a detailed cost estimate for performing the work under the existing contract and under the proposed change detailing quantities and dollar amounts for each work item num .
an estimate of the effect the proposed changes would have on other costs to the department num .
a time frame within which the department must make a decision num .
the dates project numbers and the action of the department if the proposal was previously submitted and num .
a statement of the effect implementation of the proposal would have on the contract completion time .
the department is not required to consider a proposal or be liable to the contractor for failure to accept or act on a proposal submitted under this specification including delays to the num scope of work num edition num work attributable to the proposal .
proposals that are similar to a change in the contract that are under consideration or have been adopted by the department before the submittal will not be accepted .
the department reserves the right to make these changes without compensation to the contractor .
continue to perform the work according to the contract requirements until the department has taken final action on the proposal .
consider the proposal rejected if the departments final decision is not received within the time frame specified in the contractors submittal .
the department will determine the acceptability and the estimated net savings in construction costs from the adoption of all or part of a proposal .
the department will disregard the contract unit prices if these prices do not represent a fair measure of the value of work to be performed or to be deleted .
the departments costs for reviewing and implementing proposals including any increased costs to the department resulting from its application will be deducted from the total estimated cost saving to arrive at the net savings .
costs incurred by the department during a preliminary review will not be charged to the contractor .
if the proposal is advanced to the detailed review stage costs incurred by the department during the detailed review stage will be shared equally by the department and the contractor .
the submittal of a formal proposal constitutes the departments authority to deduct these costs from any monies due or that may become due to the contractor under the contract .
the department costs for researching and defending claims related to an accepted ve proposal will not be shared equally .
these costs will be deducted from progress payments .
proposals accepted by the department in whole or in part will be by a change order .
the change order will incorporate the changes in the contract necessary to implement the proposal and will include any conditions placed on the approval by the department .
the change order will establish the estimated net savings in the cost of performing the work attributable to the proposal and provide for payment of num of the estimated net savings to the contractor .
acceptance of proposals does not extend the contract time unless specifically provided for in the change order .
the payment amount specified in the change order constitutes full compensation to the contractor for the proposal and the performance of the work .
the department reserves the right to apply a proposal for general use on other contracts administered by the department .
when an accepted proposal is applied for general use only the contractor who submitted the initial proposal is eligible for compensation and this compensation applies only to those contracts awarded to the contractor before submission of the accepted proposal .
proposals that are identical or similar to previously submitted proposals are eligible for consideration and compensation under this specification if the proposals were not previously adopted for use in other contracts administered by the department .
subject to these provisions the department reserves the right to use all or any part of any submitted proposal without obligation or compensation to the contractor .
this specification applies only to the contractor awarded the contract .
no consideration will be given to and no payment made for any claims for additional compensation for changed conditions that are attributable to the approved proposal .
num section num control of work num authority of the engineer the engineer will decide all questions regarding the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed the rate of progress of the work the interpretation of the contract and the acceptable fulfillment of the contract .
contract time will continue to be charged during suspensions in accordance with subsection numa and subsection num .
a .
the engineer will suspend the work wholly or in part for failure to num .
correct conditions unsafe for project personnel or the public or num .
carry out provisions of the contract or num .
carry out orders of the engineer .
b .
work may also be partially or wholly suspended for num .
periods necessary due to unsuitable weather or num .
conditions unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or num .
any condition or reason determined to be in the departments interest .
num contractor furnished drawings and submittals the plans show the details of structures lines grades typical roadway cross sections location and design of structures and a summary of items appearing in the bid package .
furnish the department with contractor prepared working drawings that detail required work not included in the contract plans .
prepare all working drawings using english or metric units as shown in the contract .
upon request submit manufacture literature describing the materials and equipment to be incorporated into the work .
this requirement to submit drawings and literature applies to all items not specifically requested elsewhere in the contract .
the department has num business days to review the submittals before returning them to the contractor .
the department has num business days to review drawings returned for correction and that are resubmitted for review .
the department will consider extending contract time should the department review exceed the num business day review time limit and the delay can be shown to affect the contractors operation based on the current schedule .
the departments approval of the fabricators shop detail drawings is verification that the fabricator and contractor have correctly interpreted the intent of the contract documents and the details reflect the material and connection requirements .
approval does not relieve the contractor or fabricator of the responsibility for accuracy of design dimensions completeness or adherence to the requirements of the contract nor does it permit deviations from the contract without the departments documented consent .
the department will perform an engineering review of the first submittal at no cost to the contractor .
if the department determines that the submittal fails to meet generally accepted engineering standards it will return the submittal for correction .
the department will perform reviews of resubmittals with its own personnel when possible .
if department staff does not have time available to perform reviews at the departments sole option it may hire a consultant engineer from outside the department to finish the review process .
the department will charge for reviews of resubmittals for its staff time and at the rate charged by a hired engineering firm for its staff time if the department hires one .
the department will subtract the charges from contractor payments .
working drawings and falsework plans for facilities open to public travel are to be signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of montana before submittal to the project manager .
num control of work num edition num check and approve working drawings and submittals before submittal to the project manager .
show the contractors approval on the drawings and submittals .
num conformity with plans and specifications num general perform work and furnish materials to meet the contract requirements .
provide materials and workmanship uniform in character and meeting the plan dimensions and contract specifications .
when a contract item does not meet the contract requirements but is adequate to serve the design purpose the contractor will be notified in writing of the deficiency .
the contractor will be given the choice to remove and replace the deficient work correct the work at no expense to the department or accept a reduction in the contract unit price .
if the contractor chooses to accept a price reduction the project manager will determine the amount of the reduction and will apply the reduction using a line item adjustment to the contract .
the project manager may document the basis of the acceptance by change order .
when a contract item does not meet the contract requirements resulting in work inadequate to serve the design purpose remove and replace or correct the work by and at contractor expense .
num items designated for acceptance on a lot basis quality assurance contract items listed in table num are designated for acceptance on a lotbylot basis .
the elements in the table are evaluated and the contract items accepted under this provision .
all other contract items are evaluated for acceptance under the specifications covering those items .
an element of a lot will be evaluated for conformance when results of one or more tests are outside specified tolerance limits for that element .
all the individual test results in the lot for the element to be evaluated will be averaged and the percent of price reduction for the lot determined by the applicable formula .
num .
the formula p xn ar tu x f will be used if a maximum limit only is specified or when the average of the test values is above the midpoint of a specified band or above a job mix target value .
num .
the formula p tl ar xn x f will be used if a minimum limit only is specified or when the average of the several test values is below the midpoint of a specified band or below a job mix target value .
num edition control of work num num table num contract items evaluation elements elements evaluated item aggregate gradation fineness modulus compaction fracture selected surfacing x sand surfacing x crushed base course type a x x crushed base course type b x crushed top surfacing type a x x crushed top surfacing type b x crushed aggregate cover material x x cement treated base x x plant mix surfacing and base x x x portland cement concrete paving x x where p is the percent of reduction in contract unit price .
xn is the average of the several test values from samples taken from the lot with n indicating the number of values .
a is a variable factor to be used as n changes according to the following when n is num a num n is num a num n is num a num n is num a num and n is num a num .
r is the difference between the highest and lowest values in the group of several test results from the lot .
tu is the upper or maximum tolerance limit permitted by the specifications .
tl is the lower or minimum tolerance limit permitted by the specifications .
f is the price reduction factor to be applied for each element as shown in table num .
num control of work num edition num table num table of price reduction factors element factor f num size sieve num numinch num mm sieve and larger num no .
num to numinch num to num mm sieve inclusive except num size sieve num no .
num num mm sieve num fine aggregate fineness modulus num compaction noncommercial commercial num num compaction ctb num fracture num if p is less than num or a negative quantity the lot will be accepted as being in conformance .
if one or more elements for a contract item show a positive p value the positive values will be added and the resulting sum used to determine whether the lot is in conformance .
if the total p value is between num and num the project manager may require correction or accept the lot at a reduced price .
if p is greater than num the project manager may num .
require complete removal and replacement with specification material at contractor expense num .
require corrective action to bring the material into conformance at contractor expense or num .
where the finished product is found to be capable of initially performing the intended purpose but with a reduced service life expectancy permit leaving the material in place with an appropriate price adjustment calculated using a p value ranging between num and num .
immediately halt production following written notification when either of the following has occurred num .
three consecutive lots for a contract item have an individual total p value of num or more .
num .
beginning with the second lot when three tests within one lot have one or more elements outside the specification bands and the total p value for the lot is num or more .
make adjustments to bring the product within the specification limits before resuming production .
the contractor does not have the option of accepting a price reduction in lieu of producing specification material .
continued production of nonspecification material is prohibited .
material that is obviously defective may be isolated and rejected without regard to sampling sequence or location within a lot .
the project manager may allow the adjustments to be made without halting production .
num quality incentive allowance quality incentive allowances will be used to offset any price reductions .
all quality incentive allowance remaining after all price reductions have been deducted will be paid as a lump sum when all work on the item is complete .
a .
plant mix volumetric properties .
outlier determination and payment adjustments are for properties only .
if suspect test values are noted during construction the department will check plant production information test equipment processes calculations etc .
for num edition control of work num num errors .
if a problem is noted in the plant production sampling or other process controlled by the contractor the test result will be considered valid until production is complete .
if a problem is found with the testing or other department process the test result will be corrected or the test redone on material from the same sample if possible .
if a non correctable testing problem is found the result will be discarded if possible another sample will be taken and the new result used in its place .
if resampling is not possible the department may discard the test results for a sublot considered to be an outlier and recalculate the incentives and disincentives using the remaining results in the lot .
the department may follow standard qa guidelines to adjust lot sizes .
if no identifiable problem is found no corrections will be made until production is complete .
the following outlier evaluation only applies to projects with num or more qa sublots .
after all production of this product is completed the department will determine the standard deviation and mean of all the departments test results for each property representing material produced after the initial targets were set .
for each property test the z value is defined as the absolute value of the difference between the test value and the mean divided by the standard deviation .
if the average of the z values of the four properties in a sublot is greater than num the department may consider the sublot an outlier .
if more than one sublot outlier is identified in a lot the test results will not be considered outliers .
the department will not adjust for outliers within the last lot of production .
the department will discard the test results for a sublot considered to be an outlier and recalculate the incentives and disincentives using the remaining results in the lots .
the department will follow standard qa guidelines to adjust lot sizes .
b. density .
a num pay factor will be applied to the lots of plant mix surfacing when the average density for the lot xn is from num to num inclusive of the maximum specific gravity rices method and the range r is num or less .
c. ride specification .
the surface smoothness will be measured using the international roughness index iri .
the surface smoothness will be evaluated in each travel lane for the entire length of the project .
the following project category pay factors will be applied to each lane num control of work num edition num table num maximum allowable variance and divergence project category actual iri inchesmi pay factor category i num num num num num num iri num num num num num num num iri num num num num corrective action initially assumed zero pay category ii num num num num num num iri num num num num num num num iri num corrective action initially assumed zero pay category iii num num num num num num iri num num num num num num num iri num corrective action initially assumed zero pay notes num .
the pay factor is the same whether the plant mix is measured in english or metric units .
final pay factors are rounded to num decimals and used in calculating the value of the incentivedisincentive .
num .
the iri used to calculate the pay factor is the average of num runs on each travel lane evaluated .
the incentive or disincentive for surface smoothness will be calculated based on the ride category and entire length the project in each travel lane or measured section using the following equation .
the calculated value will be applied as a line item adjustment to the plant mix item on the estimate .
calculate the pay adjustment as follows pay adjustment pay factor num x l x unit cost pay factor calculate using the formulas for the appropriate project category l length of the lane measured unit cost use appropriate value from the table below num edition control of work num num table num unit cost category description unit costft .
i or iii reconstruction or rehabilitation section with num ft. or greater plant mix surfacing num i ii or iii reconstruction rehabilitation or overlay section with num to num ft. plant mix surfacing num i ii or iii num ft. or less thin lift overlay num note isolation lifts are not considered to be part of the surfacing section when determining the appropriate overlay depth .
incentives will be reduced based on the percentage of density tests that do not meet minimum plant mix pavement density requirements as determined by table num ride incentive reduction .
table num ride incentive reduction table project size percent of density tests not meeting specifications no reduction of ride incentive incentive reduced no incentive allowed num to num tons num to num failing tests num num num tons num to num failing tests num num note final incentive reductions are rounded to num decimals .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work under the contract .
num table of contractor submittals to assist in identifying all required submittals and clarifying the submittal process the contract may include a table of contractor submittals as a special provision .
the table may not be allinclusive and does not include submittals required by other special provisions .
provide all submittals required by the contract including those not listed in the table .
if a discrepancy exists submittals required by other special provisions in the contract take precedence over the table of contractor submittals .
electronic submittals to the department will be accepted if they are in a format accessible by the departments software and legible once opened .
verify acceptable electronic format types with the project manager prior to submittal .
when a specification requires submittal of a form submit the most current department form .
forms are available from the project manager or on the departments contractors system internet site at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov .
num coordination of contract provisions all documents referred to in subsection num contract are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is binding as though occurring in all .
they are complementary and describe and provide for a complete contract .
if a discrepancy exists the governing ranking is num control of work num edition num dimensions information num .
plan num .
question and answer forum information num .
calculated num .
special provisions num .
scaled num .
table of contractor submittals num .
plans num .
supplemental specifications num .
standard specifications num .
supplemental detailed drawings num .
detailed drawings num cooperation by contractor the department will furnish the contractor at least num sets of contract documents .
keep at least one set available on the project at all times .
cooperate with the engineer project manager the inspectors and other contractors during the contract work .
staff the project with a superintendent experienced in the type of work to be performed under the contract .
provide the superintendents name in writing before work starts .
ensure the superintendent when not physically on the project has the ability to communicate with department representatives by phone cell phone radio or other electronic means .
this contact must be maintained during all work suspensions including winter suspension .
maintain a contractor representative having the superintendents authority when the superintendent is not physically on the project or available for immediate communication .
notify the project manager in writing of the identity and contact information of that representative before that person assumes the authority .
give the superintendent the authority to execute orders or instructions of the project manager or authorized representative and the authority to obtain all resources to complete the contract including directing all subcontractor operations .
the project manager or authorized representative will issue instructions to the superintendent .
notify the project manager in writing at least num hours in advance of changes in the contractors representative .
failure to maintain a contractors superintendent or authorized representative on the project is cause for the project manager to stop work until one is assigned .
all costs associated with the delay are at contractor expense .
failure to maintain the ability to be contacted within num hours during times of work suspension will result in contract time being charged .
time will be charged for the day the department first attempts to make contact and each additional day that the contractors designated representative can not be contacted .
num cooperation with utilities underground overhead and nonutility facilities will be relocated or adjusted to clear conflicts with the contract .
some or all of these facilities may be relocated or adjusted during the contract work .
perform the contract work without damaging these facilities .
conduct onproject meetings on a weekly or biweekly basis with utility company representatives having facilities within the project limits and the project manager .
have the first meeting on the project before grading and excavation work begins to discuss the utility locations and progress on utility relocation work .
a list of utility representatives is furnished in the contract .
cooperate with utility owners in the removal and rearrangement of utility facilities to minimize interruption to utility service and duplication of work by the utility owner .
num edition control of work num num submission of a bid is an affirmative statement that the contractor has considered in the bid proposal all permanent and temporary utility facilities in the present or relocated positions as specified in the contract and as revealed by its site investigation .
no additional compensation is allowed for delays inconvenience or damage sustained due to interference from the utility facilities or their relocation work .
the contract indicates utility items to be relocated or adjusted and who is to perform the work .
the contract indicates the means of adjudication if any if the utility owners fail to relocate or adjust the facilities .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work for the project .
conduct the work without interfering with or hindering the progress or completion of the work by other contractors .
cooperate with other contractors working within the limits of the project .
each contractor involved must accept all liability financial or otherwise in connection with the contract and protect and hold harmless the department from damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project .
coordinate and sequence with the work of other contractors .
do not store materials tools machinery and other equipment in locations that interfere with the work of other contractors .
num construction stakes lines and grades maintain all survey controls required to control alignment and grade using survey personnel that are trained experienced and skilled in construction layout and staking .
do not hire department personnel to perform any survey work .
staking requests must be submitted on form csbnum_num_num .
department construction staking will be performed once for a given type and location .
if construction staking is required more than once submit an additional request to the project manager in writing with justification .
num department furnished survey and layout unless otherwise stated the department will furnish the following all right of way and monumentation surveys centerline coordinates benchmarks at the beginning end and near midpoint of the project construction stakes for establishing lines slopes and profile grade excluding finish grade control construction stakes for culverts structures and appurtenances wetland delineation preserve and protect department furnished control points and replace any that may be damaged displaced or removed .
replace any stakes that are obliterated by the contractor or by construction activities .
use provided controls as the field control to perform the work .
verify accuracy of all department furnished controls before any layout staking or grading is performed .
request all department furnished construction staking in writing .
num contractor survey and layout when required by the contract furnish all surveys and calculations necessary to layout and control the work to specified lines grades and tolerances .
provide surveys with accuracy and control equal to or better than the requirements of the montana department of transportation survey manual survey manual .
num control of work num edition num protect departmentfurnished control points .
set or reset destroyed control points conduct all rightofway and monumentation and public land monumentation surveys under the responsible charge of a registered land surveyor licensed in montana per section num mca .
the department will measure quantities for payment except items specified under pre determined quantities .
identify department set control points .
verify accuracy of the department furnished controls before any layout staking is performed .
a .
survey plan .
at least num calendar days prior to beginning survey work submit two copies of a survey plan to the project manager that details each proposed survey operation including num .
methods for initial layout to include accuracy references independent verification and checks .
num .
methods for control surveys to include number and type of controls for various items and measurement tolerances and accuracy .
the plan will be reviewed for compliance with the requirements of the survey manual .
the plan will be returned for correction if it does not meet or exceed requirements of the survey manual .
do not begin survey operations until the survey plan has been reviewed and approved by the project manager .
b. staking .
set all stakes necessary to control all work under the contract .
this includes but is not limited to bridges centerline stations clearing limits drainage structures fencing pavement reference points retaining structures rightofway lines and monuments sewers and waterlines signs pavement markings guardrail surfacing courses wetland delineation any other items of work included in the contract special conditions for specific layout items determine the slope stake catch point and provide copies of the slope staking notes to the department .
replace any stakes that are obliterated by the contractor or by construction activities .
do not begin grading operations until all slope stakes within a balance or at least num of the project have been set .
c. culverts .
take cross sections and profiles .
adjust culvert locations to match existing field conditions .
use form mdtconnum to submit the list of proposed culvert lengths to the project manager .
profiles cross sections adjustments and culvert lengths must be approved by the project manager before culverts are ordered .
d. bridges .
include a check of the bridge location relative to railroads streams roads or fixed features in the initial layout .
report discrepancies before performing any bridge construction activities .
survey controls for the following are required as a minimum foundations num edition control of work num num pile layout and cutoff all substructure elements girder seat elevations girder profiles deck forms and placement curbs rails joints e. plan errors .
notification must be made immediately of any apparent errors including but not limited to grade alignment location dimensions and quantities .
changes to the plans must be approved in writing by the project manager .
f. inspection .
the department may conduct inspections and random checks of any portion of the layout and control work .
the project manager may order work not performed with sufficient accuracy to be corrected .
no compensation will be allowed for corrective work .
the contractor is responsible for securing proper dimensions lines grades and elevations for all parts of the work and department inspection will not relieve the contractor of this responsibility .
g. survey notes .
submit survey notes including electronic notes to the project manager every num business days and upon completion of each survey function .
h. extra work .
survey required for extra work may be performed by the contractor or by the department as determined by the project manager .
i. predetermined pay quantities .
quantity sheet amounts for items described under sections num and num will be considered final quantities for payment .
requests for adjustment of bid schedule quantities for these items may be initiated by the contractor or by the project manager if evidence indicates the total actual required inplace quantity varies from the bid schedule quantities by more than num .
not taking cross section elevations during slope staking waives any adjustment to predetermined pay quantity items including borrow .
the party requesting the quantity adjustment must notify the other party in writing and furnish acceptable survey data and calculations to accurately establish any quantity adjustments .
load counts will not be considered acceptable for excavation and borrow items .
the quantity adjustment will only apply for the amount greater than num of the bid schedule quantity .
quantity adjustments due to changes ordered and approved in writing will be determined by measurement calculation or both .
these quantities will be added or deducted from bid schedule quantities without regard to the num limitations outlined herein .
num finish grade control provide all finish grade control required to establish the surfacing sections shown in the plans .
calculate the finish grades for the subgrade and each surfacing course using the plan information and the furnished staking notes .
special borrow is a surfacing course for finish grade control purposes .
run a level circuit to check the project benchmarks on each roadway section where finish grade is being controlled .
use a finish grade control method that provides positive horizontal and vertical alignment control for the required surfacing sections and ride quality .
num bridge survey the department will establish control points defining median or roadway centerline bridge centerline and benchmarks for elevation control .
num control of work num edition num establish and maintain all other survey controls required to control bridge alignment and grade meeting the plan dimensions and elevations using survey personnel trained experienced and skilled in construction layout and staking .
do not hire department personnel to perform survey work .
furnish horizontal and vertical control meeting the departments survey manual requirements .
furnish the original survey notes upon request .
furnish the notes showing the initial layout and primary controls and references and the method of independent check before starting work on the substructure units .
submit a copy of the structure excavation crosssection notes .
the project manager reserves the right to resurvey any pay item area .
make calculations from the plan information to control alignment and elevation .
correct all incorrect locations misalignments and incorrect elevations caused by contractor calculations layouts and surveys at contractor expense .
submit the proposed method of correction for approval .
do not begin the corrective work until the proposal has been reviewed and approved .
num materials and equipment furnish all materials and equipment required to perform this work .
keep survey notes in a standard field notebook written in a clear orderly neat manner meeting the departments survey manual requirements and standard surveying practice .
if survey notes are generated electronically produce notes in a format meeting these requirements .
the project manager will inspect the field notes for acceptance .
the finished notes become the departments property .
num survey tolerances and inspection the department will perform finish grade checks based on the following a. subgrade .
three random stations per numfoot num m section will be checked .
the numfoot num m section will be accepted if num or more of the points checked are within a vertical tolerance range of num to num foot num to num mm and the horizontal alignment is within num foot num mm of the true line .
if not within required tolerances rework the entire numfoot num m section .
three new random stations will be checked after rework is completed .
random checks will be performed for finish ditch grade control to ensure proper drainage .
b .
special borrow .
three random stations per numfoot num m section will be checked .
the numfoot num m section will be accepted if num or more of the points checked are within a vertical tolerance range of num to num foot num to num mm and the horizontal alignment is within num foot num mm of the true line .
if not within required tolerances rework the entire numfoot num m section .
three new random stations will be checked .
c. aggregate surfacing .
six random stations per numfoot numm section will be checked .
each numfoot numm section will be accepted if num percent or more of the points checked meet the requirements listed in table num and the horizontal alignment is within num foot num mm of the true line .
if not within required tolerances rework the entire numfoot num m section .
six new random stations will be checked .
sections that are obviously defective may or may not be checked prior to rejection .
a station check consists of centerline shoulders any break in cross slope and intermediate points not to exceed intervals of num feet num m. all elevation checks are taken on the material not on the finish grade control .
the project manager may increase or decrease the number of stations being checked .
after receiving notification of a completed section the project manager will perform the finish grade check by the close of the following business day .
contract time will be extended day for day without any other compensation for department caused delays beyond the allotted time to perform the finish grade check .
num edition control of work num num num method of measurement a .
finish grade control .
finish grade control is measured by the course foot km along the roadway centerline .
a course foot cr km is one foot num km for each twolane roadway including shoulders and ditches .
each traffic lane is considered as onehalf course foot onehalf cr km including the adjacent shoulder ditch parking turning median lanes and chain up areas .
the subgrade and each surfacing course requiring finish grade control are measured separately by the course foot cr km for each roadway section ramp intersecting roadway ptw connection temporary detour and each frontage road .
finished grade control for approaches is not measured for payment .
b .
contractor survey and layout .
contractor survey and layout is measured by the lump sum .
c. bridge survey .
bridge survey is measured by the lump sum .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made as follows pay item pay unit finish grade control course foot km contractor survey and layout lump sum bridge survey lump sum correct all deficient work due to incorrect finish grade control or bridge survey and reset reference points lost or destroyed by traffic or construction at contractor expense .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work under the contract .
num authority and duties of project manager each project will be staffed with a project manager who is the engineers direct representative .
the project manager has immediate charge of the engineering details of each construction project and is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the project .
the project manager can num .
reject defective material .
num .
suspend work being improperly performed .
num .
execute any authority delegated to the project manager by the engineer .
the project manager will be identified before work begins .
num authority and duties of inspectors department inspectors are authorized to a .
inspect all work being done and materials furnished .
inspection extends to all or any part of the work and to the preparation or manufacture of the materials to be used .
inspection does not relieve the contractors obligation to perform the work as specified in the contract .
b .
reject materials or suspend the work until the issue can be referred to and decided by the project manager .
inspectors technicians and aides can not a. revoke alter enlarge or relax any requirements of the contract .
b .
final approve or accept any portion of work .
c. issue instructions contrary to the contract .
num control of work num edition num only the project manager is authorized to make contract changes waive or alter the contract specifications and then only if it is made in writing .
ensure that the change waiver or alteration is in writing before taking action on it .
num inspection of work all work is subject to department inspection .
inspectors may not be at all work activities nor available for all work shifts for each work activity .
perform the work meeting the contract requirements regardless of inspection .
allow the inspector access to all parts of the work and furnish information and assistance necessary to make a complete and detailed inspection .
provide a safe environment for the inspector during the inspections .
inspection of the work does not relieve the contractor of its responsibility to meet the contract requirements .
the inspector can not waive contract requirements .
remove or uncover portions of the finished work as directed .
once examined restore the work to the contract requirements .
if the work is acceptable the uncovering or removing and replacing the covering or making good the parts removed is paid for as extra work .
if the work is unacceptable the uncovering removing and replacing the covering or making good the parts removed is at contractor expense .
work done or materials used without inspection by an authorized department inspector may be ordered removed and replaced at contractor expense .
when a government agency political subdivision a utility or railroad is to accept or pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract the organizations representatives may inspect the work .
the inspection does not make that entity a party to the contract nor permit it to interfere with the rights of either party to the contract .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work work not meeting the contract requirements is unacceptable unless determined acceptable under subsection num .
remove and replace any unacceptable work before final acceptance at contractor expense .
this requirement has full effect regardless of the fact that the unacceptable work or defective materials were known or overlooked by the inspector .
work done contrary to instructions received or beyond the plan limits or extra work done without the permission of the project manager will not be considered for payment .
work so done may be ordered removed restored or replaced at contractor expense .
neither the contractor nor the department incurs any liability by reason of any verbal directions or instructions received from the project manager .
the department will not be liable for extra materials furnished or used or for extra work or labor done unless required by written order from the project manager .
if the contractor fails to follow any order made under this subsection the project manager has the authority to remove replace or restore the work and deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num reserved num reserved num component inspection upon notice of completion for a project component with a contract specific warranty non manufacturer a milestone or defined phase or unit of construction the project manager will arrange to make an inspection of that work .
seal coat warrantees will be administered in accordance with section num .
num edition control of work num num if the contract work is found satisfactorily completed the inspection will constitute the component inspection .
if the inspection discloses unsatisfactory work the project manager will issue written instructions to the contractor on the necessary corrections .
when the deficiencies are corrected another inspection will be made which constitutes the component inspection .
upon completion of the component inspection submit a completed contractors component inspection form csbnum_num_num .
the form is available from the departments website or the project manager .
the contractors project superintendent must sign the form .
the form must state that num .
the department and the contractor have completed a component inspection of the work and the contractor verifies that the work was completed in full accordance with the specifications and the requirements of the contract .
num .
if applicable the component has an associated incentive or disincentive and they have been assessed .
num .
if applicable the component has an associated warranty and what the expiration date is .
contract time assessment will not cease until all contractspecific warranties have expired but may be suspended under subsection num .
within num calendar days of being notified of necessary warranty repairs submit a plan detailing repair procedures the expected date activities will begin and expected duration of repair work .
the time suspension will be rescinded and contract time charged if a repair plan is not provided within the allotted num calendar days .
the time suspension will be rescinded and contract time charged beginning on the date that repair activities begin or the date provided in the repair plan whichever is earlier and continue until repairs are complete .
completion and approval of the contractors work component inspection is not a statement or commitment by the department that all work meets the contract requirements and does not waive or alter any of the contracts terms .
num claims for adjustment and disputes num notice of claim submit a notice of claim using the departments notice of claim form csbnum_num_numa no later than the next business day of disagreements that are to be the subject of a claim for additional compensation time extension contract change or other remedy .
provide full details in the written notice why additional compensation time extension contract change or other remedy is warranted .
attach to the notice of claim all documentation showing the history of the disagreement .
upon submission of the written notice immediately begin keeping and maintaining complete and specific daily records using the departments claim cost record form csbnum_num_num of all details and costs directly related to the disagreement .
the form is available from the project manager or the departments website .
base equipment costs on internal rates for ownership depreciation and operating expense .
provide the project manager with updates of details and costs related to the disagreement as they develop .
failure to timely provide the written notice as required waives the contractors right to make any claim for the disagreement .
ensure that any notice of disagreement is fully and completely explained and documented as the department expects and requires early notice to mitigate costs and to fully document any potential costs .
the project manager will attempt to resolve the disagreement after the written notice is submitted .
the project manager will issue a written response no more than num calendar days after receipt of the written notice .
num control of work num edition num num submission of certified claims if an agreeable resolution is not reached within num calendar days of the written notice the contractor may submit a certified claim using the certified claim form csbnum_num_num to the project manager no more than num calendar days after receipt of the project managers response .
the form is available from the project manager or the departments website .
include all claim cost records to date with the certified claim .
provide copies to the dce and the ces engineer of the engineering division .
the project manager will continue to attempt to resolve the disagreement after the certified claim is submitted .
detail the following in the certified claim a .
reasons for each requested remedy referenced to the applicable contract provisions b .
objections to the project managers response and c. basis for and amount of any additional compensation extension of time contract change or other remedy including any potential solutions .
if the claim includes requests for delay compensation follow all procedures in subsection num .
the prime contractor must verify the claim data and certify the claim .
claims from a subcontractor or supplier will not be accepted .
only the prime contractor may submit the certified claim .
failure to timely submit the completed certified claim form or the claim cost records as required is a material breach of contract and waives the contractors right to make any claim for the disagreement or be entitled to any compensation time extension or contract change related to the disagreement .
allow the project manager access to and provide copies of all records when requested by the department .
make other project records available for technical and audit evaluation during the project and after the claimrelated work has been performed .
promptly furnish written clarification and any additional information or data requested by the department .
after the certified claim is submitted continue keeping and maintaining complete and specific daily records using the departments claim cost record form of all details and costs directly related to the claim .
base equipment costs on internal rates for ownership depreciation and operating expense .
submit claim updates every month until the claim is resolved .
include all costs incurred and any other pertinent information discovered after the certified claim was submitted and include copies of all claim cost records for that month .
for claims over num all claim costs must be certified by a certified public accountant cpa prior to the claim being resolved .
do not change the basis of a claim after submitting the written notice .
do not supplement a faulty submission to rebut or dispute a decision made by the project manager .
claims that have changed in basis or that have been supplemented due to an original faulty submission will not be considered and are waived by the contractor .
the contractor waives the claim and any compensation time extension or contract change for any of the following num .
not filing a timely complete written notice num .
not submitting a timely and complete certified claim form num .
not submitting monthly claim updates as required or num .
not keeping and submitting timely and complete claim cost records .
num decision on claims the prime contractor must verify the claim data and certify the claim .
claims from a subcontractor or supplier will not be accepted .
the dce will provide a written decision no more num edition control of work num num than num calendar days after receipt of the certified claim for contracts that do not require escrow of bid documents .
the dce will provide a written decision no more than num calendar days after receipt of bid documents for contracts that do require escrow of bid documents .
if additional time is required to research and evaluate the claim the dce can extend the time period num calendar days by notifying the contractor in writing .
to advance the claim appeal the dces decision to the claims review board board .
submit the request for appeal form csbnum_num_numh to the ces engineer no more than num calendar days after the date of the dces decision .
provide a copy of the appeal to the dce .
the dces decision is final unless appealed no more than num calendar days after the date of the decision .
if appealed the dce will forward the original claim supporting documents or evidence and the districts evaluation to the ces engineer .
the ces engineer will submit the claim to the board .
board meetings are scheduled on a quarterly basis with the schedule available on request from the ces engineer .
claim appeals received less than num calendar days in advance of the next scheduled board meeting may not be presented to the board until the following scheduled meeting .
the board will only review those documents and evidence submitted in the original claim its supporting documents and the districts evaluation but may request further information from the dce or the contractor .
the board may affirm overrule or modify in whole or in part the decision of the dce .
the decision of the board is the departments final decision .
the contractor or department may request nonbinding independent third party mediation .
the contractors request for third party mediation must be submitted to the construction engineer on the request for mediation form csbnum_num_nume no more than num calendar days after the date of the boards decision .
if the department and contractor both agree to mediation they must mutually agree on a mediator and a mediation date within num calendar days of the date of the request for mediation .
all costs associated with mediation will be shared equally between the contractor and the department .
num project finalization num final walkthrough process when all physical work has been completed in accordance with the contract requirements a final walkthrough process will be completed to inspect the work and identify and resolve all punchlist items .
if all work is complete but deferment of the final walkthrough is necessary for causes outside the contractors control the project manager will suspend contract time .
the following describes the process between the project manager and the contractor num .
the contractor requests a final walkthrough inspection using form mdtcon num_num_numb .
submit the preliminary mpdesnpdes storm water permit package if applicable for review with this form if not previously submitted .
num .
a final walkthrough inspection is conducted between the project manager dce and contractor .
the final walkthrough process may be postponed due to project conditions outside of contractor control .
num .
a final storm water walkthrough is conducted between the project manager district environmental engineering specialist contractor and maintenance or local entity as appropriate .
num .
punchlist items are identified including site work deficiencies outstanding materials andor civil rights requirements environmental permit compliance issues and outstanding claims .
a written list of punchlist items is submitted to the contractor within num calendar days of the request for the final walkthrough inspection .
num .
the contractor submits the final mpdesnpdes storm water permit package .
num control of work num edition num num .
when punchlist items are completed andor resolved the contractor requests a final verification using form mdtconnum_num_numc .
the department is exercising some operational control of the mpdesnpdes storm water permit when the requested changes are completed .
num .
the project manager will grant conditional final acceptance within num calendar days of the request for the final walkthrough verification .
the final acceptance is granted with the condition that all contractspecific warranties have expired and all warranty issues have been resolved .
if the punchlist items are fully resolved no further action is required .
if deficiencies still exist payment will be deducted from the estimate as appropriate .
contract time assessment will not cease until all contractspecific warranties have expired but may be suspended under subsection num .
num final acceptance when the final walkthrough process is complete all projectspecific warranties have expired and all warranty issues have been resolved submit the contractors certificate of work complete using form mdtconnum_num_num .
before the form will be approved by the department the contractors representative must provide a sworn and notarized certification that the following items have been completed num .
the work has been completed in accordance with the contracts specifications and the required materials have been used both in quality and quantity .
num .
the department and the contractor have completed the final walkthrough process and the contractor has corrected all deficiencies to the satisfaction of the project manager or payment will be deducted for outstanding deficiencies .
num .
the project has been inspected for compliance with the mpdesnpdes storm water permit all necessary corrective actions taken .
num .
there are no pending investigations referencing alleged nonpayment to subcontractors or suppliers .
num .
there are no pending labor compliance or nonpayment claims on the contract .
num .
there are no known environmental violations .
the contractor is responsible for any violations issued for damages or noncompliance with permit requirements and conditions prior to the transfer of the mpdesnpdes storm water permit .
the contractor will defend and hold the department harmless from any violations claims enforcement actions penalties or fines issued for contractor activities or recordkeeping that occurred prior to the transfer of the mpdesnpdes storm water permit this does not include activities specifically directed by the department in writing .
num .
liquidated damages have or have not been assessed and damages that have been assessed either are or are not disputed by the contractor .
num .
the contract does or does not include any contract specific warranties non manufacturer .
if it does all contract specific warranties have expired and all corrective actions have been completed .
if any of the above is not completed in full before the certification form is submitted the project manager will reject the form .
contract time assessment will not cease until all warranty issues are corrected and the contractors certificate of work complete form has been received and approved .
the project manager may suspend contract time for punchlist items provided the roadway is in a safe and convenient condition .
the date the form is approved is the final acceptance .
maintain the insurance specified in subsection num until the final acceptance .
num edition control of work num num completion and approval of the contractors certificate of work complete form is not a statement or commitment by the department that the work meets all contract requirements and does not waive or alter any of the contracts terms .
num final estimate process when the contract has reached the final acceptance under subsection num the contract documents will be finalized and the final estimate processed within num calendar days .
the final estimate will include the amount and value of each class of work performed and any extra work and materials .
errors made in previous partial payments will be corrected in the final estimate .
when the final estimate is prepared and all required documentation such as material certifications labor dispute resolutions etc .
has been received the construction administration services bureau will send a copy of the final estimate to the contractor for review .
the contractor has num calendar days to notify the project manager in writing if the final estimate is acceptable .
if no response is received within that timeframe concurrence will be assumed .
to dispute the final estimate submit the items disputed and justification to the construction administration services bureau .
provide a copy to the project manager .
the construction administration services bureau will provide a written decision on the disputed items .
the department reserves the right to withhold all or part of the final payments earned under the contract until all taxes and assessments due and owing to the state of montana for any reason have been paid in full unless a written release is received from the department or the state agency having a claim against the contractor .
num control of work num edition num num section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements the contract specifies the basis of acceptance for materials and assemblies .
num source of supply use only materials that meet the contract requirements .
submit a list of the names and addresses of the suppliers producers manufacturers and fabricators furnishing products for the contract .
itemize the list as shown in the contract schedule of items .
material may be inspected and tested at the source of supply before delivery to the project .
all materials may be inspected tested and possibly rejected before incorporated into the work .
perform sampling of any material to be tested in accordance with the contract .
the department will decide if a sample was taken correctly .
samples not properly taken may be rejected and may not be accepted for testing .
determine the quality and quantity of materials produced at or developed from any source based on the contract documents and by conducting an independent source investigation .
if payments due the owner of a materials source become delinquent and the owner notifies the department a sum equal to the amount of the delinquent payments may be withheld from estimate payments due the contractor .
num samples tests and cited specifications a .
materials accepted by certification .
ensure all required certifications for materials are furnished to the department and the department has inspected and accepted the certification before incorporating the materials into the work .
the project manager may grant written permission to place materials before receiving certifications for materials only under the following conditions num .
not placing the materials poses immediate danger to traffic or the general public or num .
not placing the materials would cause a delay in the work resulting in damage to the project or adjacent property .
the project manager may require that materials be removed and replaced at contractor expense if the certifications are not furnished .
b .
materials accepted by department testing .
do not incorporate material into the work until it is inspected or sampled by the department .
reference to a specification or test designated in aashto astm federal specifications or other recognized nonproprietary national organization is the specification or test method that is current on the date of advertisement for bids and as amended by the departments test method manual .
copies of individual montana test methods mt methods are available from the departments website www.mdt.mt.gov .
department material tests are by and at the departments expense .
where there is a difference in the test methods the order of precedence for tests is num .
the departments standard material test methods in the materials manual num .
aashto num .
astm submit representative preliminary material samples in the specified quantities for testing upon request .
the testing of preliminary samples does not constitute acceptance of the materials .
only materials delivered for incorporation into the work will be accepted or rejected based on the test results specified in the contract .
num control of material num edition num num unacceptable materials all materials not meeting the contract requirements will be accepted or rejected under subsection num .
num local material sources num general local aggregate borrow and topsoil materials sources include prospected sources contractorfurnished sources and mandatory sources .
provide the source for obtaining local materials unless mandatory sources are specified .
when prospected sources are identified in the contract use the prospected sources or locate other sources of material .
contractorfurnished sources must be approved by the department .
the contractor must a .
provide an approved reclamation plan meeting subsection num before using any materials source b .
comply with section num of the national historic preservation act and c. adhere to state and federal requirements and obtain clearance from the state historic preservation officer before using material from surfacing and borrow sources .
num prospected sources each districtarea lab has historical information regarding potential prospected sources .
this information typically includes the source location owner and some test results of samples taken from the source .
to view or obtain this information for sources near a project contact the area lab supervisor .
the phone numbers for the district area offices are in table num .
table num districtarea lab phone numbers area phone number missoula num num kalispell num num butte num num bozeman num num great falls num num havre num num glendive num num wolf point num num miles city num num billings num num lewistown num num helena num num the department is not responsible for the quantity or quality of materials indicated in the prospected source reports .
test data included in the reports are based on the samples tested from the exact locations shown using standard tests .
no interpretation is made or intended by the department .
any interpretation is the judgment of the person examining the tests .
see subsection num concerning verifying quantity and quality by an independent subsurface investigation before submitting a bid .
make arrangements with landowners for sampling and obtaining material from the prospected material sources .
do not sell or use material from departmentowned or departmentoptioned sources for anything other than the designated project without a written agreement from the landowner and department approval .
other than those requirements specified in a written agreement between num edition control of material num num the landowner and department any arrangements between the landowner and the contractor are solely between them .
submit copies of all correspondence and agreements with the landowner to the project manager .
notify the department in writing if a prospected source is to be used and list the contract items for which that material will be used .
pay all royalties obtain all required permits and follow their requirements .
coordinate with the landowner to determine the access routes that are allowed for use and any additional landowner requirements .
adhere to all agreed stipulations including contouring of pits topsoil conservation and replacement seeding repair or obliteration of haul roads cattle guards and fencing the cost of which is incidental to and included in the materials cost .
num contractorfurnished sources acquire the rights to take materials from contractorfurnished sources and pay all related costs including costs due to increased haul length exploring and source development .
furnish material that meets all statutory and regulatory requirements for being nontoxic and nonhazardous .
do not furnish material from mine tailings and waste slag sources within state and federal superfund sites or sources within areas known or suspected to be contaminated with toxic substances or petroleum products unless laboratory reports from an approved laboratory indicate the material meets these requirements .
obtain department approval for any special borrow or aggregate source prior to use .
arrange with the project manager for representative samples to be taken and witnessed by the department at least num calendar days before beginning production .
provide all equipment and labor necessary for the sampling .
see subsection num for the number of department furnished tests at department expense .
the departments approval of the source does not release the contractor from the responsibility to produce materials meeting all specified acceptance requirements .
a .
borrow source approval .
the numth percentile of the samples taken from the sources must meet the rvalue andor the soils classification specified in the contract .
furnish a minimum of num departmentwitnessed samples at the locations and depths designated within the limits of the proposed sources .
samples will be tested for rvalue according to aashto t num .
the rvalue at a num psi num kpa exudation pressure will be used for evaluation .
samples will be tested for soils classification according to mt num .
if the source is approved it may be limited to certain areas layers or soil classes within a source during or after source approval testing .
approval of the source does not preclude the department from sampling from the roadway .
b .
aggregate source approval .
the department will process and test samples to determine the suitability of the material in accordance with subsections num and num .
passing wear and sand equivalent test results are mandatory for department approval of bituminized material aggregate sources .
passing wear test results are mandatory for department approval of untreated aggregate sources .
assume all risk for producing aggregate from sources not meeting the wear test mt num and sand equivalent test aashto t num .
the department will randomly test stockpiled aggregate for wear and sand equivalent .
num mandatory material sources use of materials from mandatory sources is a condition for preparing a bid and executing a contract .
follow the conditions in the contract for producing materials from mandatory sources .
num control of material num edition num num reclamation requirements a .
general .
reclaim all land used in constructing the project as required by the approved reclamation plan .
comply with the pertinent statutes relating to open cut mining section num mca hard rock mining section num mca water quality section num mca stream bank preservation sections num and num mca the montana county noxious weed management act section num mca and all other applicable federal state and local statutes regulations and ordinances .
the deq has final responsibility for administration of the open cut mining act and the hard rock mining act and must review and approve all reclamation plans and reclamation work .
follow all directives and instructions issued by the deq with regard to reclamation work .
b. reclamation plan .
submit a copy of the approved reclamation plan before removing earth quarried rock sand gravel or other substance from any materials source .
follow the deq format for reclamation plan and mapping guidelines when developing reclamation plans .
the format and guidelines are available from department of environmental quality permitting and compliance division industrial and energy minerals bureau open cut mining section helena mt num the time allowed for approval of reclamation plans is included in the open cut mining act section num mca .
c. reclamation work .
perform reclamation immediately after removing the necessary material .
leave all slopes in a stable condition and if topographic conditions permit grade to no steeper than numhnumv after final grading .
grade the excavated area to maintain the natural contour of the land and blend into the surrounding terrain .
remove or grade all outcroppings to daylight where possible .
strip and stockpile all topsoil and overburden from the material source stockpile site crushing area and equipment parking areas before excavating material .
salvage all topsoil from all new or widened haul access and service roads before grading or surfacing .
reclaim all roads when removal operations are complete .
store overburden or subsoil separately from topsoil and replace before topsoil is replaced on reclaimed areas .
uniformly redistribute all topsoil to the entire reclaimed area .
seed all retop soiled areas during the first seeding season following grading and topsoil replacement .
contourseed all slopes steeper than numhnumv .
fence newly seeded reclaimed areas including roads where required to protect from livestock .
use type fnumm fence .
do not locate material sources in a flowing stream or on a stream floodway at a location likely to develop a new channel to the stream during flooding .
leave the final floor elevations of material sources high enough to not be impacted by fluctuations in the groundwater table unless addressed in the approved reclamation plan .
provide protection and safety of persons and property adjacent to the work .
d. method of measurement and basis of payment .
reclamation of material sources is incidental to the materials cost .
num protection of livestock and property prevent livestock from straying into or out of any materials source .
num edition control of material num num protect all irrigation facilities from construction operations .
promptly repair or replace damaged irrigation facilities to the landowners satisfaction at contractor expense .
num rejects excess fines material referred to as rejects are inherent in a rock pit gravel pit or quarry or accumulated during crushing and screening operations .
stockpile rejects from material sources owned or optioned by the department and not acceptable for use on the project at a site selected or approved by the project manager when requested .
stockpiled reject material is paid for at num cents per ton mile num cents per mt km for haul in excess of num feet num m from the crusher site to the stockpile .
retain title to all rejects accumulated during aggregate production from contractorfurnished sources .
department purchased rejects are paid for at an agreed purchase price .
num certification of compliance a certification of compliance states the material meets the contract requirements .
a manufacturers authorized representative must sign the certificate .
clearly identify each lot of certified materials or assemblies delivered to the work in the certificate of compliance .
materials or assemblies used on the basis of certificates of compliance may be sampled and tested at any time .
materials not meeting contract requirements will be rejected .
num product data sheet a product data sheet describes the mechanical thermal physical chemical and specific properties of the product .
product data sheets must contain relevant standards test methods and results for applicable materials and subcomponents showing products to be in compliance with contract requirements .
num plant inspection meet the following conditions if materials are department inspected at the source of supply or manufacture a .
provide the inspector full cooperation and assistance during inspections .
b .
provide the inspector full entry to all parts of the plant used in the manufacture or production of the materials .
c. furnish the facilities to determine if the material furnished meets contract requirements .
d. provide and maintain adequate safety measures .
materials inspected at the source may be reinspected before incorporation into the work .
materials not meeting the contract requirements will be rejected .
num field laboratory the department will furnish all field offices and laboratories .
furnish and install electrical power to field offices and laboratories as directed a continuous numampere num to num volt single phase numhertz power supply using a four wire connector or a num to num volt alternating current of sufficient capacity .
have the source connected by a montana licensed electrician .
furnish a potable water supply to operate all testing equipment for the offices and laboratories .
notify the project manager at least num business days prior to producing material to be tested in the field laboratory .
do not begin production until the test trailer is fully operational .
no additional payment will be made for providing power and water to the field office and laboratories .
include these costs in the other items on the project .
num control of material num edition num num qualified products list the departments materials bureau maintains a qpl .
obtain further information and requirements on the qpl website located at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov contractingconsultant link .
the qpl is limited to certain types of items .
different types of products may be added to or deleted from the qpl .
procedures for qualifying listing and delisting products are available on the qpl website .
materials listed as approved on the qpl at the time the materials are delivered to the project may be accepted as a preapproved qpl item in lieu of the normal sampling and testing procedures .
submit the documentation required by the qpl .
work to qualify or list products on the qpl is not measured for payment .
num handling and storage of materials store and handle materials to preserve their quality .
stored materials are subject to inspection and retesting before incorporating into the work .
locate stored materials for ease of inspection .
obtain approval to use portions of the rightofway for storage and placing the plant and equipment .
obtain additional required space at contractor expense .
do not use private property for storage without the landowners or lessees written permission .
furnish copies of the written permission to the project manager .
restore all storage sites to original condition at contractor expense .
transport bulk materials in vehicles that do not cause material loss or segregation .
num department furnished material department furnished material will be delivered or made available at the locations specified .
include the cost of handling and placing departmentfurnished materials in the contract unit price for the item .
be responsible for all department furnished material .
deductions will be made from any monies due for shortages deficiencies and damage that occur after delivery .
demurrage charges resulting from failure to accept the material at the designated time and location will be deducted from monies due the contractor .
num domestic materials furnish domestic steel or iron materials for applicable products as defined in mt num .
notify the project manager and obtain clarification for any materials containing steel or iron components prior to their incorporation if not clearly defined in mt num .
domestic material is material produced by manufacturing processes including coating of steel or iron that have occurred entirely in the united states .
pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore may be manufactured outside the united states .
as required furnish certification from the original steel producing mill documenting the manufacturing processes including coatings of covered materials as performed in the united states .
buy america requirements apply to all manufactured products composed predominantly of steel or iron materials .
a product is considered to be manufactured predominantly of steel or iron if the product consists of at least num steel or iron content as determined by the department when it is delivered to the job site for permanent incorporation .
for purposes of addressing precast or prestressed items the job site encompasses locations where the precast operations occur .
buy america requirements do not apply to miscellaneous steel or iron components subcomponents or hardware such as cabinets covers shelves clamps fittings sleeves washers bolts excluding high strength and anchor bolts nuts screws tie wire spacers chairs num edition control of material num num lifting hooks faucets or door hinges that are commonly available as offtheshelf products or minor items that are necessary to encase assemble and construct project materials .
do not incorporate steel or iron materials into the project until a completed form num with all required documentation is submitted to the department .
ensure that suppliers understand the buy america and contract requirements to supply the required documentation .
submit documentation to the department in a clear organized legible manner or it will be returned .
clarify which material certifications are for which items .
the department will review the submitted documentation one time at no cost to the contractor .
if the department determines that the submitted documentation is inadequate or fails to meet the contract requirements the submitted documentation will be returned for clarification or correction .
the cost for the departments rereview of the same submittal is the contractors responsibility and may be deducted from contractor payments .
the department will not pay for items installed until the submitted form num and supporting documentation has been reviewed and is found to be in accordance with the contract requirements .
insufficient or unavailable documentation or documentation showing products to contain steel of foreign origin are grounds for removal and replacement at the contractors expense .
material inspection of precast products prefabricated steel products or prefabrication plants will take place at the point of manufacture .
the district materials lab helena materials bureau or department representative will inspect the manufacturing of these items and verify that the fabricator is maintaining supporting documentation .
all precast products containing steel and prefabricated steel products delivered to the project must be accompanied by certification from the end product manufacturer or prefabrication plant which states that all steel used in the product has been meltedrecycled and manufactured entirely in the united states and they have maintained supporting documentation .
submit a form num with certification by the end product manufacturer or prefabrication plant that all steel incorporated has been meltedrecycled and manufactured entirely in the united states .
all supporting documentation must be maintained by the fabricator and made available to the department as requested .
a minimal quantity of foreign manufactured steel and iron material may be used if the cost of the material including delivery costs to the project does not exceed onetenth of num of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
submit a request to use a minimal quantity of foreign manufactured steel and iron a minimum of num business days before incorporation into the work .
include in the request the dollar amount of the steel for this request and the cumulative dollar amount requested to date .
provide documentation typically in the form of invoices showing product and delivery cost .
failure to do so will require removal and replacement of all foreign steel and iron with domestic steel and iron .
if the foreign steel and iron can not be positively distinguished from any domestic material used then all of the material must be removed and replaced with domestic steel and iron at the contractors expense .
num mix designs and testing of material sources the department will furnish the number of mix design verifications or tests shown in table num at no cost to the contractor .
num control of material num edition num table num number of mix designs verifications or tests furnished at no cost description number furnished per contract plant mix surfacing mix design verification num per grade portland cement concrete mix design verification num per class cement treated base mix design verification num per grade special borrow testing package num per num cubic yard num mnum of plan quantity surfacing material testing package indicated sources shown on plans surfacing sources furnished by the contractor num num requests for additional verification or testing will be processed in the order received with a minimum num calendar day turnaround .
the contractor will be charged the departments cost for each additional mix design verification or testing package .
the total cost will be deducted from the progress estimate payments .
num section num legal relations and responsiblities to the public num laws rules and regulations to be observed observe and comply with all of the following a .
federal and state laws and regulations b .
local laws and ordinances and c. regulations orders and decrees of bodies or tribal ordinances having any jurisdiction or authority .
protect and indemnify the department and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from the violation of any of the above listed items whether violated by the contractor a subcontractor material man or supplier or any of their employees or agents .
follow all rules and regulations of federal state and local health officials .
do not require an employee of the contractor or subcontractors to work in surroundings or under conditions that are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to health or safety .
admit any inspector of the osha or other legally responsible agency involved in safety and health administration without delay and without presentation of an inspection warrant to all areas of the work and project site upon presentation of proper credentials .
comply with and enforce all federal state and local safety standards e.g .
the montana scaffolding act etc .
for contractors workers and its subcontractors workers on the project protecting and indemnifying the department and its representatives from all claims suits damages or liabilities from all accidents or safety violations and ensuring the publics safety .
the contractor is not to enforce safety standards for department employees .
follow federal state and local laws rules and regulations regarding unlawful employment practices including race religion color sex or national origin discrimination and that define actions required for affirmative action and disadvantaged business programs .
work within a state or national forest is under the regulations of the authority having jurisdiction governing the forest .
immediately notify the project manager in writing if any discrepancy or inconsistency is discovered between the contract and any law ordinance regulation order or decree .
num permits licenses and taxes obtain all legally required permits authorizations and licenses pay all charges fees taxes and fuel taxes giving all notices necessary and incidental to the lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices materials and processes do not use any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright without a legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
indemnify and hold harmless the department any affected third party or political subdivision from all claims for infringement for the use of any patented design device material or process or trademark or copyright .
indemnify the department of all costs expenses and damages obligated for payment by reason of an infringement during the prosecution or after the completion of the project .
num restoring surfaces opened by permit the department may grant permits to construct or reconstruct a utility facility in the highway or street for authorities of the municipality in which the work is done .
do not allow any individual firm or corporation to make an opening in the street without a department permit .
do not allow any person or persons to make an opening unless authorized by the department .
parties bearing permits may make openings in the street .
when requested by the project manager num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num repair these openings .
the work is paid for under subsection num or as provided in the contract .
repair to the same standards as the original work .
num federal aid participation federal laws rules or regulations in conflict with any provisions of a federally assisted contract prevail and take precedence over conflicting contract provisions .
federally assisted work is under department supervision and subject to inspection and approval of the united states government .
inspections by authorized federal representatives do not make the united states a party to the contract and do not interfere with the rights of the contract parties .
num public convenience and safety conduct construction with minimum obstruction to traffic .
provide safety and convenience to the public and protect persons and property including but not limited to items specified in subsection num and section num .
highvisibility safety apparel must be worn by all workers within the rightofway of all projects .
use highvisibility safety apparel that meets the performance class num or num requirements of the ansiisea num publication entitled american national standard for highvisibility safety apparel and headwear .
workers include all persons on the project at the request of employed by or for the benefit of the contractor .
this includes suppliers and subcontractors at every tier including volunteers .
a workers failure to wear required apparel may result in the workers immediate and permanent ejection from the project andor a suspension of work in that area at the discretion of the project manager .
no claim for compensation or delay costs may be made by or through the contractor in such a case .
provide complete protection at all times to the travelling public crossing under any structure .
employ positive means such as netting tarpaulins wood or metal covering to prevent tools materials etc .
from falling onto the roadway below .
positive protection may include traffic control methods or other approved means to ensure complete protection .
submit the proposed method and any modifications of the proposed method of traffic protection for approval to the project manager a minimum of num days prior to the start of this work .
do not begin work until the protection plan is approved and installed to the satisfaction of the project manager .
failure to maintain such safeguards in an effective manner may result in an immediate shutdown of work until corrected .
do not close public roads without the engineers permission .
providing protection to underlying roadways is not measured for payment .
num railwayhighway provisions responsibilities for work involving railway property are a .
contractor .
perform work on railroad rightofway without interfering with the movements of trains or traffic on railway property .
do not cross the railway right of way or tracks except at temporary or existing open public grade crossings .
furnish signed copies of the contractor requirements and acknowledgment for working on railroad right of way found in the contract to the railroad and project manager before entering railroad property and starting work .
provide advance notice as agreed to between the contractor and railway officials before working on railway property hauling across railway tracks or blasting within num feet num m of railway property .
comply with section num and subsection num when blasting or performing other work on or near railway property .
num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num furnish insurance for all work performed as required by subsection num or the contract .
make arrangements with the railway company for railway crossings not specified in the contract at contractor expense .
reimburse the railroad company for all costs of railway flagging other protective services and installation of temporary crossings for haul roads for contractorfurnished material sources based on billings submitted by the railway company .
b .
department .
the department will num .
enter into an agreement with the contractor and the railway company when required by the railway company num .
arrange for railway crossings specified in the contract and pay for the crossings railway flagging and other protective services necessary for work performed on or near railroad right of way including haul road track crossings to departmentoptioned or owned material sources and num .
forward billings for flagging track crossings and other protective service billings for contractorrequested crossings submitted to the department by the railway company .
c. railway .
railway companies must num .
furnish all flagging or other protective service as necessary for the safe operation of trains or traffic on railway property and num .
construct maintain protect and remove temporary crossings and submit billings for flagging or other protective services to the contractor or department .
num load restrictions do not exceed legal load restrictions when hauling material and equipment on public roadways and bridges within and beyond the project limits and on all new and existing portland cement concrete roadways completed and accepted gravel surfaces treated base courses bituminous surfacing lifts and courses including plant mix base plant mix surfacing and seal and cover .
do not place loads on a concrete pavement treated base or structure before the curing period has been achieved .
repair damaged roadways and structures resulting from construction operations at contractor expense .
measure and analyze truck legal load limits by the bridge formula before hauling any material over existing or newly paved roadways and bridges .
furnish a drawing showing distances between axles truck tare weight and the overall length of each truck prior to hauling or placing operations .
show a minimum of two applications using the bridge formula on the drawing .
include on the first application the overall length between axles .
for the second application do not consider the steering axle and add the value obtained from the bridge formula to the anticipated load on the steering axle .
use the lesser of the two values obtained as the legal load .
retain a copy of the appropriate drawing in each truck .
do not exceed established legal load weights for single axle and tandem axles .
if raising a retractable or tag axle results in the truck being over the maximum legal weight only raise the axles when backing to unload at a chip spreader windrow or plant mix paver .
back the minimum distance possible while over legal weight restrictions .
do not exceed the legal weight on the steering axle by more than num or tandem axles by more than num while backing with retractable or tag axles lifted .
the weight on a truck in excess of the maximum legal weight as determined above will be deducted from the quantity considered for payment .
num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num comply with this provision and all applicable laws rules and regulations related to operation of motor vehicles on public roads .
trucks operated on public roads may be checked by the departments motor carrier services division and fines levied for exceeding legal loads .
do not use existing bridges new bridges or bridges to be removed but still in use by the public as work platforms work bridges or to support or move equipment without the departments written approval .
approval will be granted only where load analysis and review of traffic control safety and convenience show it to be in the public interest .
no additional compensation will be considered or allowed for any violation of these provisions .
num reserved num protection and restortation of property and landscape num public and private property preserve all public and private property when performing work .
do not disturb or damage land monuments and property markers until witnessed or referenced by the project manager .
be responsible for all damage to public and private property resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the manner or method of executing work until the project is accepted .
this responsibility includes damage caused by compaction vibratory and impact equipment .
replace or restore damaged property to its original condition at contractor expense .
conduct a review of all public roadways to be used by contractor equipment including haul operations before work begins .
arrange for a local road authority representative and the project manager to attend the review .
the parties are to review and document the roadways existing condition and determine a dispute resolution process if an agreement on roadway restoration can not be reached .
once the roadway is no longer in use by the contractor conduct another review by the same parties .
the parties are to reach an agreement on what is required to restore the roadway comparable to its original condition .
perform all work required to restore the roadway comparable to its original condition and obtain the project managers approval of the work once completed .
roadway restoration is not measured for payment .
num american legion fatality markers take inventory of all american legion fatality markers fatality markers within the project limits prior to construction activities .
identify the fatality markers route reference post and side of road it is located on .
identify fatality markers in conflict with proposed construction activities and those that are not .
a .
fatality markers in conflict with construction activities .
prior to construction activities in vicinity of fatality markers remove and locate fatality markers to a safe location .
upon completion of construction activities return the fatality markers to the same route as close as practical to the original reference post and side of road at an offset distance established by the department .
b .
fatality markers not in conflict with construction activities .
do not disturb fatality markers not in conflict with construction activities .
be responsible for all damage to fatality markers resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the manner or method of executing work until the project is accepted .
replace or restore damaged fatality markers to their original condition at contractor expense .
all costs num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num incurred to meet the american legion fatality marker requirements are incidental to other items of the contract .
num environmental protection num general follow all state local tribal and federal laws and regulations controlling pollution of the environment .
take precautions to prevent pollution of aquatic resources from silt fuels oils bitumen chemicals or other harmful materials .
take precautions to prevent pollution of the atmosphere from particulate and gaseous matter .
do not begin work in areas covered by the permits authorizations or notifications until all are received from the regulatory agency .
allow a minimum of num calendar days to receive required permits authorizations or notifications from the date of the submittal of a complete request unless a different timeframe is specified by the regulatory agency .
the department is not responsible for delays caused by incomplete or inaccurate submittals by the contractor .
obtain and submit one copy to the project manager of all required environmental permits authorizations and notifications necessary for activities relating to construction activities including those secured for sites outside of the project limits before construction activities start in permitted area .
submit to the project manager within num calendar days of sending or receiving all correspondence to or from regulatory agencies regarding potential noncompliance or violations .
num water pollution control regulations refer to section num for other requirements relating to water pollution control and aquatic resource protection .
a .
construction dewatering permit .
a construction dewatering general permit authorization is required for any construction activity that discharges sedimentladen water from the work area such as cofferdams trenches excavation pits or other work types identified in the permit to state waters .
obtain authorization from the water protection bureau deq before discharging into any state waters .
if sedimentladen water is landapplied and will not reach state waters then a discharge permit is not required .
b. shortterm turbidity standard num authorization .
obtain authorization as required under section num mca for any activity that will cause a short term increase in turbidity .
c. section num nationwide permit nwp and individual permit ip .
follow the provisions of the federal clean water act including the requirements of section num .
temporary facilities and construction activities in and around waters of the u.s. may be covered by a coe num permit .
adhere to applicable permit conditions andor nwp fact sheets regional conditions and num certification requirements .
obtain a num permit for temporary facilities andor construction activities that are not covered by the num permit obtained by the department for permanent structures .
these construction activities may include but are not limited to temporary work bridges work pads cofferdams diversions temporary fills and berms haul roads and other work that involves the placement of fill or dredged materials into waters of the u.s .
prepare the application and submit to the project manager for department review and submittal to the coe .
the contract may include additional conditions and requirements for applicable section num permits .
d. section num rivers and harbors act permits .
follow the requirements of the rivers and harbors act including requirements of section num .
coe permits are required for structures or work in over under or affecting navigable waters of the u.s .
in montana num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num navigable waters of the u.s. include but are not limited to the kootenai river missouri river and yellowstone river .
section num permits can be issued concurrently with the section num permits described above .
adhere to applicable permit conditions andor nwp fact sheets regional conditions and num certification requirements .
e. general storm water permits .
follow the requirements of the npdes and mpdes storm water permits .
coverage under the general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activities general storm water permit is required for any construction activity that disturbs an area of at least one acre or has the potential of discharge .
deq administers the mpdes permit .
if the project is located on one of montanas indian reservations npdes permit authorization is issued by the epa .
permit authorization is obtained by submitting a complete application package including the notice of intent noi to the appropriate regulatory entities .
the epa allows electronic submittal of the noi .
obtain the permit authorization directly from the deq or epa .
f. spa num notification .
follow the requirements of the montana stream protection act spa .
the spa is administered by fwp .
obtain an spa num for temporary facilities andor construction activities that are not covered under the spa num obtained by the department .
these activities may include but are not limited to work bridges work pads cofferdams temporary detours diversions removal and disposal of existing structures access sequencing and construction methodology .
prepare the application and submit it to the project manager for department review and submittal to fwp .
the contract may include additional conditions from the spa num obtained from contractor submittal .
g. tribal permits .
work within reservations may require additional permits and submittals to tribal authorities .
coordinate with the department to determine requirements and receive assistance in obtaining permits .
the aquatic lands protection ordinance alpo numa provides regulation of all waters and aquatic lands on the blackfeet reservation in order to prevent or minimize their degradation .
obtain an alpo permit for any project within or near aquatic resources .
the shoreline protection office of the confederated salish and kootenai tribes cskt tribal council administers the following tribal ordinances num .
shoreline protection ordinance numa which deals with any work along the shoreline of flathead lake .
num .
aquatic lands conservation ordinance alco numa which is required for the alteration of aquatic lands wetlands or flathead reservation waters from activities such as dredging filling irrigation diversions and returns drainage ditches and maintenance repairs of these resources .
tribal permits are required for construction activities within the project limits and may be required for temporary facilities outside the project limits .
if required coordinate with the department and obtain tribal permits from the tribal office for additional activities and facilities not covered by tribal permits obtained by the department .
h. floodplain permit .
follow the requirements of the montana floodplain and floodway management act .
any construction project within a designated numyear floodplain is required to have a floodplain development permit prior to the start of construction .
the dnrc administer this permit through the floodplain management section or local floodplain administrators .
num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num the department obtains this permit for permanent facilities .
obtain the floodplain permit from the dnrc or the local floodplain administrator for temporary facilities if required .
num air quality operate all equipment including but not limited to hotmix paving plants concrete batch plants generators aggregate crushers and screens etc .
to meet the minimum air quality standards and applicable requirements established by federal state tribal and local agencies .
secure necessary air quality permits from the appropriate regulatory entity .
use reasonable precautions to prevent or reduce dust on the project caused by construction operations or traffic to be in compliance with all federal state tribal and local laws and regulations .
use water liquid magnesium chloride liquid calcium chloride or other dust palliative approved by the project manager .
use only contractor owned water sources or water that is obtained under a purchased water right according to applicable laws .
dust control for compliance with all laws and regulations is not measured for payment .
include the cost for dust control in the item of work being performed that results in dust .
any violations or fines associated with dust controldust control operations are the responsibility of the contractor .
no additional payment will be made for the use or installation of dust or smoke control devices for the disruption of work or loss of time occasioned by the installation of such control devices or for any other related reasons .
num noise pollution adhere to local noise ordinances laws and regulations and follow all requirements contained in the contract regarding noise pollution .
num noxious weed management follow the requirements of the county noxious weed management act section num num mca section num mca and all county and contract noxious weed control requirements .
determine the specific noxious weed control requirements not specified in the contract of each county where the project is located before submitting a bid .
any product containing forage per section num mca must be certified noxious weed seed free by the montana department of agriculture .
noxious weeds include those species designated by the montana department of agriculture .
the most recent list of designated noxious weeds is available from the montana department of agriculture or local county extension service or weed district .
the montana department of agriculture web site with noxious weed information is www.agr.mt.govweedpestnoxiousweeds.asp .
clean all equipment and vehicles prior to their transport into the project area .
equipment or vehicles with visible dirt or plant parts will not be allowed into the project area until they are cleaned to the satisfaction of the project manager .
all costs incurred to meet the county weed control requirements are incidental to other items of the contract .
num noxious weed control when noxious weed control is included as a bid item provide noxious weed control to all lands within the rightofway within the project limits .
monitor the construction borrow and staging areas at intervals necessary to prevent noxious weeds from developing viable seed .
noxious weeds may be controlled through handpulling or num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num herbicide application .
select the most effective and appropriate means of control based upon the species and size of infestation and environmental conditions .
if the control is accomplished with the application of herbicides use only a licensed commercial pesticide applicator certified to apply general and restricteduse herbicides .
use herbicides that meet all applicable state and federal pesticide laws and that are registered with the montana department of agriculture as required by the montana pesticide act .
apply herbicides in a manner that provides immediate control but does not jeopardize or cause potential harm to final reclamation objectives .
follow all applicable state and federal pesticide laws .
if it is determined that herbicide application caused or contributed to the failure of reclamation take corrective action at no additional cost to the department .
do not perform noxious weed control on areas that have received final seeding .
noxious weed control within the project limits is measured by force account methodology .
noxious weed control in areas outside of the project limits is not measured for payment .
work performed within the project limits is paid by units of noxious weed control .
num plant and animal protection a. migratory bird treaty act .
complete operations in compliance with the migratory bird treaty act .
migratory birds of any kind including but not limited to swallows and other song birds are protected under the migratory bird treaty act .
it is unlawful to pursue hunt take capture or kill attempt to take capture or kill possess offer to or sell barter purchase deliver or cause to be shipped exported imported transported carried or received any migratory bird part nest egg or product manufactured or not .
direct disturbance of an occupied migratory bird nest with birds or eggs is prohibited under the law .
the migratory bird treaty act does not prohibit the destruction of most unoccupied without birds or eggs migratory bird nests provided that no possession occurs during the destruction .
the destruction of unoccupied nests of eagles and other threatened and endangered species is not allowed .
contact the department district biologist if further instruction clarification or consultation is required prior to or during construction .
compliance with the migratory bird treaty act is incidental to performance of the work and no additional payment is made .
b. bald and golden eagle protection act .
complete operations in compliance with the bald and golden eagle protection act .
the bald and golden eagle protection act num u.s.c .
numc prohibits anyone without a permit issued by the secretary of the interior from taking bald eagles including their parts nests or eggs .
the act provides criminal penalties for persons who take possess sell purchase barter offer to sell purchase or barter transport export or import at any time or any manner any bald eagle or golden eagle alive or dead or any part nest or egg thereof .
the act defines take as pursue shoot shoot at poison wound kill capture trap collect molest or disturb .
for purposes of this contract disturb means to agitate or bother a bald or golden eagle to a degree that causes or is likely to cause based on the best scientific information available num injury to an eagle num a decrease in its productivity by substantially interfering with normal breeding feeding or sheltering behavior or num nest abandonment by substantially interfering with normal breeding feeding or sheltering behavior .
in addition to immediate impacts this definition also covers impacts that result from human induced alterations initiated around a previously used nest site during a time when eagles are not present if upon the eagles return such alterations agitate or bother num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num an eagle to a degree that interferes with or interrupts normal breeding feeding or sheltering habits and causes injury death or nest abandonment .
violation of the act can result in a fine of num num for organizations imprisonment for one year or both for a first offense .
penalties increase substantially for additional offenses and a second violation of this act is a felony .
c. endangered species act esa .
complete operations in compliance with the esa num u.s.c num et seq ..
the esa provides a program for the conservation of threatened and endangered plants and animals and the habitats in which they are found .
the esa prohibits any taking of a threatened or endangered species .
the definition of take includes to harass harm hunt shoot wound kill trap capture or collect or attempt to engage in any such conduct .
num protection of aquatic resources unless permitted or authorized do not impact any aquatic resources located adjacent to the project .
avoid all equipment traffic fill material staging activities and other disturbances to all aquatic resources .
in areas adjacent to any water body including streams or irrigation ditches crossing the highway and any wetland areas or in areas immediately adjacent to the highway susceptible to sediment transport conduct construction staging and paving operations in a manner to avoid placement of materials in these areas .
any impacts to these areas and associated consequences without the proper permitting are the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor must secure the appropriate permits or authorizations prior to working in these areas .
if complete avoidance of these areas is not possible contact the project manager who will coordinate the permitting effort with the district biologist or the district environmental engineering specialist .
num forest protection observe sanitary laws and regulations regarding the performance of the work within or adjacent to state or national forests and parks .
keep all areas in a neat condition dispose of all refuse and obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures .
prevent suppress and assist in preventing and suppressing forest fires and immediately notify a forest official of the location and extent of any fire discovered .
maintain spark arresters to meet the forest supervisors requirements on all steam gas or dieseldriven machinery and on all flues at construction camps .
num insurance requirements meet the timing requirements of subsection num .
num insurance on all contracts a .
commercial general liability insurance .
obtain commercial general liability insurance with a general aggregate limit of num an occurrence limit of num and products and completed operations limit of num .
the policy must name the state of montana its agents employees and officers as an additional named insured .
b .
owners and contractors protective liability insurance .
obtain an owners and contractors protective ocp liability insurance policy for all work to be done on behalf of the owner state of montana the department and its agents employees and officers to be submitted with the contract when executed with a general aggregate limit of not less than num and an occurrence limit of not less than num .
c. insurance policies .
insurance policies must num .
provide coverage on an occurrence basis and not on a claimsmade basis num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num num .
not contain exclusions for explosion collapse or underground damage hazards and num .
provide that all insurance or selfinsurance maintained by the state its agents employees and officers is in excess of the required insurance and does not contribute with it .
maintain commercial general liability insurance in full force from the effective date stipulated in the notice to proceed until commission acceptance of the project unless written approval is given by the cas engineer to cancel the policy .
maintain owners and contractors liability insurance in full force from the effective date stipulated in the notice to proceed until the final acceptance form mdtconnum_num_num is approved by the department .
obtain all policies from an insurer with a best rating of a or better on the date the policy is written .
the insurance requirements are a condition precedent to the contract .
failure to obtain and maintain all required insurance is considered a material breach of the contract .
reinstate the policies listed above if a return to the project is required to complete additional work .
do not begin work until the policies are reinstated and submitted to the construction administration services bureau in helena .
num insurance involving railroads furnish railroad protective liability insurance on behalf of the railroad when equipment or personnel are located or work is done on any railroad right of way .
the limits of liability are specified in the contract .
maintain railroad protective liability insurance in full force until the final acceptance form mdtconnum_num_num is approved by the department .
submit copies of the railroad insurance policies as specified in the contract for transmittal to and approval by the railroad .
do not use or enter railroad property until railroad approval is received and the policies are in effect .
this applies to all work done as a part of the project .
reinstate the railroad protective liability insurance if a return to the project is required to complete additional work .
do not begin work until the policy is reinstated and submitted to the construction administration services bureau in helena .
num insurance requirements when utilities are present when working below the ground surface ensure a comprehensive num insurance policy covering underground work and resulting damage to underground utilities is in effect .
maintain insurance in full force until the final acceptance form mdtcon_num_num_num is approved by the department .
num general furnish insurance policies with an endorsement that prohibits canceling altering amending or reducing coverage without giving a minimum of num calendar days written notice by the insurance company to the insured and the department .
a montana resident agent must countersign all insurance policies issued under the contract .
if the state where the insurance is purchased has a reciprocal agreement with the state of montana and the insurance company is licensed to do business in the state of montana a countersignature by a montana resident agent is not required .
num third party beneficiary clause it is specifically agreed between the parties to the contract that it is not intended to create anyone as a third party beneficiary or to authorize anyone not a party to the contract to maintain an action for damages pursuant to the terms or provisions of the contract .
num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num num responsibility for damage claims indemnify and hold harmless the department and the departments officers and employees from all actions or claims brought because of injuries or damages to persons or property caused by the actions or omissions of the contractors employees or agents .
num opening sections of project to traffic the project manager may open certain sections of the work before completion or acceptance of the contract .
opening these sections does not constitute acceptance of the work or waive any contract requirement .
pending completion and acceptance of the roadway complete all repairs or removals on sections of opened roadway caused by defective materials work or by causes other than ordinary wear and tear meeting subsection num requirements .
if shoulders drainage structures or other elements of the work are not completed on schedule the project manager may order all or a portion of the project open to traffic .
liability and responsibility for maintaining the work before final acceptance remains in effect .
complete the remaining work with minimum interference to traffic .
num contractors responsibility for work protect the work against loss injury or damage caused by the elements traffic or any other cause including but not limited to fire theft pilferage vandalism or thirdparty negligence until final acceptance .
repair all damage to any project work or the project site caused by the contractor or anyone performing any project work at no expense to the department .
rebuilding repairing and restoring damage to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god such as earthquake flood tornado or other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature or acts of the public enemy or of governmental authorities will be paid for under subsection num .
this does not excuse or allow compensation or repayment for any act or omission by the contractor or its subcontractors either in violation of law regulation ordinance etc .
or for any act or occurrence which could have or should have been foreseen .
expect probable adverse weather and stream flow conditions to occur .
the cost of delay loss injury or damage occurring to dikes cofferdams caissons work bridges haul bridges or any other construction item or equipment caused by adverse weather and stream flow conditions is the contractors responsibility .
the above requirements do not apply if the contract has reached the final acceptance under subsection num .
provided the damage was not caused by the contractor or subcontractor repair to items that have been accepted as complete is extra work under subsection num and will be paid for under subsection num .
a building is considered complete when it is fully functional and is open to the public .
payment for repair of damages resulting from public traffic and use does not entitle the contractor to a .
the release of any part of unpaid contract funds or b .
relief from responsibility for defective workmanship or materials or c. a waiver of any contract provision .
conduct the work to ensure maximum convenience and safety to the general public and to the property owners adjacent to the work .
maintain access for adjacent property owners at all times .
take precautions to prevent damage to the project during work suspensions .
provide for drainage and erect all necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at contractor expense .
num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num num contractors responsibility for utility property and services protect railway telegraph telephone and power company properties or other property from damage loss or inconvenience from construction before starting work .
cooperate with the utility owners in the removal and rearrangement of underground or overhead utility lines or facilities to minimize interruption to service and duplication of work by the utility owners .
call the utilities underground location center num or other notification system udig num if in flathead or lincoln county for the marking and locating of the utilities before excavation .
the department will locate existing department owned utilities .
if utilities are relocated or installed as part of the contract the location of the relocated or newly installed utilities is the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor remains responsible for the relocated or newly installed utilities until the utility is functioning and in use by the traveling public .
obtain insurance covering underground work per subsection num .
provide and maintain temporary drainage facilities if existing surface drainage sewers or underdrains are interrupted at contractor expense until permanent drainage facilities are completed .
protect and preserve existing tile drains sewers other subsurface drains conduits and other underground structures affected by construction that can remain in use without any change .
immediately stop work if a utility line cable pipe or other facility is exposed or damaged during the work .
notify the project manager and the utility company of the damage and its location .
cooperate with the utility company if utility services are interrupted due to an accidental break until service has been restored .
the project manager will stop work in the area of the damaged utility should the contractor not stop work voluntarily .
resume work upon notice from the project manager .
no compensation is made for delays associated with utility damage caused by the contractors work .
the department will withhold monies from estimates due or to become due the contractor for all utility damage and related costs not reimbursed by the contractor under this subsection .
do not begin work around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been made and approved by the local fire authority .
provide continuous repair until service is restored if water service is interrupted .
repairs to damaged utility facilities or structures resulting from construction operations and negligence is at contractor expense .
be responsible to the utility owners and operators for damage injury expense loss inconvenience delay and for any legal suits actions or claims that may result from the work .
the commission may require the contractor to furnish protective public liability and property damage insurance to each corporation company partnership or individual owning or operating the properties affected .
num furnishing right of way the department will obtain all rightofway for the project .
exceptions will be noted in the bid proposal and award of the contract may not be made until rightofway is obtained .
the submission of a bid is an affirmative statement that the bidder accepts this condition and waives any damage that could be claimed .
claims for damage or loss of anticipated profits because of this delay will not be considered by the department .
consideration will be given for an appropriate extension of the contract time if the award is substantially delayed .
num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num num personal liability of public officials the department and its authorized representatives are acting solely as agents and representatives of the state when carrying out or exercising the power or authority granted under the contract .
there is no liability on them either personally or as officials of the state .
num no waiver of legal rights final walk through under subsection num does not prevent the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after contract completion and from recovering from the contractor or surety or both overpayments sustained for failure to fulfill the obligations under the contract .
a department waiver of any breach of any part of the contract does not constitute a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or with regards to the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num protection of archeological and historical findings submit written evidence that no historic or prehistoric sites on or eligible for listing in the national register of historic places are located on property used for construction activities that are outside of the department obtained right of way easements material sites or other areas designated in the contract before construction starts .
these areas include but are not limited to staging areas contractor furnished material sites or other related areas to be used for the work .
submit the legal descriptions the area involved a description of the work activity a site plan and a description of the ground surface of all sites not included in the contract plans .
within num business days the department will notify the contractor if the presence of or potential for cultural resources exists in the areas and recommend if a professional cultural resource survey is needed or not needed .
if a survey is not recommended no further cultural resource work is required .
if a survey is recommended hire a professional cultural resource contractor to perform a survey .
a directory of cultural resource contractors is available from the department archeologist .
if the survey does not identify any historic or prehistoric site within the area of proposed disturbance the department will issue a notice to proceed with the work .
if the cultural resource contractor or the department identifies any historic or prehistoric sites within the proposed area of disturbance the department in concert with shpo will determine whether the sites may be eligible for listing in the national register of historic places .
choose one of the following options if a site is eligible a .
do not use or disturb the proposed site .
b .
request the department to proceed with the steps to comply with num cfr num .
use a professional cultural resource contractor to perform all field work surveys etc .
required to complete the process identified by the department .
no additional compensation or delay considerations are allowed under these requirements .
immediately stop work if archeological or historical artifacts are encountered .
immediately notify the project manager of the find .
the project manager will stake the area to remain undisturbed until further notice .
num discovery of underground storage tanks take the following action if an underground storage tank or tanks are encountered the existence or location which was previously unknown to the department or contractor on the project within the project limits .
a .
immediately stop work in the vicinity and notify the project manager .
num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num b .
immediately notify the local fire authority and protect people and property from fire explosion vapor and other potential hazards and prevent further release of the tanks contents .
take all action requested by the project manager .
c. notify the deq within num hours if there is evidence of soil or groundwater contamination resulting from a tank leak or pipe leak at underground storage tank program department of environmental quality environmental remediation division petroleum technical section num d. perform the tank removal and closure work as permitted by deq .
e. do not resume work in the immediate vicinity of the tank or piping until approved by the project manager .
costs incurred from the discovery of underground storage tanks within the project limits will be paid for as extra work in accordance with subsection num .
costs from the discovery of underground storage tanks outside the project limits are not the departments responsibility .
num discovery and removal of unknown hazardous materials if hazardous material is discovered within the project limits the existence or location of which was previously unknown to the department or the contractor or not identified in the contract immediately stop work in that area and notify the project manager .
hazardous material includes but is not limited to contaminated soil contaminated water asbestos pcbs petroleum pcps hazardous waste or radioactive material .
if the area is determined to pose a hazard to the traveling public close off all access to the area as directed .
work may continue in unaffected areas believed to be safe .
once notified of the contaminated site the department will determine whether a separate contractor will be used to assess and clean up the contaminated site before permitting the contractor to resume work in the contaminated area .
if the department determines that the contractor can perform the work meet the requirements of subsection num .
the work will be paid for under subsection num .
obtain all necessary clearances procedures permits etc .
from the regulatory agencies before starting any work .
if the contractor does not perform the work it waives any potential claim for itself its subcontractors and suppliers for damages for delay from the departments securing another contractor to perform the cleanup work .
the department will equitably compensate the contractor under subsection num for costs associated with the delay to work in the affected area .
num access to contractors records allow access by the department or its authorized representative and the fhwa to all project records and the project records of all subcontractors under section num mca by the legislative auditor and legislative fiscal analyst to determine compliance with the contract terms .
num liability for cerclacecra claims the department will indemnify protect and hold harmless the contractor for any actions which the department specifically directs or reasonably requires the contractor to perform only if said action is the subject of litigation or administrative action under cercla num u.s.c .
section num et seq .
or cecra section num et seq .
mca and it does not fall within the exceptions below .
indemnify protect and hold harmless the department for any omissions or actions not specifically directed by the department if said omissions or actions are the subject of litigation or num edition legal relations and num responsibilities to the public num administrative action pursuant to cercla or cecra .
actions or omissions which are chosen either in type scope location amount or method by the contractor are not specifically directed or reasonably required by the department .
further indemnify protect and hold harmless the department for any negligent actions by the contractor its subcontractors their employees or agents including any actions that may be the subject of litigation or administrative action pursuant to cercla or cecra .
when the contractor is directed by the contract to obtain hazardous material liability insurance coverage for a project that contract requirement controls and has priority over this specification .
num diesel fuel used on the project use taxed clear fuel as required by state law to construct the project .
violation of state law may result in a sixmonth suspension of the violating firm from participation in department contracts not already awarded on the date of suspension .
prime contractors are responsible for compliance of their own equipment and the equipment of all subcontractors and their subcontractors .
num legal relations and num edition responsibilities to the public num num section num prosecution and progress num subcontrating or assignment of contract num subcontracting do not subcontract assign or otherwise dispose of more than num of the original contract cost without the written consent of the surety and the department .
table num illustrates when an executed subcontract is required .
the table is not all inclusive but shows examples .
when required a final determination will be made by the cas engineer .
table num subcontract requirements activity subcontract required payroll required physical work within the project limits yes yes material application dust palliative water oil products etc .
yes yes commercially supplied materials no no owneroperator of heavy haul trucks no crushing operations at a site dedicated to the project yes concrete pump truck no labor by operator no no equipment rentals woperator no yes work performed by a contractor on the primes payroll no yes survey work yes consultant services within project limits yes consultant services not within project limits no no contact the departments civil rights bureau for a determination .
the same criteria apply to work added by a change order .
a subcontract is required for work performed by a subcontractor at any level secondtier thirdtier etc of the contract .
include in the written subcontract or assignment or in a separate written document with the subcontract or assignment the following language in consideration of being awarded this subcontract and in consideration of having this subcontract approved by the state of montana the subcontractor hereby assigns to the state of montana any and all claims or causes of action for any antitrust law violations or damages arising there from as to goods materials and services purchased under the terms of this subcontract or any change order that may result from this subcontract .
do not hire or use in any manner a person or organization that performed any part of the design work for the department unless first approved by the department in writing .
num contract performance perform at least num of the original contract cost with the contractors organization .
the price of items designated in the contract as specialty items will be subtracted from the original contract price before the amount required to be performed by the contractor is calculated .
where an entire item is subcontracted the percentage of the work subcontracted is based on the original contract item unit price .
when a portion of an item is subcontracted the percentage of the work subcontracted will be based on either the subcontract item unit price or on an num prosecution and progress num edition num estimated percentage of the contract item unit price determined by the cas engineer .
an item will not be considered partially subcontracted unless the prime contractor performs a portion of the work equipment materials or labor .
if the same item is subcontracted at multiple levels the cost is only accounted for at the first level .
when an item added by change order is subcontracted the cost of the item does not count towards the required contract performance in subsection num .
do not allow a subcontractor at any contract tier to start work until its subcontract is consented to by the cas engineer .
include one executed and certified copy of the subcontract a letter from the surety consenting to the subcontract and the subcontractors checklist .
inform the subcontractor of all the contract provisions and that the subcontractor is bound by all terms of the primes contract with the department .
provide the subcontractor a copy of all the contract provisions including the applicable prevailing wage rates and fhwa num .
include in the subcontract the following language the subcontractor agrees to comply with all of the labor provisions contained in the attached special required contract provisions and davis bacon wage decision .
all subcontractors are agents of the contractor .
the contractor is responsible for all work material furnished project documentation provided by and indebtedness incurred by its subcontractors .
written consent to subcontract assign or transfer the contract does not release the contractor from liability under the contract and bond .
num subcontractor payments submit payment information for all subcontractors to the civil rights bureau within num calendar days of the payment .
this information can be submitted electronically on the departments website .
num notice to proceed work is to begin and time charges start on the date stipulated in the notice to proceed .
do not begin actual work nor permit subcontractors to begin work until all subsection num requirements are met .
if work can not begin on the date in the notice to proceed due to reasons beyond the contractors control these conditions dates and reasons will be recorded in the weekly assessment of contract time report and no time will be charged .
begin work when the project manager determines and issues a notice to resume work and that assessment of contract time will start .
num prosecution of work num general begin obtaining all air quality water quality and storm water runoff permits approval of reclamation plans and archaeological and historical clearances immediately upon receipt of the notice of contract award letter from the department .
furnish the completed applications to secure permits approvals or clearances as they are submitted to the respective agency .
furnish approved permits reclamation plans and clearances necessary to complete the work in conformance with all federal state and contract requirements .
the department will reimburse all reasonable costs incurred in securing the permits approvals and clearances if the department does not execute the contract for reasons outside its control .
num edition prosecution and progress num num a preconstruction conference will be held on a mutually agreed date between the contractor department and other parties interested in the work before work within the project limits begins no later than num calendar days after the notice to proceed date .
the contractors superintendent in charge of the project must attend the conference .
encourage subcontractors to attend .
submit a schedule meeting all requirements of subsection num or num at or before the preconstruction conference .
no other work except obtaining permits may begin until the schedule requirements have been met .
no payments will be made on the contract until the preconstruction conference has been held and the submitted schedule reviewed .
obtain written approval before starting night work .
provide work area flood lighting for night work and do not rely solely on equipment lights .
night work approval may be rescinded at any time .
suspending and resuming work on all or a part of the contract will be by subsection num .
work may be suspended on working day contracts for unsuitable weather or for other conditions that are detrimental to the work accuracy and quality .
prevent damage and repair damaged work that was not protected during the suspension at contractor expense .
no time extensions will be approved for work to correct nonprotected work .
store materials to protect against damage and without obstructing endangering or impeding traffic .
do not allow water to pond on the roadway or within the construction limits excluding environmental protective devices .
open ditches and shoulder drains and take other actions to protect the public and the work .
the department does not authorize project suspension by the contractor and time will be charged during unauthorized project suspensions .
if the contractor suspends the project provide written notification of the suspension to the project manager num calendar days before the suspension .
the contractor is responsible for all maintenance required during unauthorized suspensions and for all work and materials required due to the suspension .
num project schedules for projects not subject to subsection num requirements submit num copies of an asc and num copies of a wn that details the work and time working days calendar days or completion date to complete the contract .
the initial schedule must show that the work will be completed in the time frame specified in the contract .
the contractor may use a cpm schedule as the asc if it meets the requirements described in subsection num herein and results in no additional cost to the department .
a .
include in the asc num .
a bar chart chronologically sequenced and to time scale showing the following a .
all work activities with a completion duration of num or more working days .
for this requirement working days does not exclude the period from november numth through april numth .
b .
any work activity that has an impact on completion of the project .
num .
the relationship of each work activity listed in subsection numanum to other work activities permits plans submittals and approvals required to complete the project .
num .
work activity durations by working days or calendar days as appropriate .
indicate nonworking periods exceeding num days on each activity bar .
b .
include in the wn num .
the proposed work process sequence describing the relationship of the work activities listed in subsection numa required to complete the contract including num prosecution and progress num edition num shop drawing submittals permits including estimated maximum waiting periods for all required permits fabrication and delivery activities .
num .
a detailed description and the progress time of each work activity listed in subsection numa measured by working day or calendar day as appropriate .
num .
a detailed description of the asc including holidays planned workdays per week number of shifts per day hours per shift size of work crews and resources used .
num .
the contractors anticipated number of days during each month that weather will affect operations .
submit an updated asc and wn every month in which work is performed one week before the end of the projects monthly estimate cycle .
the asc and wn should show current progress and all revisions or modifications that reflect changes in the method or manner of the work specification changes extra work changes in duration changes in shifts work crews or resources .
if the work is not proceeding consistently with the contractors most recently reviewed asc and wn the project manager may require that the contractor submit num copies of an updated asc and wn that accurately reflect the contractors progress resource allocation for the project and revised schedule .
submit the updated asc and wn within num working day of the project managers request .
ensure that the wn and asc submitted meet the above requirements and accurately reflect the work progress .
the project manager may suspend work under subsection numa if the wn and asc do not accurately reflect the actual progress of the work the suspension may continue until accurate wn and asc are submitted .
any delay in beginning or prosecuting work that is caused by the contractors failure to provide an asc or wn when and as required is solely the responsibility of the contractor and is not an excusable delay .
prosecute the work with the resources required to complete the contract within the time shown in the contractors updated asc and wn .
the department may withhold num of each monthly progress estimate for failure to submit an original or updated asc or wn on time and in the manner required .
payment withheld for violation of the schedule requirements will be included in the next progress estimate following the contractors submission of the required asc and wn .
the project managers review does not attest to the validity of the asc or wn .
num cpm scheduling develop maintain and provide a detailed timescaled computer generated progress schedule using the critical path method that is compatible with primavera pnum or other primavera product which generates a .xer file type .
schedule all contract work including that of subcontractors vendors and suppliers .
the initial schedule must show that the work will be completed in the time frame specified in the contract .
prepare the initial cpm schedule as an activity on node aon or precedence diagramming method pdm .
the project manager may withhold num of each monthly progress estimate for failure to submit an original or updated cpm schedule on time and in the manner required .
payment withheld for violation of the schedule requirements will be included in the next progress estimate following the contractors submission of the required cpm schedule .
the project managers approval of the cpm schedule does not attest to the validity of the contractors assumptions logic constraints dependency relationships resource allocations labor and equipment or other schedule aspects .
a .
preparation and submission of schedule .
prepare an initial schedule and submit an electronic file compatible with primavera pnum or other primavera product which generates num edition prosecution and progress num num a .xer file type .
once an accepted baseline schedule is submitted furnish one ansi d numinch by numinch paper copy .
submit all items listed in subsection numc .
attend a meeting scheduled by the project manager within num calendar days of the project managers receipt of the cpm schedule to review correct or adjust the cpm schedule if required .
make all schedule adjustments and corrections discussed at the meeting and re submit a disk with the revised schedule within num calendar days after the meeting .
plan and execute the work to meet project milestones and completion dates .
b .
initial schedule requirements .
include the requirements listed in subsection numc and the following num .
total float sort responsibilityearly start sort areaearly start sort num .
numday look ahead bar charts by early start and num .
logic diagram having a maximum num activities for each ansi d numinch by numinch size sheet .
ensure each sheet includes project number page number title match data or diagram correlation and key to identify all components used in the diagram .
c. schedule requirements .
submit schedules that include num .
activity identification numbers num .
project milestones num .
activity descriptions num .
appropriate relationships num .
activity durations appropriate for the work .
submit activity manpower equipment unit quantities and production rates to the project manager for review num .
procurement of permits num .
material procurement separated into at least two activities fabrication and delivery .
include time for delivering all submittals and department review of working drawing submittals as separate items in the schedule logic for all items requiring submittal review and approval num .
activities coded to reflect the party performing each activity only one party performs each activity including subcontractors and suppliers and the arealocation of each activity num .
work days per week holidays number of shifts per day hours per shift and major equipment to be used num .
phasing staging details if the work has phasing or is to be performed in phases num .
written narrative describing the anticipated work in an orderly sequence of the construction phasing anticipated problems and anticipated project completion dates in a detailed description .
narratives that are a listing of the work will not be acceptable .
include written narratives with each submission num .
calendars including weekends holidays or other contractor nonwork periods .
all activities must be identified by entry of their appropriate calendar and num .
the contractors anticipated number of days during each month that weather will affect operations .
use only contractual constraints in the schedule logic .
do not use any other schedule constraints such as activity mandatory start and finish dates or mandatory zero float constraints .
float is defined as the amount of time between when an activity can start and when it must start .
total float is float shared with all other activities and is defined as the amount of time an activity can be delayed without affecting the overall time of project completion .
float is a shared commodity not for the exclusive use or financial benefit of either party .
either party has the full use of float until it is depleted .
num prosecution and progress num edition num the critical path is defined as the longest continuous sequence of activities through the network schedule that establishes the minimum overall project duration .
the submitted activity sequence and durations must generate a cpm schedule having a critical path .
keep multiple critical paths and nearcritical paths to a minimum .
describe multiple critical paths and nearcritical paths with thorough and reasonable justification in the written narrative .
show the sequence and interdependence of all activities required for the complete performance of all items of work under this contract including acquiring all the environmental permits .
show all network dummies on the diagram .
the department reserves the right to limit the number of activities on the schedule to between num and num activities .
describe the activities so that the work is identifiable and the progress on each activity is measurable .
d. schedule updates and progress payments .
schedule and attend monthly project progress meetings to compare the schedule to the actual finish dates of completed activities the remaining duration of uncompleted activities and the proposed logic andor time estimate revisions .
provide the status of activities at these meetings and the schedule updates based on this information once it has been verified .
each month of the project one week before the end of the projects monthly estimate cycle submit an electronic file using primavera pnum or other primavera product which generates a .xer file type containing num .
total float sort num .
a narrative report describing the critical path logic revisions or modifications to the schedule including but not limited to changes in the method or manner of the work changes in specifications extra work changes in duration etc .
and num .
any revised activity on node diagrams for the following a .
delay in the completion of any critical activity b .
actual prosecution of the work that is different than that represented on the cpm schedule and c. the addition deletion or revision of activities required by contract modification or logic revisions .
the contract time will be adjusted only as specified in the contract .
furnish documentation to support requests for time extensions for milestone dates or the contract completion date .
num method of measurement cpm schedule is measured by the lump sum .
other scheduling requirements are not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for all costs associated with cpm scheduling is included in the lump sum contract unit price for cpm scheduling .
payment for all costs associated with other scheduling requirements is included in the payment for other items of work .
failure to submit a cpm schedule update to the project manager within num calendar days of its due date will result in a num deduct of the cpm schedule bid item for each update that is late .
failure to submit a revised cpm schedule as specified may also result in withholding num of each monthly progress estimate .
payment withheld for violation of the schedule requirements will be included in the next progress estimate following the contractors submission of the required schedule .
num edition prosecution and progress num num partial payments for cpm scheduling will be made based on the lump sum contract unit price as follows num .
num when the initial schedule is finalized .
num .
num when the overall project is num complete .
num .
num when all updates have been submitted .
num limitation of operations conduct the work to minimize interfering with traffic and work already started .
finish a section of roadway before starting work on any additional sections if it is essential to public convenience .
num character of workers provide workers with the skill and experience to perform the work .
remove any person employed who does not perform work in a proper and skillful manner or who is intemperate disorderly or verbally abusive .
employees may not return to the project or communicate with department personnel without the written approval of the project manager .
failure to remove the employees or failure to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel to perform the work may result in a written notice to suspend the work .
num methods and equipment use equipment of the size and mechanical condition to perform and produce the specified quality of work .
do not use equipment that damages the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
operate all equipment with adequate lighting at night .
do not use methods or equipment other than as specified unless requested in writing and authorized by the project manager .
include in the request a full description of the proposed methods and equipment to be used and the reasons for the change .
produce work meeting the contract requirements .
discontinue use of alternate methods or equipment if the project manager determines that the work does not meet contract requirements .
remove and replace or repair deficient work with work of specified quality at contractor expense .
no change will be made regarding payment for authorizing a change in methods or equipment .
num determination of compensation and extension of contract time for excusable noncompensable and compensable delays time allowed for completion of the contract is determined by the completion date calendar day or working day provision in the contract .
num completion date contracts complete all work by the completion date specified in the contract .
begin work on the effective date stated in the notice to proceed .
the completion date will be extended for the following a. extensions according to the calendar days added under subsection num or b. suspensions of work authorized after the contract is awarded or c. delays in the award of the contract .
the new completion date is determined by adding the calendar days added under subsection num the number of calendar days during authorized suspensions or the number of calendar days the award was delayed past the posted award date to the specified completion date .
the actual completion date is the date the project manager approves the contractors certificate of work complete form under subsection num .
num prosecution and progress num edition num contract time overruns for assessment of liquidated damages will be computed as the number of calendar days elapsing between the contract completion date and the actual completion date .
num calendar day contracts complete all work within the number of calendar days specified in the contract .
a calendar day is defined in subsection num .
begin work on the effective date stated in the notice to proceed .
calendar days will be added for extensions added under subsection num .
work on no work days will be considered a chargeable day and assessed against the contract time unless the work is an exempt work item defined in subsection num .
contract time assessment will cease when the project manager approves the contractors certificate of work complete form under subsection num .
contract time overruns for assessment of liquidated damages will be computed as the number of calendar days the contract is not complete beyond the contract time specified .
num working day contracts complete all work within the number of working days specified in the contract .
a working day is defined in subsection num .
begin work on the effective date stated in the notice to proceed .
working days will be assessed against the contract time except for days when work can not be performed due to inclement weather .
days will not be assessed if inclement weather or the aftermath of inclement weather prevents the contractor from working at least six hours in a day .
inclement weather will not be considered when assessing time if the contractor is not actively performing work or is not scheduled to work .
work on no work days will considered a chargeable day and assessed against the contract time unless the work is an exempt work item defined in subsection num .
a working day will not be assessed against the contract for work performed up until num noon on friday prior to memorial day labor day or independence day july numth .
chargeable or nonchargeable working days will be determined daily by the project manager .
except during the winter shutdown the project manager will furnish a weekly report every monday showing the number of working days a .
charged for the preceding week b .
previously charged c. specified for contract completion d. approved time extensions and e. remaining to complete the contract .
during winter shutdown the project manager will furnish a report showing the information listed above for any week that the contractor has chargeable days .
submit a written protest to the project manager within the timeframe shown on the weekly report for any alleged discrepancies in the time assessed .
failure to file a protest is conclusive evidence that the time assessed is accepted as correct .
contract time assessment will cease when the project manager approves the contractors certificate of work complete form under subsection num .
contract time overruns for assessment of liquidated damages will be computed as the number of working days assessed beyond the contract time specified .
num delays the following delays will be considered for extensions of contract time num edition prosecution and progress num num a. excusable or noncompensable delay .
contract time allowed for the performance of the work may be extended for delays caused by acts of god acts of the public enemy fires floods epidemics quarantine restrictions strikes freight embargoes unusually severe weather or delays not caused by the contractors fault or negligence .
provide project and site specific documentation to support the delay cause .
b. compensable delay .
contract time may be extended for delays caused by the department under subsection num .
num extensions provide a written request detailing the reasons for requesting a time extension .
a plea that insufficient contract time was specified is not a valid reason for a time extension .
if the department finds that the work was delayed because of conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor the contract time will be extended in the amount justified .
the extended time for completion is in full force and effect as though it were the original time for completion .
time extension requests must be made within num business days of the alleged delay .
the time extension request must be accompanied with a written narrative and an updated schedule .
the contract time as awarded is based on the estimated quantities as defined in subsection num .
no decrease in contract time will be made for any decrease in a contract item .
the contract time will be increased based on the quantity and difficulty of added work and how it impacts the critical activities of the contractors operation as shown on the most current work schedule as required under subsection num .
the time extension will be to the nearest whole day .
no additional contract time will be allowed for a .
increases in percentages of asphalt in plant mix materials .
b .
the addition of antistripping additives to bituminous materials .
c. the addition of or for increases in hydrated lime or mineral fillers to plant mix materials .
d. increases in traffic control devices .
e. delays for slow delivery of materials from the supplier or fabricator .
f. material deliveries delayed for reasons of late ordering financial considerations or other foreseeable and preventable causes within the contractors control .
delays in material deliveries for unusual market condition caused by an industrywide strike national disaster or an areawide shortage beyond the contractors control will be considered as a basis for granting additional time .
submit written documentation substantiating the reasons for the late delivery or non availability of materials .
the documentation must be from the original supplier and document the dates the material was ordered by the contractor and the reason for late delivery or non availability of the material .
include a statement elaborating on the efforts to obtain materials from alternate suppliers .
num delay compensation notify the project manager of the request for delay consideration .
keep daily records of all nonsalaried labor material costs and equipment expenses for all operations affected by the delay .
maintain a daily record of each operation affected by the delay .
identify the location by stations of the affected operations .
each monday prepare and submit written reports to the project manager containing the following information num .
number of days behind schedule num .
a summation of all operations that have been delayed or will be delayed num prosecution and progress num edition num num .
an explanation for compensable delays and how the departments act or omission delayed each operation num .
an estimate of the time required to complete the project and num .
an itemization of all extra costs incurred including a relating the extra costs to the delay and document how they are calculated and measured b identifying all nonsalaried project employees for whom costs are being compiled and c summarizing the time charges for equipment identified by manufacturers number for which costs are compiled .
the project manager will maintain daily records of the operations by stations .
at the end of each week request a copy of the project managers daily records in writing .
compare the two records and provide a written summation of the comparison of the detailed reports to the project manager within num calendar days of receipt of the project managers daily records .
identify all disagreements between specific records .
failure to review the project managers records or to report disagreements between the records is considered the contractors acceptance of the project managers records as accurate .
submit a written report to the project manager within num calendar days of completion of work allegedly delayed .
all costs shown in the report submitted must be certified by a certified public accountant cpa and include the following num .
a description of the delayed operations and the documentation and explanation of the reason for the delay including all reports prepared for the contractor by consultants if used and num .
an itembyitem measurement and explanation of extra costs requested for reimbursement due to the delay .
the project manager will provide a written decision to the contractor within num calendar days of receiving the submittal .
in the case of compensable delays if it is determined that the department is responsible for delays to the contractors operations the project managers written decision will reflect the nature and extent of any equitable adjustment to the contract as specified in subsection num .
num failure to complete on time if the contract time is exceeded including approved adjustments a daily charge will be made against the contract until final acceptance under subsection num .
this daily charge determined from table num will be deducted from any money due the contractor .
this deduction is for liquidated damages for added department contract administration costs etc .
for failure to complete the work on time .
num edition prosecution and progress num num table num schedule of liquidated damages original contract amount daily charge from more than to and including working day or calendar day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num permitting the contractor to continue and complete the work after the specified contract completion time or approved extensions granted does not waive the departments rights under the contract .
if the contractor disputes the liquidated damages on the approved contractors certificate of work complete form the cas bureau will send a final notification in writing to the contractor of the number of days to be assessed and the dollar amount of proposed liquidated damages .
submit any objections of the assessment to the cas bureau in writing within num calendar days of receipt of the departments notification .
include with the objection the justification and all information to support an adjustment to the assessment .
the department will review the contractors information and perform a final analysis .
the commission will review all liquidated damages and any disputes .
the cas bureau will submit the contractors information and the departments recommendation to the commission .
a copy of the departments recommendation will be sent to the contractor within num calendar days of receipt of the objections .
the contractor must state in writing within num calendar days of receipt of the departments recommendation if an appearance before the commission is requested .
if an appearance is requested the department will notify the contractor in writing of the date the commission will review the liquidated damages recommendation .
the commission will not receive or hear new information at the meeting not already furnished in the contractors original response .
num default of contractor the contractor will be in default if it a .
fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified in the notice to proceed .
b .
fails to perform the work with sufficient resources to promptly complete the work .
c. fails to perform the work in accordance with the contract requirements or refuses to remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable work .
d. discontinues the prosecution of the work .
e. fails to resume work that has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to resume has been given .
f. becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits an act of bankruptcy or insolvency .
g. allows a final judgment to remain unsatisfied for a period of num calendar days .
h. makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors .
i .
fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments eeo requirements or any state or federally mandated affirmative action requirements .
num prosecution and progress num edition num j .
for any other cause fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner .
the engineer will give written notice to the contractor and surety of such delay neglect or default .
failure to correct the delay neglect or default within num calendar days after the engineers written notice gives the department full authority without violating the contract to take over prosecution of the work from the contractor .
the department may appropriate or use any or all materials and equipment at the project site that is suitable and acceptable and enter into an agreement for completing the contract .
the department may use any methods determined necessary to complete the contract .
all costs and charges incurred by the department including the cost of completing the work under the contract will be deducted from any monies due or that may become due the contractor .
if the expense exceeds the sum that would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the surety are liable and must pay to the department the amount of such excess .
num termination for public convenience num general the department may terminate the contract in whole or part whenever a .
work can not proceed because of an executive order of the president with respect to the prosecution of war or in the interest of national defense or an executive order of the president or governor of the state with respect to the preservation of energy resources .
b .
work can not proceed because of a preliminary special or permanent restraining order of a court of competent jurisdiction where the issuance of such restraining order is primarily caused by acts or omissions of persons or agencies other than the contractor .
c. it is determined that termination is in the best interests of the department .
num payment payment will be made for the actual work performed at the contract unit prices for completed items of work when the contract is terminated under subsection num .
payment will be made for materials delivered or stockpiled or work performed that comply with the contracts specifications or that have been inspected tested and accepted for use .
payment will only be made for materials that have been properly stored and maintained until they are delivered to the department .
an equitable adjustment will be made under subsection num for partially completed items of work and disposal of materials .
submit the termination costs to the project manager within num calendar days of the date of the notice of termination for public convenience under subsection num .
provide sufficient detail and make all project records available so the engineer can determine the basis and amount of the termination costs .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
follow the requirements of subsection num if the engineers equitable adjustment is disputed .
num responsibility of the contractor and surety termination of a contract does not relieve the contractor of any contractual responsibilities for the work nor the surety or sureties of the obligations under the contract bond for the work performed .
num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities work completed under the contract will be measured using the united states standard measure or the metric system when specified .
where the standard measure is given in the english system approximate metric equivalents are shown in parentheses .
no guarantee is provided explicit or implicit that the units are exact conversions .
work will be accepted on the basis of measures in the contract .
specified metric tolerances apply to metric contracts .
the method of measurement and computations used in determining quantities of material furnished and work performed are those methods recognized as conforming to sound engineering practice .
a station when used as a term of measurement is num feet or num meters .
longitudinal and transverse measurements for surface area computations will be made horizontally using the neat plan dimensions .
no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of num square feet num mnum or less .
structures are measured using neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
items that are measured by the foot m mm such as pipe culverts guardrail underdrains and the like are measured parallel to the structure base or foundation .
computing excavation volumes will be by the average end area method or by alternate methods involving threedimensional measurements delta surface .
the term gauge when used for measuring plates is the u.s. standard gauge .
galvanized sheets used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing are specified and measured as sheet thickness in inches mm .
when the term gauge refers to measuring wire it is the u.s. steel wire gauge .
the term ton is the short ton consisting of num pounds num kg .
measure or proportion weighed materials on certified scales at the designated locations .
material shipped by rail may be accepted using the car weight provided that only the actual weight of material is paid for .
car weights are not acceptable for material that will be processed in mixing plants .
obtain tare weights daily on haul vehicles or as directed .
clearly mark each individual vehicle with a legible identification mark .
haul materials measured by volume in approved hauling vehicles and measure materials at the point of delivery .
if approved material specified to be measured by the ton may be weighed and converted to cubic yards mnum .
the project manager will determine the conversion factors from weight to volume subject to contractor concurrence before using this method of measurement .
net certified scale weights based on certified volumes in the case of rail shipments will be the basis of measurement corrected for loss of bituminous material from the car or distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
when bituminous materials are shipped by truck or transport net certified weights or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
lump sum payment is complete payment for the work item described in the contract .
when a complete structure or structural unit i.e .
lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit includes all necessary fittings and accessories .
num measurement and payment num edition num rented equipment is measured in hours of actual working time and necessary equipment travel time within the project limits .
travel time and transportation to the project is measured for special equipment ordered by the project manager for force account work .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by gauge unit weight section dimensions etc .
this identification is the nominal weight or dimension .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted .
other quantities are computed in the contract units using established engineering principles without consideration of local rules or customs .
num weighing equipment furnish accurate weigh equipment for material specified to be proportioned or measured for payment by weight .
the weigh equipment must indicate the weight to within the smaller of num .
tolerances from correct weight adopted by the montana bureau of weights and measures or num .
onehalf percent of the correct weight .
use weigh systems tested and certified by the bureau of weights and measures before each use and after each scale setup or when directed .
the project manager will accept reports from a montana certified scale service stating compliance with the applicable tolerances in lieu of state certification .
seal the weigh system after adjustment and testing .
evidence of tampering or scale adjustment is cause to suspend use of the scale until it is retested and certified .
all materials received after the last test and certification will be reduced by the percent of error in excess of the specified tolerances if the weigh system is found to overweigh indicate more than the correct weight .
no adjustment is made for systems found to underweigh indicate less than the correct weight .
repair and recertify weigh systems underweighing or overweighing outside the specified accuracy limits before use .
follow the weigh equipment manufacturers procedures or the national bureau of standards handbook no .
num procedures for weigh system testing witnessed by the project manager .
provide all equipment tools and labor necessary to perform the test .
test permanent scales at least annually .
the cost of furnishing testing operating and maintaining weigh equipment is incidental to and included in the payment for the work .
num scope of payment receive and accept the specified compensation as full payment for furnishing all materials performing all work under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner and for all risk loss damage or expense arising from the work subject to subsection num .
if the basis of payment clause for unit price in the contract requires that the unit price be full compensation for work or material essential to the item this same work or material is not measured or paid for under any other pay item in the contract .
the payment of any current or final estimate or of any unpaid contract funds does not prejudice or affect the contractors obligation to submit for final acceptance a completed improvement meeting the contract specifications .
in accordance with the requirements of section num mca for contracts exceeding num including approved modifications the department will withhold num of the dollar amount of all contractor payments .
all payments by a prime contractor to a subcontractor are also num edition measurement and payment num num subject to this num gross receipts fee .
the prime contractor must withhold num of all payments made to subcontractors .
num pay unit rounding the project manager will determine the quantities of work performed for each pay estimate as outlined in subsection num .
all quantity calculations will be rounded for payment as outlined in table num .
table num rounding criteria pay unit rounding foot m num num station num mile km num num course foot km num num square foot mnum num num square yard mnum num num acre ha num num cubic yard mnum num num gallon l num num pound kg num num ton mt num num hour num lump sum num each num unit num all dollars will be rounded on progress and final estimates to num .
num compensation for altered quantities accept payment for work quantities that vary from the contract quantities at the original contract unit prices .
no allowance except under subsections num and num will be made for any increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense and subsequent loss of expected reimbursements or from any other cause .
only those quantities of materials actually incorporated into the final work and accepted will be paid for .
num payment for extra work num unit price or agreed price extra work performed under subsections num and num is paid for at the unit price or price agreed upon and specified in the change order .
num measurement and payment num edition num force account basis under subsection num will be used if a change order with an agreed price is not signed by the contractor .
num force account basis approved extra work paid for on a force account basis will be accounted for daily .
the daily report sheets are the true record of extra work .
the payments below are full compensation and include profit and overhead .
no additional profit will be added .
extra work on a force account basis ordered by the project manager in writing under section num is paid for as follows a .
labor .
the contractor is paid the wage rates for all labor and foremen assigned exclusively to performing the extra work for the total hours worked plus at least num of the total .
the num surcharge may be increased if certified documentation is submitted showing that a higher percentage surcharge is needed to cover labor costs .
the wage rates used for the above computation include travel pay if applicable but must not include fringe benefits whether or not paid directly to the employees .
payment as described above is full compensation for all labor related expenses incurred including but not limited to premiums for workers compensation insurance public liability and property damage insurance social security unemployment compensation health and welfare expenses and other expenses imposed by federal or state laws or both .
submit evidence of the actual wage rates paid .
only labor on certified payrolls is eligible .
the rate paid will be that which is listed on the certified payroll .
b .
materials .
the contractor will receive the actual delivered cost of all materials used based on invoices plus num .
the quantity of material used must be documented .
c. equipment .
the contractor will receive the rental rate or invoice price where applicable for machinery or special equipment other than small tools used to perform the work plus num .
rental rates are calculated using the current issue of the departments equipment rental rate guidelines .
rates and allowances for standby time outside rented equipment owneroperated equipment and moving of equipment is determined under the equipment rate guidelines .
d. bond .
the actual cost chargeable to force account work of premiums for the performance bond are paid .
no surcharge is allowed for the performance bond .
no payment will be made for additional performance bond premiums if the evidence is not submitted within num calendar days of completion of the force account work .
furnish evidence of the rate paid for the bond .
e. miscellaneous .
accept the compensation provided for under subsection num as full payment for extra work done .
f. statements .
submit all statements for the extra work done on a force account basis on department forms .
attach the original extra work order material invoices and freight bills .
the inspector will compile and forward to the project manager at the end of each day a daily record of extra work done on a force account basis .
the project manager will forward the information to the contractor .
g. subcontracting .
extra work performed on a force account basis by a subcontractor under an extra work order will include the percentage allowed in table num for administrative expenses .
this administrative allowance only applies to charges for labor and materials .
the allowance is applied to all charges and added percentages specified in subsections numa b and d. bid items in the original contract are not eligible for this administrative allowance .
num edition measurement and payment num num table num subcontracting administrative allowances extra work subcontractor administrative allowance num to num num num to num num plus num of excess over num over num num plus num of excess over num approval of this additional percentage is made after the contractor furnishes receipted invoices .
administrative expenses are not paid for on a force account basis above the amount allowed the prime contractor and subcontractor if the work is done by a sub subcontractor .
num equitable adjustment the equitable adjustment provided for in subsection num is determined as follows a .
if the parties agree the price is determined using unit prices or other agreed upon prices .
b .
if the parties can not agree the price is determined by the project manager using unit prices or other means to establish cost .
the following limitations apply a .
the rental rates must be actual cost not to exceed the rates established in subsection num and in effect at the time the work is performed .
b .
no claim for loss of anticipated profits on deleted or uncompleted work or consequential damages of any kind is allowed .
num deleted or terminated work the engineer may delete work by change order under subsection num or may terminate the contract in whole or part under subsection num .
when the contract is terminated in part the partial termination is treated as a deletion change order for payment under this section .
payment for completed items is at the contract unit prices .
when any item is deleted in whole or in part by change order or when the contract is terminated in whole or in part payment for deleted or terminated work is made as follows num .
payment will be made for the actual number of units of work completed and meeting all contract requirements at the contract unit prices unless the project manager determines the contract unit prices are inappropriate for the work actually performed .
when that determination is made payment for work performed will be as mutually agreed .
if the parties can not agree the project manager will determine the amount or the equitable adjustment under subsection num .
num .
payment for partially completed lump sum items that meet contract requirements will be as mutually agreed .
if the parties can not agree the project manager will determine the amount of the equitable adjustment under subsection num .
num .
the department will pay as part of the equitable adjustment those direct costs necessarily and actually incurred in anticipation of performing the work that has been deleted or terminated .
costs previously paid for by the contract unit prices for completed units of work are excluded .
num .
the total payment for any one item in the case of a deletion or partial termination can not exceed the contract unit price as modified by approved change orders less the estimated cost including overhead and profit to complete the work and less any amount paid to the contractor for the item .
num measurement and payment num edition num num .
the total payment where the contract is terminated will not exceed the total contract price as modified by approved change orders less those amounts paid before the effective date of termination .
no claim for damages of any kind or for loss of anticipated profits on deleted or terminated work is allowed because of the termination or change order .
contract time will be adjusted as the parties agree .
if the parties can not agree the project manager will determine the equitable adjustment for contract time .
materials to be permanently incorporated into the work and ordered before the date the work was terminated under subsection num or as deleted under subsection num will either be purchased by the department at the actual cost and become department property or the contractor will be reimbursed for the actual cost of returning the materials to the suppliers .
num partial payments partial payments will be made once each month following the effective date on the notice to proceed based on estimates of the value of the work performed and materials complete in place under the contract including materials delivered under subsection num .
no payments will be made for work performed or materials produced without the required permits and authorizations in place as required under subsection num .
the department reserves the right to withhold all or part of any partial payments earned under the contract until all special fuel users tax payments due or owing to the state of montana under section num mca or other statutory taxes are paid in full .
if the contractor becomes delinquent in any monetary contractual obligations e.g .
prompt payment upon satisfactory completion of work payment to owners of materials sources etc .
the department may withhold unpaid contract funds from each monthly estimate thereafter until the delinquency is resolved or the amount of the delinquency has been withheld .
the amount of the withholding will not exceed the amount of known delinquency but depending on the amount of the delinquency and the amount of the monthly estimate may be in the full amount of that monthly estimate .
in the event the delinquency involves nonpayment to a subcontractor or supplier the department also may order forfeiture of the contract bond or take action under subsection num .
the department will release the withheld amounts to the contractor upon the engineers receipt of a notarized statement from the entity to whom the delinquency was owed stating that the delinquency has been satisfied in full or in the event the entity has received partial payment of the delinquency that portion of the withheld amount may be released .
if the contract extends beyond the contract completion time the sum specified in table num will be deducted from any money due the contractor .
num billing cycle in accordance with section num mca this contract provides that the department will submit payment estimates in billing cycles other than once a month when deemed necessary .
do not submit a request for routine payment and requests for payment of any item does not initiate any period for payment .
requests may be submitted for stockpiled material payments in accordance with subsection num .
in accordance with federal regulations the project manager will issue estimates usually monthly for progress payments greater than num based on the documentation of approved work and the project managers opinion of the percentage of completion in accordance with specifications of each of the projects schedule of items .
the department will review work performed for completeness specification compliance and quality assurance before it is given conditional approval for progress payment .
should work that was previously paid for any reason such as stockpiled material under subsection num be later found not to comply with quality num edition measurement and payment num num assurance or specification such as compliance testing or any required material certification that part of the work will be deleted from payment approval .
in such case future monthly estimates will be lessened by the reduced amount or the contractor will be required to repay the previouslypaid amounts until the work is performed in full compliance with specification and quality assurance .
notice of extended payment provision this contract allows the department to make payment within num calendar days after submission of estimates by the project manager .
the contracts final payment will not be made until the contractor has fully completed all work under the contract all required documentation has been submitted to the departments satisfaction and the materials supplied and work performed has passed the departments quality assurance testing .
pay all subcontractors within seven days after receipt of a periodic or final payment from the department for the full amount due the subcontractor under the subcontract for work performed or materials provided that were included in the periodic or final payment according to the provisions of section numa mca .
a subcontract may not provide for a time longer than the laws mandated num days .
num stockpiled materials materials delivered and stockpiled at the project site or other location approved by the project manager may be considered for partial payment if the following requirements are met num .
the requirements of subsection num have been satisfied .
num .
the material meets the contract requirements .
num .
the material is a manufactured end product or a fully fabricated product .
aggregate must be produced and stockpiled to the final stage for incorporation into the specified mixture or the roadway .
riprap meeting the gradations specified in table num for the class specified in the plans is considered a manufactured end product for this subsection .
num .
material is stored to prevent damage and theft without obstructing or impeding the traveling public .
department inspectors must have access to the inventory sheets and the stockpiles at all times .
num .
a written request is accompanied with an invoices for all items received at least one week before the end of the monthly estimate cycle .
include the quantity for which payment is requested the length of time the material is to be stored the location for material stored off the project site and sufficient detail to justify the costs .
if the material is manufactured by the contractor include the manufacturing costs in the request .
submit a new request and invoices to the project manager whenever items are added to the stockpile .
clearly identify the project number location designation and the entire inventory on these sheets .
keep each projects stockpiled material separated from stockpiles belonging to other projects .
only use stockpiled material for the designated project .
steel or iron items meeting subsection num may be stored at property owned or leased by the contractor or approved subcontractor if approved by the project manager .
the property must be located in montana and accessible to department personnel at all times .
payment made for material on hand does not constitute acceptance of the material .
if stored material is lost stolen or damaged the materials value will be deducted from the subsequent estimate or estimates .
payment of partial estimates for stored material acceptance of the materials to be stored or approval of the storage method does not relieve the contractors responsibility for all materials and work upon which payments have been made or the restoration of any damaged work .
the num measurement and payment num edition num payments are not a waiver by the department of any other contract provisions or of its rights to require fulfillment of all contract terms .
partial payment will be made for the invoice price or for the manufacturing costs incurred by the contractor .
payment for stockpiled materials will not exceed the contract unit price or the amount justified to the project manager .
when stockpiled material has been produced by crushing operations payment will not exceed num of the contract unit price .
maximum payment for materials in storage will be based on quantities that will be measured for payment .
obtain the project managers written approval of offproject site storage locations for bridge prestressed beams bridge structural steel members concrete box structures and other large structural items .
no payment is made for bridge deck resurfacing materials having a manufacturers expiration date passing before its scheduled incorporation into the work .
num reserved num mobilization num general mobilization is the preparatory work and operations performed including but not limited to those necessary for num .
the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site num .
the establishment of all offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project num .
premium on contract bonds num .
insurance for the contract num .
other work and operations that must be performed or costs incurred before beginning contract work num .
mobilization costs for subcontracted work and num .
submission of all forms certifications and documentation required by the department to prepare the final estimate and issue a certificate of completion .
mobilization is only to be used for these reasonablyanticipated expenses and is not to be used either to frontload a bid in order to receive payment earlier or to unbalance a bid .
num payment the original contract amount is the total price of the contract as bid .
the contract amount paid is the cumulative amount paid on progress estimates excluding all price adjustments .
partial payments for mobilization will be made based on the lump sum contract unit price under table num .
no payments will be made for mobilization until the requirements of subsection num have been satisfied .
num edition measurement and payment num num table num mobilization payments percent of contract amount paid amount paid whichever is less percent of mobilization bid amount num percent of original contract amount first estimate after notice to proceed num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or conditional final acceptance whichever occurs first num final estimate num note num .
this percentage is the cumulative amount paid to that point not the amount paid on the progress estimate .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work under the contract .
num payment smp contracts an exception to subsection num is state maintenance stockpile contracts smp contracts .
mobilization will be paid for based on the percentage each stockpile site quantity bears in relation to the entire contract quantity determined by the department .
the amount established as payment for mobilization for each site will be paid for in its entirety with the first estimate for each site .
num overpayments overpayments on progress estimates will be deducted from subsequent progress estimate payments .
if there are no subsequent progress estimate payments to be made or the amounts to be paid are less than the overpayment the department may num .
notify the contractor of the overpayment .
the contractor has num calendar days from the date of receipt of notification of overpayment to repay the money owed .
if the money owed is not received by the department before the numday period expires interest will be charged on the overpayment beginning with the date of receipt of notification of overpayment .
the interest rate charged will be the average short term investment pool stip rate determined by the montana state board of investments for the period in which the overpayment is not repaid .
the contractor may be barred from bidding on department projects until the money that is owed has been received .
num .
the department may deduct the amount of overpayment and accrued interest from the progress estimate payment of any contract with the department .
num fuel price adjustment notify the project manager in writing by the notice to proceed date or at the preconstruction conference whichever comes first of intent to participate in fuel price adjustment .
once the provision is invoked it will not be reversed .
submit a list of contract items according to table num that are requested to be subject to fuel price adjustment .
submit the list to the project manager for approval by the preconstruction conference using form csbnum_num .
num measurement and payment num edition num table num items subject to fuel price adjustment original contract amount maximum number of items num to num num num to num num greater than num num when required by the project manager provide actual diesel fuel propane fuel and gasoline fuel costs along with the calculations used to determine the costs for the respective contract items .
the accumulated diesel fuel propane fuel and gasoline fuel costs may not exceed num of the contract unit price without additional justification acceptable to the project manager .
items measured on a lump sum basis will not be eligible for fuel price adjustment .
no fuel price adjustment will be made for stockpiled materials .
adjustments will be calculated using the increase or decrease between the base price and the monthly average price at the time the contract items are added to the progress estimate .
the base price for the contract will be the average of the high and low price for the num business days before the bid opening .
the base price for propane fuel will be the base price for diesel fuel divided by the difference in btuhr .
for each fuel or num btuhr .
the monthly average price will be the average of the high and low prices on wednesday of each week in the adjustment period taken from platts oilgram price report or other fuel price report determined by the department for unleaded gasoline and ultralow sulfur diesel fuel .
the average price for propane fuel will be the average monthly price for diesel fuel divided by num .
the adjustment period for fuel price is from the wednesday of the full week before the beginning of the estimate cycle to the wednesday of the full week prior to the next estimate cycle .
if the estimate cycle extends beyond the monthly estimate period only the fuel prices from the month in which the item is added to the estimate will be used to generate the average price .
adjustments will be made only when the monthly average price exceeds num per gallon more or less than the base price .
the adjustments will be for the amount exceeding num per gallon .
the price adjustment for each type of fuel will be the change in cost from the base price bp to the monthly average price ap that exceeds num multiplied by the quantity q of the item added to the progress estimate multiplied by the fuel cost fc .
adjustments will be according to the following formulas q fc bp bp ap increase .num num q fc bp ap bp decrease .num num where ap monthly average price bp base price fc fuel cost q quantity include only the cost of fuel associated with the approved items in fc .
do not include additional costs related to items such as servicing of equipment lubricants tire and ground engaging component wear depreciation insurance storage licenses inspection etc .
adjustments will be calculated for each type as described without regard to the grade or amount of fuel actually used .
the total of the fuel price adjustments will be added to or subtracted from the monthly progress estimate .
num section num clearing and grubbing num description this work is the clearing grubbing removing burning burying and disposing of vegetation and debris within the rw limits and easement areas without damaging vegetation adjacent property and other objects designated to remain in place .
immediately stop work and notify the project manager if evidence of aboriginal activity or occupation is encountered .
num clearing clearing is felling trees disposing of stumps brush windfalls logs limbs sticks piles of sawdust rubbish debris vegetation and other matter within the clearing limits or other areas that interfere with the excavation and embankment limits .
num grubbing grubbing is removing and disposing of roots stumps stubs duff matted roots and debris from the grubbing limits .
num clearing and grubbing perform clearing and grubbing in accordance with subsections num and num .
num disposal disposal is removing burning and burying material generated from clearing grubbing or clearing and grubbing operations meeting all local state and federal laws and regulations .
num reserved num construction requirements num general limit dragging piling disposing of debris and other work to areas to be excavated or covered by embankment .
do not damage or destroy vegetation not designated to be removed .
do not injure or damage vegetation adjacent to streams ponds or lakes unless designated for removal in the contract .
replace damaged or destroyed vegetation not to be disturbed at contractor expense .
coat cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs to be preserved with an asphaltum base paint formulated for tree surgery .
locate pioneer roads or work trails a minimum num feet num m inside of the clearing limits .
protect live root systems adjacent to but outside of the clearing limits .
closecut and remove potential hazards such as leaning trees alive or dead and snags within the rw as directed by the project manager .
coordinate clearing grubbing or clearing and grubbing with the grading work to meet the approved erosion control plan in subsection num .
backfill or grade depressions caused by grubbing to drain .
construct temporary settling basins where scour may occur .
stake construction limits for cuts fills channel changes ditches fence lines utility relocation roadside development areas selective thinning for sight distance grubbing and similar areas to establish clearing and grubbing limits in accordance with num .
num clearing and grubbing num edition num num clearing clear only within the staked construction limits .
cut off trees stumps brush shrubs and other vegetation to within num inches num mm of the ground .
fell trees without endangering traffic and injuring trees or objects not designated for removal .
remove dead vegetation logs stumps limbs sticks sawdust piles rubbish debris and other undesirable matter from areas where live shrubbery brush or trees are to remain in place .
merchantable timber is the property of the contractor .
num grubbing grub only within the staked construction limits .
remove all stumps roots logs timber exceeding num inches num mm in diameter and all brush matted roots and other debris within the grubbing limits to at least num inches num mm below the original ground surface .
grubbing items that do not extend more than num inches num mm above the ground line that are to be covered with at least num feet num m of subgrade or slope embankment may remain .
num clearing and grubbing clear and grub in accordance with subsections num and num requirements .
num disposal dispose of all brush stumps windfalls slash timber having no commercial value and all other debris from clearing grubbing clearing and grubbing or other operations to meet all local state and federal requirements at contractor expense .
furnish the project manager a written statement detailing the disposal location of non salvageable treated timber .
a .
burning .
burn materials meeting the state of montana open burning regulations administered by the air quality bureau of the montana department of health and environmental sciences and all other applicable local state and federal rules and regulations .
the general requirements of the montana open burning regulations regarding burning season and permits are described below .
num .
permits .
obtain an open burning permit from the air quality bureau during the open burning season when burning more than num acres num ha of forest residue per year .
when burning near public lands during the fire season may numst through september numth or as extended obtain a burning permit from the local state or federal fire protection agency having jurisdiction .
num .
open burning season .
the open burning season for forestry slash is from march numst through november numth .
open burning is not allowed during december january or february .
burning from september numst through november numth on a daytoday basis is subject to ventilation conditions available from the air quality bureau at num num .
obtain the ventilation conditions daily before burning .
num .
burning methods and instructions .
burning by the air curtain destructor or forced air methods are encouraged .
obtain the project managers approval for burning pits located within the rw limits .
dispose of all pits ashes and debris meeting subsection numb .
locate burning pits at least num feet num m from freeflowing water or areas where ditches are to be constructed .
locate pits and incinerators to prevent fire damage or hazard to surrounding vegetation or structures .
contact local fire protection agencies before the start of any burning .
provide num hour monitoring of all burning .
num edition clearing and grubbing num num b .
disposal of other material .
obtain the project managers approval to incorporate non hazardous solid material into the work for constructive use .
dispose of material not incorporated into the work at contractor expense .
num method of measurement measurement for clearing grubbing or clearing and grubbing is by either of the following methods .
num lump sum basis clearing grubbing and clearing and grubbing are measured by the lump sum .
disposal of the material is not measured for payment .
num area basis measurement is by the acre ha for the area actually cleared to the limits in the contract or as staked .
disposal is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit clearing lump sum or acre ha clearing and grubbing lump sum or acre ha grubbing lump sum or acre ha payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num lump sum basis payments will be prorated for the percentage of completed work for each item listed as a lump sum item in the contract .
num area basis no payment is made or allowed for any areas not actually cleared ptw paved surfaces etc .. num reserved num exclusion when the contract does not contain a pay item for clearing grubbing or clearing and grubbing the work is incidental to and included in payment for other items of work .
num clearing and grubbing num edition num num section num removal of structures and obstructions num description remove and dispose of all structures and obstructions not designated to remain or to be removed and disposed of under other items of the contract .
num reserved num construction requirements a .
general .
retain a blasting consultant as required in subsection num when using explosives to remove structures or obstructions .
raze remove and dispose of all buildings foundations structures fences debris and other obstructions on the rw excluding utilities .
remove and transport specified salvage material designated to remain property of the department without damage to the specified locations .
obtain the project managers written permission to use any salvaged materials .
dispose of unusable combustible material in accordance with subsection numa .
dispose of unusable noncombustible material in accordance with subsection numb .
backfill cavities caused by removing structures and obstructions level with the surrounding ground and compact the backfill in accordance with subsection num .
install the necessary traffic control devices when removing and transporting structures to maintain traffic in the work area .
b .
structure removal .
submit to the project manager num copies of a written proposal that describes the proposed plan for removal andor salvage of bridges .
do not begin removal or salvage operations prior to receiving approval .
include in the proposal a narrative of all operations including all cutting and welding procedures done in conjunction with the removal of the existing bridge .
include welders certifications and descriptions of welding processes .
approval of the plan is contingent on the plan meeting the requirements of the contract and all permits .
num removal of bridges and major drainage structures a .
removal of superstructures .
repair or replace all damaged or destroyed members pins nuts and plates from steel or timber structures designated to be salvaged at contractor expense .
matchmark all members to be salvaged with paint before dismantling .
similarly mark all pins nuts and plates to indicate their location in the structure .
paint all pins pin holes and machined surfaces with a zincrich paint and wire all loose parts to adjacent members or pack in clearly marked boxes showing the contents and indexnumbered for identification .
b .
removal of substructures .
remove or cut off piles and substructures to num feet num mm below the finished grade or existing ground surface elevation whichever is lower .
shape and contour the removal areas to blend with the surrounding terrain .
do not damage new work while removing existing structures .
c. disposal of materials removed .
num .
structural steel .
store salvaged structure members and all steel beams above the ground on skids at the designated sites .
num .
concrete and masonry .
use concrete and masonry removed from old structures in backfills or approach embankments in accordance with subsection num .
dispose num removal of structures num edition and obstructions num of concrete or masonry not placed in backfills or embankments at contractor expense .
remove all contract related concrete rubble from streams .
num .
timber and other materials .
store all salvageable timber or other salvaged materials above ground on skids at the designated sites .
d. disposal of temporary structures .
remove and dispose of all temporary structures in accordance with subsection numc .
e. removal and salvage of structure .
do not weld or use a cutting torch on any portion of existing bridge without an approved welding or cutting plan .
follow the requirements of section num and perform no welding without the presence of the cwi .
notify the project manager at least num working days prior to weldingcutting operations for scheduling of the cwi .
assume all costs for repairs of contractor caused damage to the structure including inspection and testing .
inspectiontesting costs include salaries travel expenses and fees for professional services by whomever the state assigns or hires to perform those services .
notify each party as listed in contract as owner at least num days prior to the anticipated date of structure removal .
keep each party informed about any changes to the removal dates .
if the new owners have a transport available on site at the time of removal set the truss and floor materials on the transport provided by the new owners .
if the new owners do not provide a transport at the time of removal set the truss and floor materials aside on site at a location as directed .
if the new owners have not transported the structure off the project within num calendar days of removal dispose of it unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
any loss or damage suffered by the new owner of a removed bridge or by a firm or entity that is to remove the bridge on behalf of the new owner caused by the contractors failure to fully comply with the provisions of this contract will be solely the responsibility of the contractor and will be paid by the contactor or will subject the contractor to action under its bond or insurance policy at no expense to the state .
dispose of all nonsalvageable materials in accordance with approved methods and applicable rules laws and regulations for disposal of solid waste .
at the conclusion of the project clean up all affected areas to the satisfaction of the project manager .
num removal of minor drainage structures remove minor drainage structures as specified in the contract .
replace lost or damaged salvaged material at contractor expense .
num removal of pavement concrete and masonry remove and dispose of all existing bituminous or concrete materials to be removed unless otherwise specified .
if used for new roadway construction process handle and transport these materials for embankments or crush screen mix and process for use as base surfacing or traffic gravel as approved .
otherwise dispose of them as solid waste in conformance with applicable laws rules regulations and the montana solid waste management act .
existing materials used for base gravel or surfacing must meet the specifications for the particular item .
process bituminous material to be used as embankment to a maximum numinch num mm size in its largest dimension .
process concrete material to be used in the embankment to a maximum numinch num mm size in its largest dimension .
do not place the removed bituminous or concrete material in ephemeral drainages or within num feet num m of standing water and groundwater wells .
bituminous materials used for embankment of the new roadway must be covered with plant mix surfacing or num inches num mm of soil capable of supporting plant growth .
num edition removal of structures num and obstructions num include all costs of this work in the unit price for the applicable contract item .
num method of measurement num remove structures and obstructions remove structures and obstructions is measured by the lump sum and includes the removal and disposal of all structures and obstructions encountered within the rightofway .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit remove structures and obstructions lump sum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
when the contract does not contain estimated quantities or lump sum items for removal and disposal of structures and obstructions the work is incidental to and included in payment for other items of work .
num removal of structures num edition and obstructions num num section num excavation and embankment num description this work is the excavation placing compacting and disposal of material encountered within the construction limits necessary to construct the project .
this is also referred to as grading .
num excavation a. unclassified excavation .
unclassified excavation is excavating and disposing when required of material from the rw or construction easement areas except borrow excavation and muck excavation .
b .
borrow excavation .
borrow for embankment construction is contractor furnished excavation from outside the rw or construction easement areas .
num .
unclassified borrow .
use department approved sources meeting current environmental and cultural resource preservation regulations .
material from a departmentoptioned or departmentowned borrow source may be available at no cost .
the applicable provisions of subsections num and num apply to unclassified borrow .
num .
special borrow .
special borrowexcavation and special borrowneat line is the providing and placing of the specified quality of borrow material from designated sources or from other approved sources .
the applicable provisions of subsections num and numbnum apply to special borrowexcavation and special borrow neat line .
c. unclassified channel excavation .
unclassified channel excavation is excavating and disposing of all materials from new watercourses or channels and the widening deepening or relocation of existing channels .
d. street excavation .
street excavation is excavating and disposal of all material to the street template .
e. muck excavation .
muck excavation is removing and disposing of unsuitable material in cut sections or below the natural ground line in embankment sections .
material defined as muck must be deemed unsuitable and is unable to be excavated using the same equipment and methods as for unclassified excavation .
material is considered unsuitable if num .
it contains soil or organic matter unsuitable for foundation material regardless of moisture content or num .
it is too wet to be properly compacted and can not be dried within a demonstrated reasonable timeframe prior to incorporating into work .
excessive moisture alone is not sufficient cause for determining unsuitable material .
topsoil removed below the natural ground line in embankment sections unsuitable material .
excavated unsuitable material areas will be measured before they are backfilled .
do not place fill over unsuitable or unstable foundation soils without the project managers approval .
materials placed before approval may be ordered removed and replaced at contractor expense .
f. subexcavation .
subexcavation is removing unstable material from below the plan subgrade elevation as shown or directed .
g. digout excavation .
digout excavation is removing and replacing sections of material at neat lines as shown in the contract or directed by the project manager .
num excavation and embankment num edition num num embankment place and compact excavation in roadway embankments dikes areas where unsuitable material is removed holes pits and other roadway depressions .
prepare embankment foundations prior to placing embankment material .
num reserved num construction requirements num excavation a .
general .
do not begin grading operations before the area is cleared of vegetation and obstructions in accordance with sections num and num .
ensure erosion controls are placed as specified in the contract .
excavate without disturbing material and vegetation outside of the slope limits .
use all suitable material removed from the excavation in embankments subgrade shoulders top soiling and other designated locations .
excavated material not used as specified or directed is not paid for .
sequence excavation of backfill or road finishing material so it is placed into final position as soon as possible .
stockpile suitable material that is not immediately used .
construct temporary fencing to restrict livestock and vehicular traffic from the work in accordance with subsection num .
replace temporarily removed fence and repair damaged fence to a condition equal to the existing fence at contractor expense .
confine livestock when fencing is disturbed .
if excavated material from the roadbed is used outside the embankments furnish and place at contractor expense an equal quantity of borrow to replace the material .
do not dispose of excess or unusable material within the rightofway limits unless approved by the project manager .
compact the top num inches num mm of the subgrade in cut sections in accordance with subsection num .
b .
rock blasting .
perform all blasting in accordance with section num .
c. rock excavated below grade .
excavate all unyielding materials that require blasting or the use of rippers to at least num inches num mm below subgrade within the roadbed limits .
backfill the excavation with specified or approved material .
remove or drain surface rock pockets that trap or pond water .
rock removed to a maximum depth of num inches num mm below subgrade is measured and paid for as unclassified excavation .
rock removed or backfilling due to over excavating in excess of the num inches num mm with approved backfill material is at contractor expense .
d. removing excess moisture .
rework materials from excavation or borrow areas exceeding num of optimum moisture to the specified optimum moisture before use in embankments or as backfill .
costs to remove excess moisture from the material are incidental to the embankment .
remove excess moisture in the finished roadbed soil introduced or caused by construction operations for reuse in the work at contractor expense .
excessively wet material caused by the construction operations that can not be properly compacted must be removed and replaced with suitable material at contractor expense .
e. borrow material .
excluding special borrow borrow material may be used only after the roadway excavation has been placed in the embankment .
if excess borrow is placed creating a waste of excavation the waste quantity will be deducted from the measured volume in the borrow area .
num edition excavation and embankment num num notify the project manager num calendar days before excavating material from the borrow area so that the area may be surveyed .
do not excavate beyond the dimensions and elevations established for the borrow areas .
finish and shape all borrow areas to permit accurate measurements .
reclaim borrow areas meeting subsection num requirements f. roughen slopes .
roughen slopes as directed .
g. digout .
in areas of digout excavate the full road width to a depth as shown in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
excavate parallel to the finish grade daylighting to the left and right slopes .
slope the ends of the digout no steeper than numhnumv .
dispose of the excavated material to the satisfaction of the project manager .
provide special borrow for digout replacement material consisting of a wellgraded sand and gravel free of organic and other deleterious material meeting the aashto m num requirements for anuma group classification with num passing the numinch num mm sieve and a maximum of num passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
the material may consist of up to num millings uniformly blended .
crusher fines and reject material may be used if the requirements in table num are met .
provide stabilization geotextile that meets the requirements of subsection num for stabilization geotextile .
place stabilization geotextile over the bottom and sides of the excavated digout area in conformance with subsection num .
extend the geotextile up the side walls of the excavation for the full height of the exposed subgrade soils .
place the initial lift of special borrow over the geotextile in accordance with subsection num .
repair any geotextile damaged during construction in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as directed by the project manager at contractor expense .
h. sub excavation .
in areas of sub excavation excavate the full road width to a depth as shown in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
excavate parallel to the finish grade day lighting to the left and right slopes .
slope the ends of the excavation no steeper than a numhnumv .
dispose of the excavated material to the satisfaction of the project manager .
provide special borrow for subexcavation replacement material consisting of a well graded sand and gravel free of organic and other deleterious material meeting the aashto m num requirements for anuma group classification with num passing the num inch num mm sieve and a maximum of num passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
the material may consist of up to num millings uniformly blended .
crusher fines and crusher reject material may be used if the requirements in table num are met .
provide stabilization geotextile that meets the requirements of subsection num .
place stabilization geotextile over the bottom and sides of the sub excavated area in conformance with subsection num .
extend the geotextile up the side walls of the excavation for the full height of the exposed subgrade soils .
place the initial lift of special borrow over the geotextile in accordance with subsection num .
repair any geotextile damaged during construction in accordance with subsection num .
num embankment a .
general .
do not place stumps trees logs rubbish vegetation muck frozen material pockets of rock volcanic ash or other deleterious materials in embankments .
num excavation and embankment num edition num sod mixed with surface soil and soil containing excessive humus or other organic materials may be spread over the top of embankment slopes .
compact embankment backfill and embankment foundation areas in accordance with subsection num .
leave the surface of completed embankments in a roughened condition .
rework or remove and replace unstable or pumping material prior to placing additional lifts or materials .
reworking or replacing materials within constructed embankment is at contractor expense .
b. embankment at structures .
do not place rocks broken concrete or other solid material in areas where piling is to be driven .
do not place embankment against any backwall or abutment until the concrete has cured for num calendar days or has reached num of the required strength .
furnish a certified laboratory test report showing the fieldcured cylinders meet the required strengths .
the project manager may approve early embankment work at backwalls or abutments with beams or girders in place or that are cantilevered from a fixed footing or cap if the strength requirement is met .
do not place embankment against unsupported backwalls or ushaped abutments rigidly connected to the deck until the deck is placed and cured meeting the applicable requirements of section num .
the contractor may submit a method of supporting the structure to permit early placement of embankment against the structure .
if approved all costs of the alternate method are at contractor expense .
place embankment in numinch num mm maximum layers loose thickness and compact adjacent to structures around columns and similar structural supports and on both sides of concrete walls box type structures and similar structures .
extend embankment material placed above the excavation limits or ground line a minimum num feet num m from the structure or structural support .
restore repair or replace structures or structural members moved or distorted by placing and compacting embankment at contractor expense .
compact embankment inaccessible to rollers by mechanical tampers to the density specified in subsection num .
before placing and compacting backfill compact at least the top num inches num mm of the existing ground in accordance with subsection num .
c. preparation of embankment foundations .
bench all embankments placed and compacted on hillsides against existing embankments built onehalf width at a time or on slopes numhnumv or steeper when measured at right angles to the roadway centerline .
construct benches in minimum numfoot num m widths .
maintain the horizontal inclination within num of horizontal .
backfill and compact each bench in maximum numinch num mm layers .
excavate each bench as close to each other as the slope permits .
use approved material excavated from benches in the embankment .
in excavation to embankment transitions where the natural ground slope exceeds numhnumv construct the excavated benches so the natural ground surface is a minimum num inches num mm from the top of the subgrade .
remove frozen earth snow and ice from the cut or embankment surface and place it outside the slope stakes .
provide the replacement borrow material at no cost to the department .
clear the full width of the subgrade of sod and vegetative matter .
scarify the top num inches num mm of the embankment foundation and compact in accordance with num edition excavation and embankment num num subsection num before constructing embankments num feet num m high or less or embankments placed on soils having less than num maximum density determined by mt num .
if original lightly compacted soils are encountered that exceed num inches num mm in depth remove it to the depth directed .
compact the upper num inches num mm of the ground in accordance with subsection num .
place the removed material in the embankment or use it for topsoil as directed .
material useable as topsoil may be placed alongside the roadway after compaction is completed .
d. earth embankment .
place earth roadway embankment in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding num inches num mm loose measurement and compact in accordance with subsection num .
continuously level work and maintain moisture to compact to the specified density .
uniformly work the entire surface of each layer .
work each layer of earth embankment that is not rock gravel or sand using a tandem type construction disk with a maximum disk spacing of num inches num mm and a minimum worn disk diameter of num inches num mm .
with the disk work moisture into the soil break clods of soil disorient the soil particles and penetrate the full depth of the layer being placed .
larger disks may be used if the ratio of disk spacing to disk size is comparable to the above dimensions .
leave the embankment slopes in a roughened condition .
e. rock embankment .
when the excavated material contains more than num rock by volume num inches num mm or larger in its greatest dimension place the embankment in layers num inches num mm thicker than the maximum size rock in the material not to exceed num inches num mm loose thickness .
individual rocks and boulders larger than num inches num mm in diameter may be placed in the embankment if the rocks do not exceed num inches num m vertical height after placement are evenly distributed and are spaced to allow placing and compacting of the soil in between the rocks .
place and compact the upper num feet num mm of the embankment in maximum numinch num mm layers loose thickness as specified in subsection numd .
dump and work rock from excavations to the stream face when the embankments are adjacent to streams or channels .
prevent the rock from entering the stream .
this work is incidental to unclassified excavation .
f. embankment over swampy areas .
on low swampy ground incapable of supporting haul equipment construct the lower part of the embankment by dumping successive loads of uniformly distributed material in layers thick enough to support the equipment .
place subsequent layers in accordance with subsections numd or e as directed .
g. disposal of unsuitable or excess material .
if disposal of excess or unusable excavation within the rw limits is approved by the project manager slope and shape all disposal areas to blend into the surrounding terrain and meet the requirements of subsections num and num .
num moisture and density requirements compact each layer of material to the inplace density requirements of table num for the method of moisture and density control used .
the moisture and density control is the proctor method or the zero air voids method determined by the project manager .
if proctors are used for density control the contractor may make a written request to the project manager to compact the soils at lower moisture content .
identify the soil class in the request .
the project manager may approve the request provided a department investigation num excavation and embankment num edition num determines the lower moisture content is not detrimental to the soil for the given application .
for anum material in embankments mt num and mt num tests will be used .
compact rock embankments that can not be tested by montana test methods mt num and mt num proctor method or mt num zero air voids method with compaction equipment and hauling and spreading equipment .
use grid rollers pneumatictired rollers vibrating rollers vibrating compactors or selfpropelled tamping rollers .
do not use sheepsfoot rollers unless approved by the project manager .
use water as required .
table num compaction requirements compaction control method material compacted proctor zero air voids test methods mt num mt num mt num mt num test method mt num earth embankment including all backfills minimum num of maximum density at optimum moisture num less than num airfilled voids top num inches num mm of subgrade in cut sections culvert foundations top num inches num mm of embankment foundations backfill foundations num sloping and finishing a. sloping .
finish and shape all cut slopes ditches embankments and structure berms to a uniform rough textured surface .
scarify smooth slopes .
conduct slope roughening in accordance with the contract and detailed drawings .
slope roughening is a part of slope construction and is not measured for payment .
where roadway slopes are not completed to the planned or directed lines and the material from the backslope erodes sloughs or slides due to incomplete erosion control measures or the contractors operations the removal of the material and restoration of the slope is at contractor expense .
where roadway slopes are completed to the plan or directed lines all required erosion control devices are in place as specified and the material from the completed slopes erode slough or slide onto the roadbed before acceptance of the work through no fault of the contractor the removing of the slide material potential slide material and the drainage excavation is paid for in accordance with subsection num .
when directed widen cuts and flatten slopes to obtain additional excavation for embankments or to increase slope stability .
the project manager may steepen stable rock slopes .
this work is measured and paid for under the grading item unless it requires noncontract construction methods increasing costs that are considered extra work in accordance with subsection num .
b. finishing .
finish the entire roadbed to the final elevations specified .
num maintenance of constructed roadway maintain the roadway during construction so it is continuously well drained .
keep all drainage ditches and structures open and free from debris until the final inspection is approved .
if grading work is suspended blade smooth and grade the entire roadway area to prevent water from collecting or ponding on the roadway .
maintain the roadway during suspension periods to the specified grade and cross section at contractor expense .
num edition excavation and embankment num num maintain erosion and siltation control devices meeting the contract requirements .
num topsoil salvaging and placing remove sufficient amounts of topsoil from the excavation and embankment foundations to ensure replacement quantities are available to cover all disturbed areas with num inches num mm of topsoil .
place topsoil on the completed graded roadway to the lines grades and elevations specified .
unless directed by the project manager place topsoil on all slopes excluding slopes numhnumv or steeper .
place topsoil to an average numinch num mm loose depth on the base course surfacing inslope .
uniformly spread the remaining topsoil over the rest of the disturbed areas .
finish the disturbed areas in accordance with subsection num .
stockpile topsoil at acceptable selected locations within the rw .
when construction operations do not permit stockpiling within the rw make arrangements for stockpile sites outside the rw at no additional cost to the department .
construct stockpiles so drainage is maintained and topsoil is easily reclaimed .
provide erosion controls following best management practice .
in the event that construction sequencing prevents replacement of topsoil over all disturbed areas prior to final paving reserve adequate quantities to cover the exposed base course surfacing inslope as shown in the detailed drawings .
num limitation on grading operations the maximum length allowed to be disturbed at one time within the project limits is num miles num m of clearing and grubbing and num miles num m of borrow excavation and embankment .
the project manager may modify the restriction when soil characteristics contractor operations or both indicate that a smaller or larger area is acceptable .
for long or complex projects the contractor may have several separate grading operations working where the project manager may apply the limit to each individual operation provided finishing mulching and seeding closely follow the rough grading operations at each location .
use the specified pollution controls at each individual location .
num method of measurement num excavation the quantities of unclassified excavation unclassified borrow excavation special borrow excavation unclassified channel excavation street excavation subexcavation digout excavation and muck excavation are measured for payment in cubic yards mnum as surveyed or calculated in accordance with subsection num .
the department will provide the initial measurement at no charge for the following specific work areas num .
in slide areas determined by the department not to be the fault of the contractor num .
in excavated areas authorized by the project manager outside the staked lines and grades and num .
in unstaked areas such as borrow areas muck excavations subexcavations and un staked excavations authorized by the project manager .
these areas of excavation and borrow are measured in their original position in accordance with subsection num .
disposal of excess or unusable excavation is not measured for payment .
the quantities of special borrowneat line for payment are calculated in its final position in accordance with subsection num with no allowance for shrink or swell .
num excavation and embankment num edition num either the department or the contractor may request remeasurement of specific work areas or the entire project if there is disagreement over the accuracy of quantities computed from the staked lines and grades .
the party requesting the remeasurement is responsible for all costs associated with the remeasurement .
department staff may perform the remeasurement in which case the cost for the departments remeasurement is the contractors responsibility .
an independent third party acceptable to the dce and under the direction of a professional land surveyor registered in montana may also be used to perform the remeasurement at contractor expense .
excavation is eligible for a second payment under the following conditions num .
a second handling is required num .
the excavated material meets all the contract requirements for the second usage num .
the second payment item quantity is calculated inplace in its final disposition or computed from plan dimensions .
items that require a second field measurement such as special borrowexcavation are not eligible for a second payment num .
the contractor makes up any shortfall in excavation at no cost to the department caused by the second use .
the material making up the shortfall is subject to approval by the project manager and num .
the contractor is responsible for the haul balance lengths balance points or other foreseen or unforeseen project constraints .
no payment will be made for any additional costs .
authorized excavation of rock shale muck or unstable material below grade necessary to provide the designed thickness of backfill is measured for payment .
if the designated bottom plane of the excavation falls within a layer of rock the belowgrade excavation to the bottom of the layer not exceeding num inches num mm below grade is considered authorized and is measured for payment .
rock excavation exceeding num inches num mm below grade is not measured for payment .
if the nature of the material the thickness of the layers or strata and method of operations make it practical to excavate only to the plan depth any material removed below plan depth is not measured .
measurements are made for unusable materials excavated and removed .
useable material temporarily removed and replaced for contractor convenience is not measured for payment .
removal and disposal of unusable materials from borrow areas is not measured for payment .
special borrow removed from areas before surveying is not measured for payment .
the actual quantities of plan and approved subexcavation are measured and added to the quantities of unclassified excavation for payment .
unstable material reworked in accordance with subsection numd is measured and paid for as unclassified excavation for the second handling .
when the contract does not contain a bid item for muck excavation and an area is determined to be muck in accordance with subsection nume the muck excavation quantity is measured and paid for in accordance with subsection num .
measurement and payment for muck excavation at the agreed price includes all excavating and hauling disposing of all stumps logs and other debris encountered in the excavation all pumping and dewatering required and finishing of the planned disposal areas .
unclassified excavation allowed for presplit drill equipment clearance is calculated from the area bounded by the plan slope and lines parallel to plan slope offset num feet num mm for each numfoot num m increment in vertical cut height .
the quantity for drill equipment clearance where the cut slope height is less than num feet num m is not measured for payment .
num edition excavation and embankment num num excavation used as select or stockpiled select material is measured by the cubic yard mnum in its original position .
removed and placed stockpile material is measured using the volume in its original excavated position .
channel excavation is measured and paid for as unclassified channel excavation .
street excavation is measured and paid for as unclassified excavation unless the contract has street excavation as a bid item .
disposal of material or other items within the limits of the street excavation are not measured for payment .
geotextile is measured in accordance with subsection num .
accepted quantities of geotextile are paid for in accordance with subsection num .
num reserved num embankment in place the embankment quantities measured in cubic yards mnum for payment as embankment in place include the following num .
the actual quantities of roadway embankment measured above the original ground line in accordance with subsection num with no volume adjustments made for shrinkage compaction or subsidence .
num .
the topsoil replacement quantity measured in the topsoil stockpiles .
num .
excavation of unusable material and subexcavation in the contract or directed by the project manager in its original position .
num compaction work and materials to compact embankment material and backfill to the specified density is not measured for payment .
num topsoil excavation of topsoil material from its original position loading hauling stockpiling and removal from the stockpile and spreading on the designated areas is measured for payment by the cubic yard mnum in the stockpile before final placement .
before measurement shape and smooth each stockpile into the smallest practical area .
haul is not measured for payment .
topsoil removed from cut areas is not deducted from the grading quantities .
measurement is made as if the topsoil had not been removed .
topsoil removed from embankment areas and from borrow areas excluding contractor optioned in accordance with section num is measured under the bid item topsoil salvaging and placing .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit digout excavation cubic yard mnum embankment in place cubic yard mnum muck excavation cubic yard mnum special borrow cubic yard mnum street excavation cubic yard mnum topsoil salvaging and placement cubic yard mnum unclassified borrow excavation cubic yard mnum unclassified channel excavation cubic yard mnum unclassified excavation cubic yard mnum num excavation and embankment num edition num payment at the contract unit prices is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete these items of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num blasting num description this work is using blasting techniques to form cut slopes remove rock obstructions and other objects to construct highway roads bridges and facilities .
num material furnish nonplastic crushed granular material for stemming meeting the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing  num mm num no .
num num mm num num provide a minimum of num of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve with at least one mechanically fractured face .
num production blasting production blasting refers to the main fragmentation blasting resulting from more widely spaced production holes drilled throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast line .
num blasting professional a. blasting consultant .
retain a recognized blasting consultant to assist in the blast design .
ensure the blasting consultant is an expert in the field of drilling and blasting and is not an employee of the contractor an explosives manufacturer or explosives distributor .
review the blasting consultants resume to ensure adequate experience in drilling and blasting .
submit a copy of the resume to the project manager at the pre construction conference .
the blasting consultant is professionally responsible when advising the contractor on issues relating to blast safety blast design and public safety and convenience .
the contractor is responsible for all damage .
the blasting consultant is in responsible charge of the blast monitoring preblast and postblast surveys ground vibration monitoring and air overpressure monitoring .
have the blasting consultant review all blasting plans and submit comments regarding the adequacy of the blast plans to ensure conformance to these specifications and all other applicable federal state and local regulations .
the blasting consultant and the blaster incharge must coordinate their efforts to ensure these requirements are met .
forward the blasting consultants comments master blasting plan and all other ancillary plans required by the contract to the project manager for review .
the blasting consultant has the authority to require modification of any of the proposed blasting plans to meet project requirements environmental requirements or satisfy safety concerns .
submit these modifications to the project manager for review as required .
the blasting consultant must attend all blasting related meetings including the preconstruction meeting .
b. prequalified blasting contractors .
use prequalified blasting contractors to complete the work required in the contract .
a list of prequalified contractors is located at the following website httpwww.mdt.mt.govbusinesscontractingprequalified.shtml .
contractors not currently prequalified by the department to perform blasting work can obtain prequalification information from the ces bureau num prospect ave. helena num blasting num edition num montana .
a complete statement of qualifications soq must be received a minimum of num calendar days prior to the bid opening as specified in the invitation for bids .
num use of explosives explosives refer to any commercial explosive products materials blasting agents primers delays initiators etc .
used in blasting operations .
transport store handle and load explosives and blasting agents following all laws and ordinances as well as the applicable requirements of title num title num and title num of the code of federal regulations and specifically the current office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement osmre blasting guidance manual when using handling loading transporting and storing explosives and blasting agents .
use only explosives permitted by the state local laws and ordinances and all respective agencies having jurisdiction over them .
use explosives without endangering life or property and be responsible for all resulting property damages injury or death .
only use persons experienced in the handling of explosives and do not fire explosives until sounding a warning and removing all persons from the radius of danger .
notify each property owner railway company and public utility company having facilities near the blasting area of the intent to use explosives to enable them to take precautions to protect their property from injury .
be responsible for damages to property or injury to persons attributable to the use of explosives .
do not use explosives and explosive products containing the chemical compound perchlorate clonum .
num master blasting and safety plan submit a master blasting plan along with any comments from the blasting consultant to the project manager for review at least num business days before the start of test or production drilling operations or at any time the drilling and blasting methods or explosive type or product are changed .
include full details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls to be used for production blasting in the blasting plan .
a. blasting plan .
include the following information at a minimum in all blast plans num .
shot number .
num .
date and proposed time of shot .
num .
top and bottom elevations of the blast .
num .
seismograph locations elevations and distances between the blast and vibration monitoring points .
num .
the station limits of the proposed blasts and the number of holes to be drilled and shot per blast .
num .
the hole diameter hole depths and explosive load for each hole number of cartridges of each type stemming depth decks and primers etc .. num .
explosive type diameter length weight and brand name .
num .
proposed quantities of production and presplitcushion blasting for each blast and the entire project .
num .
appropriately scaled plan diagrams showing blast hole locations blast hole diameter blast hole pattern blast hole angles free face burden spacing lift height sub drill depths delay periods delay pattern and relative location of nearby structures and appurtenances .
base all plan diagrams on the project plan sheets including topography .
num edition blasting num num num .
appropriately scaled cross section diagrams showing blast hole depths blast hole angles loading stemming sub drill as applicable etc .
base all cross section views on the project plan sheets including topography .
num .
total pounds of explosives and number of cartridges to be used .
num .
total volume of blasted material .
num .
powder factor and maximum pounds of explosives per delay .
num .
detailed calculations for predicted peak particle velocities and predicted vibration frequencies for ground and pertinent adjacent structures to ensure compliance with required peak particle velocity and vibration limits .
num .
the signatures of the blasterincharge and the blasting consultant .
num .
a storage plan for explosives including the type of magazine or explosive facility if applicable or a declaration indicating the use of daily explosive deliveries for the duration of the project .
provide a copy of the notification letter sent to the federal bureau of alcohol tobacco firearms and explosives atf signed by the magazine owner if daily delivery will not be utilized at any time during the contract .
num .
a detailed plan with the methods describing fly rock or blast debris prevention .
num .
manufacturers product data sheets or technical bulletins and msds information for all explosives to be employed .
num .
copies of the blasterincharges current state of montana blasters license .
the state of montana requires blasters to have a current montana blasters license .
the master blasting plan and required submittals will be reviewed and revised based on the results of the test blasts .
after satisfactorily completing the test blast sections and incorporating all test blast results and blasting consultants comments submit the reviewed and revised blasting plan as the master blasting plan .
submit an individual production blast plan for all subsequent blasts at least num business days prior to the planned blast day .
include the items discussed above in subsection numa items num through num in each blast plan .
submit the production blasting plans on form csnnum .
do not begin full scale production blasting until the master blast plan has been submitted and reviewed for conformance to the contract .
review of the blast plans does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the accuracy adequacy and safety of the plan when implemented in the field .
b .
safety plan .
submit a safety plan in addition to the master blasting plan and including any comments from the blasting consultant to the project manager for review at least num business days before the start of test or production drilling operations .
include the following information in the safety plan num .
the name and telephone number of the blasterincharge .
the blasterincharge is responsible for directing the day to day drilling and blasting operations for clearing the blast site before excavation of the blasted material may proceed for clearing local traffic through the blast zone and for all required report preparation including daily blast logs daily explosives consumption reports and loss reports .
submit sample copies of daily blast logs daily explosives consumption reports and loss reports .
num .
a detailed access control plan with the methods proposed to clear the blast area and to control access to the blast site and other closure locations required by the contract by unauthorized personnel during drilling loading blasting and scaling operations .
this plan will be followed exclusively by all parties concerned .
num .
a detailed plan with the methods proposed to notify local residences and all project personnel involved with field operations within the blast area of an impending blast .
include the methods of notification and the proposed timelines in the plan .
num blasting num edition num num .
a detailed plan with methods to document assess and control ground vibration and air overpressure as well as calculated scale distances to each structure or appurtenance within a minimum of num feet num m from the blast .
structures and appurtenances include but are not limited to culverts bridges other drainage facilities wells gabion walls bin walls other retaining structures utilities buildings residences railroads etc .
num .
a detailed vibration and blast monitoring plan including a current calibration certification of any seismographs to be used .
num .
a detailed fire prevention and protection plan .
num .
a detailed plan to identify all potential blast site electrical hazards including but not limited to a lightning detection and protection plan .
num .
a detailed emergency plan outlining the procedures to be followed in the event of an injury accident or unanticipated road closure in excess of one hour .
details of this plan must contain provisions for emergency vehicle traffic and personnel including potential detour routes length of emergency detour and estimated time to traverse the emergency detour .
num .
a detailed blasting day protocol to be followed by all parties concerned .
information in the blasting day protocol must include but is not limited to a notifications made to impacted local residents all project personnel local emergency response organizations utilities or other entities that may be impacted by the blast .
b a contact list and appropriate phone numbers of all parties impacted by or involved in the blasting .
post copies of the contact list in the field office and submit a copy of the contact list to the project manager .
num .
a copy of a signup sheet for documenting attendance of mandatory safety meetings by all project personnel involved with field operations within the blasting area .
num .
a detailed scaling plan including the methods proposed and the entity responsible for conducting scaling operations on the project .
num .
the signature of the blasterincharge and the blasting consultant .
blasting and safety plan submittals must be complete .
they may be submitted as num separate submittals but each plan must be a complete document .
the review time does not start until the complete package is received .
electronic documents .pdf are encouraged but may also be in the form of portable storage devices .
num blasting test sections prior to conducting fullscale blasting operations demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed master blasting plan by drilling blasting and excavating test sections num feet num m in length .
use the test sections to demonstrate which combination of methods burden spacing other blast design parameters and charge perform the best based on insitu field conditions .
when warranted by field conditions test sections shorter than num feet num m may be required as determined by the project manager .
requirements for production blasting operations covered elsewhere in this specification also apply to the blasting operations carried out in conjunction with the test blasts .
do not drill ahead of the test blast area until the test section has been excavated and the results are evaluated by the project manager .
if the results of the test blasts are unsatisfactory adopt revised methods as necessary to achieve the required results at no additional cost to the department .
if methods of drilling and blasting do not produce a uniform slope and shear face or adequate fragmentation within the tolerances specified in the contract drill blast and excavate in short num edition blasting num num sections not exceeding num feet num m in length until a technique is arrived at producing the desired results with no additional cost to the department .
unsatisfactory blast results include but are not limited to fragmentation beyond the indicated lines and grade over break excessive oversize material poor fragmentation fly rock excessive ground vibration excessive air overpressure or violation of other requirements within these specifications .
all costs incurred in adopting revised blasting methods necessary to produce an acceptable test blast are the sole responsibility of the contractor .
num safety comply with all state and federal requirements for blasting safety including the osmre blasting guidance manual which provides guidance on the use of explosives and certification of blasters .
a .
general .
prior to the each blast conduct a safety meeting to discuss the safety requirements for blasting operations and the blast day protocol .
attendance for this meeting is mandatory for all project personnel that may be involved in field operations within the blasting and closure areas .
document attendance with a signup sheet and provide a copy of this sheet to the project manager .
if there any changes to the safety requirements or blast day protocol conduct another mandatory meeting and document attendance as required above .
num .
post required blasting signage prior to the start of the shift on the day of the blast .
signage must meet requirements of section num and the traffic control plan .
num .
do not blast during hours of darkness onehalf hour before sunset to onehalf hour after the following sunrise .
num .
do not load holes during hours of darkness as defined above .
num .
do not load explosives prior to department review of applicable blast plans .
num .
keep all personnel and equipment not involved in loading or blasting operations a minimum of num feet num m from the blast site during loading operations .
num .
keep all equipment and personnel a minimum of num feet num m from the blast site during blasting operations .
num .
remove and properly dispose of all explosives packaging material prior to each blast .
b .
general .
the blasting day protocol is to be followed exclusively by all parties concerned .
information in the blasting day protocol includes but is not limited to the information listed in subsection numbnum .
num .
convene the following personnel one hour prior to blasting to coordinate traffic control required closures and blast procedures blasting consultant blasterin charge traffic control contractor project manager or representative contractors or subcontractors foreman and other pertinent personnel .
num .
road closures due to blasting operations and cleanup may not exceed the requirements of the contract .
cleanup activities include but are not limited to scaling or cleanup of loose rock or blasting related debris for safety purposes .
num .
if road closures due to blasting operations exceed the required time limit the project manager will suspend all work not directly related to blasting activities in accordance with the following a closures up to num minutes beyond the allowed closure will result in a numday suspension of all work as defined above and time charged to the contract .
b closures of num to num minutes beyond the allowed closure will result in a numday suspension of all work as defined above and time charged to the contract .
c closures of greater than num minutes beyond the allowed closure will result in a num day suspension of all work as defined above and time charged to the contract .
num blasting num edition num d the project manager will rescind the suspension of work after receipt of a written plan from the contractor detailing the measures to be taken ensuring compliance with the required road closure times .
no adjustment to contract time will be made for work suspensions resulting in excessive road closures .
c. warnings and signals .
provide a detailed explanation and description for the signals that will be used .
the warning signals must be clearly audible for mile num m from the blast site .
the blasterincharge must demonstrate to the project manager that the method of warning meets this requirement .
num .
sound an initial warning signal num minutes prior to blast initiation to notify all in the area of the start of blasting within a num minute period .
sound a second warning signal one minute prior to blast initiation .
num .
after the blast is over the blasterincharge and the blasting consultant are required to observe the entire blast area for a minimum of num minutes to determine if all explosives have detonated and to guard against rock fall before commencing cleanup work and excavation .
num .
the blasterincharge is responsible for clearing the site .
if any holes have not detonated the blasterincharge with the assistance and advice of the blasting consultant is required to address the misfires and eliminate the hazard before other personnel enter the worksite .
the blast site is off limits to unauthorized personnel during this time .
the contractor is responsible for all costs resulting from misfires .
if a misfire occurs on a blast notify the project manager .
submit a written report of existing conditions and remedial action taken to the project manager within num hours .
num .
once the blasterincharge and the blasting consultant indicate the area is free from misfires blast damage overhangs or other hazards sound an all clear signal to indicate to all personnel in the area that blasting operations are finished .
do not allow traffic to proceed until the all clear signal is given .
num presplitting rock slopes a .
general .
presplit rock cuts to a smooth plane using loaded timed and spaced drill holes .
produce a continuous or semicontinuous fracture between drill holes and a stable rock cut by eliminating over break in the back slope during primary blasting .
b .
drilling .
use drills equipped with mechanical devices that accurately determine the angle the drill steel enters the rock .
do not drill if the devices are missing or inoperative .
perform grading as necessary to remove overburden soil and loose or decomposed rock along the top of the excavation to establish a uniform and stable platform for drilling activities .
use presplit hole diameters that are between num and num inches num to num mm .
drill presplit holes within num inches num mm of the staked collar location .
holes drilled outside the numinch num mm tolerance will be rejected and not measured for payment .
drill hole intervals may vary between num and num inches num to num mm .
a numinch num mm interval is used to estimate the quantity of presplit drilling in the contract .
when the cut height exceeds num feet num m and after completion of the top excavation lift an offset from the staked slope line not to exceed num feet num mm is allowed at the top of each lift after the top lift .
the actual slope can not deviate from the plan slope by more than numfoot num mm .
control the drilling operations to ensure that no hole deviates from the slope plane by more than num inches num mm .
this tolerance applies to deviations left or right of an apparent vertical projection of the hole when viewed from a right angle to the slope face or deviations into or out of num edition blasting num num the planned slope plane when viewed parallel to the slope face .
presplit holes exceeding these limits will not be paid for .
drilling num feet num mm below ditch bottom to aid in removing the toe berm is permitted .
extend presplit holes a minimum of num feet num m beyond the limits of the production holes or to the end of the cut .
maintain the length of presplit holes for any individual lift at no more than num feet num m. the project manager may approve a written request to increase the hole length to a maximum of num feet num m if it is demonstrated that the above presplit hole tolerances and a uniform slope can be maintained .
if over num of the presplit holes are misaligned in any one lift reduce the lift heights until the numinch num mm tolerance is met .
num blasting operations a .
general .
all blasting operations including the transport storage handling and loading of explosives are the direct responsibility of the blasterincharge .
conduct all blasting operations in accordance with the contract and all applicable federal state and local regulations .
store all explosives in accordance with the submitted storage plan and all applicable federal state and local regulations .
provide each cap period from one lot number .
mixing of lot numbers for any one cap period is prohibited .
any blasting materials in excess of one year of age are prohibited .
if any explosives are determined to be of either excessive age or in a deteriorated condition cease all blasting work until the explosives age or quality can be verified .
do not use explosives that do not meet the manufacturers specifications .
remove and properly dispose of explosives not meeting the manufacturers specifications at no cost to the department .
explosives missing date codes are prohibited and can not be brought to the site .
the blasting consultant is responsible for verifying that the above requirements are met .
the project manager has the authority to require the explosives to be tested by an independent organization to determine its performance compared to the manufacturers product data sheet .
approve the independent testing organization prior to performing the tests .
reject any lot number if the explosives performance andor composition deviates more than num in any manner from the manufacturers product data sheet .
all costs for testing and replacement of the explosives are the contractors responsibility if the explosives performance or composition deviates by more than num .
the department will pay the testing costs if the explosives meet the manufacturers product data sheet .
b .
procedure .
drill production blast holes in accordance with the patterns shown on the submitted blasting plans .
drill the production blast holes within two blasthole diameters of the staked collar location .
do not drill the production hole bottoms lower than the presplit hole bottoms .
the maximum allowable diameter for production holes is num inches num mm .
locate and stake the blast holes .
if more than num of the holes are drilled outside of this tolerance fill the holes with crushed stone or approved material and redrill the blast holes at the proper location .
detonate production holes on a delay sequence toward a free face .
stem production holes a minimum of num feet num mm or num times the burden distance whichever is greater with stemming meeting the requirements of this specification .
take all precautions necessary in the blasting operations to prevent blast damage to the final rock num blasting num edition num slope .
production blasting is incidental to and included in the measurement and payment for unclassified excavation .
do not use bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil in the presplit holes .
use only standard explosives manufactured specifically for presplitting .
fit blast holes with a temporary plug to prevent overburden drill cuttings or other foreign material from falling into the hole after drilling .
verify that the drill holes are free of obstructions for their entire depth before placing charges .
take precautions to prevent material from entering the drill holes during loading operations .
stem all presplit holes a minimum of num feet num mm with stemming meeting the requirements of this specification .
the contractor may presplit the slope face before production drilling or presplit the slope face and production blast at the same time if the presplit drill holes are fired simultaneously at least num milliseconds before the production blast .
do not delay presplit holes more than num milliseconds hole to hole to reduce noise and ground vibration .
prior to loading any blast holes check and measure holes for conformance to the submitted blast plan .
the blasting consultant is responsible for verifying the location and depth of these holes .
if the blast holes are not drilled to the correct depth are plugged or are unable to be fully loaded clean out or redrill those holes not meeting the contract requirements or the submitted blast plan .
the blasting consultant is responsible for verifying that all explosives and stemming are installed in accordance with the submitted blast plan .
notify the project manager of any variations or deviations from the submitted blast plan .
submit a detailed written report on the discrepancies observed and recommended remedial action to the project manager as soon as possible .
num scaling scale slopes throughout the duration of the contract and at such frequency as required removing all loose rocks overhangs or other hazards .
scale during or upon completion of excavation in each lift .
do not allow drilling of the next lift until this work has been completed .
scaling must be performed to industry standards and contract requirements .
perform additional stabilization or scaling required as a result of the blasting at no additional cost to the department .
the project manager has the authority to prohibit or halt blasting operations if the required slopes are not being obtained in a stable condition the safety and convenience of the traveling public is being jeopardized or unsatisfactory blast results are being obtained as defined in subsection num .
all costs incurred in adopting revised blasting methods necessary to produce acceptable blasting results are the sole responsibility of the contractor .
num records a .
drilling logs .
on a daily basis and prior to loading any explosives provide copies of the daily drilling logs to the blasting consultant the blasterincharge and the project manager .
include all of the following information at a minimum for each hole drilled num .
drill hole location within the blast pattern i.e .
row number and hole number .
num .
drill hole diameter .
num .
total depth of drill hole .
num .
drill hole angle .
num .
depth of overburden .
num .
depth to any changes in material hardness e.g .
clay seams sand seams soft rock coal seams etc .. num .
depth and length of any voids encountered .
num edition blasting num num num .
depth to water if encountered .
num .
date drilled .
num .
drillers name .
b. blasting logs .
on a weekly basis provide copies of the daily logs of blasting operations to the project manager .
include the numbers times dates blasting locations and patterns of all blasts in the logs for that week .
additionally include all of the following information num .
any variations from the reviewed blasting plan .
num .
trade names and sizes of all explosives .
num .
explosives consumption and loss reports .
num .
all ground vibration and air overpressure records .
num .
signature of blasterincharge .
num survey a. preblast condition survey .
have the blast consultant arrange for a preblast survey of any nearby buildings structures utilities or other appurtenances that may potentially be at risk from blasting damage .
use a survey method acceptable to the contractors insurance company .
submit copies of all preblast survey records to the project manager for review before blasting operations begin .
notify occupantsowners of local buildings structures utilities or other appurtenances a minimum of num hours prior to the start of blasting operations .
b. postblast condition survey .
if complaints of damage or annoyance are made have the blast consultant arrange for a postblast survey of any nearby buildings structures utilities or other appurtenances affected by blasting .
use a survey method acceptable to the contractors insurance company .
be responsible for any damage as described in subsections num and num .
submit copies of all postblast survey records to the project manager for review within num hours of completing the survey .
notify the project manager of any damage or annoyance claims from occupantsowners of local buildings structures utilities or other appurtenances a within num hours of the complaint .
c. vibration control and monitoring .
have the blast consultant establish a vibration control and monitoring program .
submit the vibration control and monitoring program to the project manager for review at least num business days before the start of test or production drilling operations or at any time the drilling and blasting methods are changed .
when blasting near buildings structures or utilities or other appurtenances that may be subject to damage from blast induced ground vibrations control the ground vibrations by using properly designed delay sequences and allowable charge weights per delay .
establish allowable charge weights per delay by carrying out test blasts and measuring vibration levels .
confirm that the test blasts in accordance with subsection num and modified as required limit ground vibrations to below damage thresholds .
monitor each blast using an approved seismographs located in accordance with the submitted master blasting plan between the blast area and the closest structures subject to blast damage whenever vibration damage to adjacent structures is possible .
use a seismographs capable of recording peak particle velocity for three mutually perpendicular components of vibration in the ranges typical for blasting operations .
all seismographs employed for monitoring are required to be calibrated within the preceding num months .
furnish current calibration certifications to the project manager .
do not allow peak particle velocity or frequency of each component to exceed the safe limits of the nearest structure subject to vibration damage .
have the blasting consultant num blasting num edition num interpret the seismograph records to ensure that the seismograph data is effectively utilized in the control of the blasting operations with respect to the existing structures .
provide the data recorded for each blast to the project manager prior to the next blast and include the following num .
identification of instrument used .
num .
name of qualified observer and interpreter .
num .
distance and direction of recording station from blast area .
num .
type of ground at recording station and material on which the instrument is sittingplaced .
num .
maximum peak particle velocity and frequency in each component .
num .
a dated and signed copy of photographic records of seismograph readings .
table num lists suggested conservative limits for maximum peak particle velocity and minimum frequency .
table num seismograph tolerances structure type maximum peak particle velocity inches per second minimum vibration frequency hertz green concrete less than num days num num all other structures utilities wells springs and aquifers num num the blasting consultant has the authority to modify the above parameters to safely meet contract and environmental requirements .
older deteriorated structures utilities or structures housing computers or other sensitive equipment may require lower peak particle velocity and different frequency limits than given in table num .
additionally buried pipelines fiber optic cables or other appurtenances owned by private utility companies or structures owned by other entities may be subject to lower limiting values imposed by the owner .
on critical projects where vibration and frequency control is important have an experienced vibration specialist establish safe vibration limits .
in special cases the blasting consultant may use the blasting level chart figure num page num osmre guidelines to determine maximum allowable ground vibration .
this figure provides alternative blasting level criteria based on blast vibration frequency and maximum allowable peak particle velocity .
the blasting consultant is responsible for all necessary materials and equipment utilized in the performance of this work for providing a highspeed film or video record of each blast to be available to perform evaluation monitoring and record keeping as described above and as directed by the project manager .
num noise and debris control a .
air overpressure and noise control .
have the blasting consultant install an air overpressure monitoring system if appropriate between the main blasting area and the nearest structure subject to blast damage or other detrimental effects .
ensure the equipment used to make the air overpressure measurements is the type specifically manufactured for that purpose .
hold peak overpressure below num psi num kpa at the nearest structure or other designated location .
use appropriate blast hole patterns stemming and detonation systems to prevent venting of blasts and to minimize air overpressure and noise levels produced by the blasting operations .
lower the overpressure limit if it proves too high based on damage or complaints .
immediately after num edition blasting num num each blast furnish a permanent signed and dated record of the peak overpressure measurements to the project manager .
b .
fly rock control .
where necessary use approved blasting mats soil or other equally serviceable materials or containment methods to prevent fly rock andor debris .
permit violations resulting from blasting operations are the sole responsibility of the contractor .
num controlled blasting controlled blasting refers to the controlled use of explosives and blasting accessories in carefully spaced and aligned drill holes to produce a free surface or shear plane in the rock along the specified excavation back slope .
controlled blasting techniques include presplitting and cushion trim blasting .
all final slopes identified in the contract as presplit slopes must be excavated with controlled blasting methods .
ripping is not allowed within num feet num m of the final slope face .
a .
general .
meet all requirements of subsection num as well as the following num .
when presplitting detonate the presplit line before detonating any production holes .
num .
cushion blasting is similar to presplitting except detonation along the cut face is after the detonation of the production holes .
num .
unless otherwise approved by the project manager begin tests using controlled blast holes spaced num feet num mm adjusting if necessary to a maximum spacing of num feet num mm until the project manager approves the spacing to be used for a full scale controlled blasting operations .
b .
controlled blasting methods num .
presplitting .
perform all presplitting including the blasting test sections in accordance with subsection num .
num .
cushion trim blasting .
cushion blast in lieu of presplitting where the horizontal distance from the cut face to the existing rock face is less than num feet num m. the difference in delay time between the trim line and the nearest production row can not be more than num milliseconds or less than num milliseconds .
num method of measurement num drill presplitting holes a .
production blasting .
production blasting is incidental to and included in the measurement for unclassified excavation in accordance with section num .
b .
controlled blasting .
drill presplitting holes are measured by the linear foot m of controlled blast hole .
the measurement is made from hole collar to a depth of num feet num mm below finished ditch grade .
holes with alignments not meeting the requirements of subsection num are not measured for payment .
quantities shown in the contract are based on numfoot num mm hole spacing .
actual quantities will depend on field conditions and results from test sections .
the quantity of drill presplitting holes shown in the contract is not guaranteed and the department reserves the right to increase or decrease this item with no adjustment in the contract unit price .
num blasting consultant blasting consultant is measured by the lump sum .
num blasting num edition num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit blasting consultant lump sum drill presplitting holes linear foot m equipment to perform vibration and air overpressure monitoring preblast and postblast surveying film videotape and other expendable materials are incidental to blasting consultant work and are not paid separately .
payment for all costs associated with blasting consultant work is included in the lump sum bid price for blasting consultant .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num production blasting payment for all costs associated with production blasting including materials explosives labor tools and equipment is included in the contract unit price per cubic yard mnum of unclassified excavation .
num controlled blasting payment for all costs associated with controlled blasting including materials explosives labor tools and equipment is included in the contract unit price per linear foot m of drill pre splitting holes .
num section num detours num description this work consists of constructing maintaining and removing a detour within the prescribed corridor and as specified in the contract .
num reserved num construction num general construct the detour to the lines and grades shown in the contract and cross sections .
provide surfacing materials and thicknesses as specified in the contract .
remove and stockpile topsoil within areas of the detour that require excavation prior to detour grading operations .
complete detour grading operations in accordance with section num .
in wetland or riparian areas as shown in the contract cut shrubs impacted by temporary detour construction flush with the ground do not grub .
use geotextile or other approved separation between the natural ground and temporary detour fill to provide minimal disturbance to the existing ground .
num design construct the temporary detour within the rw or permit area and to the lines and grades shown in the contract and cross sections or as approved by the project manager .
surface the detour as indicated in the contract .
the method required for conveyance of a waterway is not included in the preconstruction authorizations and permits issued by resource and regulatory agencies .
prior to commencing any work on the detour determine a preferred method of conveyance and submit this with the contractors temporary facilities joint application to the project manager .
the submittal will be forwarded to the appropriate resource and regulatory agencies for review and approval .
a. culverts .
if used furnish culverts of the size and length shown in the contract .
provide adequate bulkheads at the approach fills to prevent fill materials from entering the waterway .
place culverts in accordance with section num .
b .
structures .
if a bridge is chosen as means for conveyance of the waterway provide a waterway opening of sufficient size to accommodate the numyear flood event spanning the active channels with numfoot num mm minimum freeboard .
construct all temporary bents in a manner that the current remains undeflected .
provide adequate bulkheads at the approach fills to prevent fill materials from entering the waterway .
provide the detour bridge with a width greater than or equal to that of the existing bridge with a design load capacity of aashto hsnum msnum .
provide a rail system with blunt end protection at all bridge ends .
ensure the rail system either meets nchrp num tlnum or mash crash test requirements or can resist railing design forces as specified in aashto lrfd tlnum table anum .
num submittals a. bridge .
submit a copy of the design and calculations plus num copies of the working drawings for the proposed detour bridge stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of montana .
show the following in the drawings num .
bridge length and width .
num .
location of all bents .
num .
clear water opening .
num .
bulkheads and method of construction .
num detours num edition num num .
details of the bridge rail .
b. culverts .
when culverts are not shown in the contract submit a copy of the design for the proposed pipe which must show the following num .
pipe size and length .
num .
location .
num .
minimum fill cover .
the department has num business days to review the submittals .
approval of the detour is contingent upon meeting the requirements of this provision and those of the resource and regulatory agencies with jurisdictional authority .
num maintenance maintain the detour in accordance with subsection num to provide the traveling public with a safe and smooth riding surface .
provide a satisfactory surface similar or better to that which existed on the ptw prior to beginning construction .
repair all damage to the detour and the ptw connections immediately and at no additional cost to the department .
this includes but is not limited to damage from washouts chuckholes soft spots guardrail damage or debris on the roadway .
failure to maintain the detour in a manner that provides the traveling public with a safe and smooth riding surface is cause for the project manager to stop work until corrective actions take place .
all costs associated with the delay are the contractors responsibility .
num removal remove the detour only after the mainline work has been completed and approved by the project manager .
fill areas excavated for detour construction and incorporate the material removed from the detour into the mainline embankment .
grade the location impacted by the detour to approximately match its original contours .
place salvaged topsoil over the disturbed area and seed as specified in the contract .
num method of measurement detour construct maintain and remove will be measured as a lump sum quantity in accordance with section num .
materials labor and equipment needed to construct maintain and remove the detour are considered incidental to this item of work and will not be measured for payment .
no additional measurements will be made for finish grade control or traffic control devices associated with detour construction .
traffic control devices used to maintain traffic after detour construction is complete will be measured under the traffic control bid item specified in the contract .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit detour construct maintain and remove lump sum include all materials labor and equipment needed to construct maintain and remove the detour in the lump sum bid for detour construct maintain and remove .
traffic control devices required to construct the detour are considered incidental and will not be paid separately .
traffic control devices required for operation of the detour will be paid under the traffic control item specified in the contract .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num culvert excavation and trench excavation num description this work is the excavation for placing or removing drainage and other appurtenant structures .
it includes foundation preparation backfilling disposal of excavation material bailing drainage sheeting shoring cribbing and installation of safety measures needed to satisfy the requirements of subsection num .
excavation classes are described below .
num .
culvert excavation culvert excavation is all work under subsection num where vertical walls are not required and the excavation width is not specified .
num .
trench excavation trench excavation is the excavation for placing or removing storm drains sanitary sewers water lines and other installations in the contract .
vertical trench walls when required must be shored or supported to meet the u.s. department of labor osha safety and health regulations for construction .
trench widths are specified in subsection num .
num reserved num construction requirements num general excavate to permit removal jointing and backfilling of pipe .
construct and maintain the excavations to prevent personal injuries damage to foundations structures pole lines or other facilities .
pile and maintain all excavated material to meet osha requirements and with a minimum of inconvenience to the public .
do not obstruct fire hydrants water valves meters and the free flow of storm water in gutters other conduits and natural water courses .
do not excavate below the specified depth except as permitted in subsection num .
remove all obstructions in the excavation at contractor expense .
backfill excavated areas in accordance with subsection num .
do not place backfill against newly constructed masonry or concrete structures for at least num calendar days .
remove all sheeting and bracing before backfilling .
num culvert excavation when special foundation stabilization is specified excavate the bedding trench walls vertically and excavate the trench width to provide room for the bedding material .
num trench excavation keep trench lengths to a minimum in paved roadways sidewalks or other improved areas in advance of the pipe laying and not to exceed num feet num m. keep trench backfilling and compaction to within num feet num m of the installed pipe .
cut the pavement full depth vertically along regular neat lines in paved roadways that require patching .
excavate the minimum trench width possible .
when vertical trench walls are specified the maximum trench width is the external width of the pipe barrel plus num feet num mm .
when a special foundation is specified excavate the bedding trench walls vertically and the trench width as specified .
do not exceed the specified trench width without the project managers approval when vertical trench walls are specified .
furnish any additional select backfill material and additional surface and subsurface improvements if the maximum trench width is exceeded at contractor expense .
num culvert excavation num edition and trench excavation num num excavation for appurtenant structures excavate for riprap rubble masonry retaining walls cutoff walls headwalls manholes drop inlets catch basins headgates division boxes and other structures appurtenant to culverts sewers drains pipes or tubing to meet the applicable requirements of subsection num .
num shoring provide and remove shoring or supports for excavation walls that protect the work existing property utilities pavement and other existing facilities .
provide safe working conditions meeting osha local and state safety codes .
repair damage caused from excavation support failure or from failure to provide support at contractor expense .
num foundation preparation compact foundations for culverts sewers drains pipes tubing and appurtenant structures to the moisture and density requirements of subsection num .
remove unstable or unsuitable material encountered below the excavation floor elevation and replace with material meeting subsection num .
cover with bedding material meeting subsection num as directed .
if approved by the project manager excavatable clsm may be substituted as bedding material for concrete and steel pipes .
a request to use excavatable clsm for any other pipes or application must be submitted at least num business days prior to use .
the project manager will investigate unstable pipe installations requiring num feet num m or more of foundation material .
remove unyielding material below the staked elevation to at least num inches num mm and replace with bedding material meeting subsection num .
bed culverts larger than num inches num mm as shown in the detailed drawings .
place bedding for numinch num mm diameter and smaller culverts to uniformly support the culvert throughout its length .
the bedding does not need to conform to the outside of the culvert .
do not lay pipe until the foundations are approved by the project manager .
remove and relay pipe laid on unapproved foundations at contractor expense .
num method of measurement culvert excavation trench excavation and excavation for bedding and foundation material are not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for all costs associated with culvert and trench excavation furnishing and installing culverts is included in the contract unit price per foot m of pipe type and size .
when bedding or foundation material is specified in the contract payment for all costs associated with excavation required to place bedding and foundation material is included in the contract unit price per cubic yard mnum of bedding or foundation material .
payment for safety measures required to protect open trenches is included in the contract unit price per foot m of pipe type and size .
num section num water pollution control and aquatic resource preservation num description water pollution control is the planning scheduling installing maintaining and removing of measures and devices to prevent or minimize pollution and control sediment transport and soil erosion .
aquatic resource preservation is the avoidance and minimization of impacts to aquatic resources .
num materials use materials meeting contract requirements or approved by the project manager if permanent and temporary materials are not specified .
num construction requirements num general comply with all local state tribal and federal laws and regulations as well as applicable permits authorizations and notifications for prevention or abatement of erosion water pollution and siltation .
obtain and submit copies of any required permits authorizations and notifications to the project manager before beginning construction activities covered under the applicable permit .
the department is not responsible for delays caused by incomplete or inaccurate submittals by the contractor .
defend indemnify and hold harmless the department from legal actions or fines resulting from violations of the rules regulations permits authorizations and notifications due to any act omission neglect or contractor misconduct .
plan install inspect and maintain temporary and permanent water pollution controls i.e .
bmps to provide economical effective continuous erosion and sediment control prevent pollution during and after completion of construction activities and preserve existing aquatic resources .
erosion and sediment control is required on all projects as necessary to minimize damage to the highway and adjacent properties and abate pollution of surface and ground water resources .
num water pollution control contractor failure to provide erosion sediment and water pollution controls may cause the department to provide the work and deduct those costs from monies due or to become due the contractor or otherwise billed to the contractor .
the department may also stop the work or withhold any payments due until acceptable corrective action is taken .
a .
spill prevention and waste disposal .
prevent chemicals fuels lubricants bitumen raw sewage and other wastes from entering regulated aquatic resources .
dispose of all wastes refuse and discarded materials in accordance with subsection num .
b .
erosion and sediment control measures .
control erosion sediment and water pollution during all work and work suspensions .
design install and maintain erosion and sediment controls to control stormwater discharges including both peak flow rates and total stormwater volume to minimize erosion at outlets and to minimize downstream channel and stream bank erosion .
num .
temporary control measures .
install bmps prior to or concurrently with soil disturbance activities .
when bmp installation is concurrent with the soil disturbance activity limit the work to an area that can be protected by bmps no later than the same day the work is performed .
failure to install bmps within the same day will result in suspension of all work relating to those bmps .
maintain all temporary erosion control sediment control and other pollution control measures until it is no longer needed or conflicts with the work .
if devices that num water pollution control num edition and stream preservation num conflict with the work are removed replace these devices no later than the end of each shift .
regrade work sites to match the surrounding terrain after the devices are removed .
repair or replace damaged inadequate nonfunctioning or nonconforming devices .
initiate work to fix the problem immediately after discovering the problem .
unless specified differently in permits or authorizations complete this work as soon as practicable but no later than num calendar days after discovering any deficiencies .
temporary pollution control measures required due to the contractors negligence carelessness failure to maintain or failure to install designed permanent controls in place of temporary controls are at contractor expense .
num .
permanent control measures .
install permanent pollution controls concurrently or immediately following work that disturbs natural ground .
c. inspections .
conduct inspections as specified in the permit .
when no permit is required conduct inspections to evaluate performance and maintenance needs of water pollution controls in accordance with the following schedule unless specified differently in permits or authorizations at least once per month and within num hours of a storm event of num inches num mm or greater .
use the departments most current swppp inspection report when no permit is required .
use the departments form or another form that conforms to permit requirements when a permit is required .
provide one copy of the signed inspection report to the project manager .
failure to conduct inspections and submit inspection reports renders the bmps unacceptable .
immediately report potential noncompliance in accordance with applicable regulations guidance and permit conditions .
the contractor is wholly responsible for all violations including but not limited to those that result during the times when the required monitoring is not conducted inspection report forms are not submitted bmps are ineffective required maintenance or monitoring of bmps is not performed .
bmps will be inspected as part of the final inspection to ensure they are adequate maintained and functioning properly .
d. erosion control plan .
mpdes permits are issued by the deq for discharges within the state of montana not including indian countries .
npdes permits are issued by the epa for discharges inside the boundaries of indian countries .
some tribal governments also have npdes review authority andor separate permitting authority .
for projects requiring mpdes andor npdes general storm water permit coverage submit one noi package and the associated fees for ground disturbance areas within the project limits to the appropriate permitting agency .
use department furnished blank erosion control plans to complete the swppp as required by the general permit .
provide a copy of the noi package submitted and confirmation for receipt of a complete noi package from the permitting agency to the project manager and environmental services bureau prior to conducting any ground disturbance activities .
be responsible for erosion sediment and water pollution control for contractor furnished material sources staging areas plant sites or any other contractor caused ground disturbance outside the project limits .
submit a separate noi package and the associated fees to the permitting agency for ground disturbance areas outside the project limits .
contractor furnished material sources staging areas plant sites or any other contractor caused ground disturbance outside the project limits are the contractors responsibility and must be submitted under a num edition water pollution control num and stream preservation num separate noi package from the ground disturbance within the project limits .
although these areas are permitted separately the areas of disturbance are considered cumulative with the project disturbance area when determining the requirement for permit coverage .
comply with the conditions of the permit .
revise andor update the swppp to reflect current conditions pollution prevention measures and installed bmps in accordance with permit requirements .
submit all changes to the project manager .
do not transfer or terminate the general storm water permit coverage until the bmps are inspected and approved and all records required under the permit including inspection and monitoring reports are furnished to the project manager .
the department may require that certain bmps be replaced by another type of bmp as a condition of permit transfer .
when submitting the general storm water permit transfer packageapplication to the department include a check for the permit transfer fee .
make the check for the amount of the fee payable to the deq .
num aquatic resource protection a .
general .
unless authorized with approved permits and authorizations meet the following general provisions num .
do not operate mechanized equipment in any regulated aquatic resource unless authorized in accordance with subsection numb .
num .
isolate work zones from flowing and standing waters during construction unless authorized in accordance with subsection numb .
num .
do not spill or dump material from equipment into regulated aquatic resources .
num .
do not discharge wastewater from washout of concrete related equipment concrete finishing saw cutting wet concrete hydraulic demolition etc .
into any regulated aquatic resource .
num .
do not place fill or other materials in any regulated aquatic resource unless included in the contract .
or authorized in accordance with subsection numb .
num .
locate staging or storage areas at least num feet num m horizontally from any aquatic resource top of stream bank or the highest anticipated water level during the construction period whichever is furthest from the resource .
num .
store and handle petroleum products chemicals cement and other deleterious materials to prevent their entering regulated aquatic resources .
num .
provide sediment and erosion controls for topsoil stockpiles staging areas access roads channel changes and instream excavations .
num .
shape and contour streambeds and stream banks to their predisturbed condition to match adjacent undisturbed ground unless included in the contract .
num .
clean maintain and operate equipment so that petroleumbased products do not leak or spill into any regulated aquatic resource .
b .
temporary facilities and construction activities .
obtain required permits and authorizations for the installation maintenance operation and removal of temporary facilities such as work bridges work pads cofferdams temporary detours diversions etc .
department obtained permits and authorizations do not typically include removal and disposal of existing structures access to and from authorized locations sequencing and construction methodology to construct authorized features impacts to areas outside of the planned construction footprint and other items potentially affecting an aquatic resource .
plan temporary construction facilities to num .
minimize disturbance to regulated aquatic resources num .
not restrict or impede fish passage in streams num water pollution control num edition and stream preservation num num .
not restrict water flow anticipated during use and num .
remove temporary facilities as soon as practicable once they are no longer needed .
complete application forms in accordance with the permitting agency requirements .
plans included as part of the application forms must at a minimum contain the following information num .
details depicting regulated aquatic resource features before installation of temporary construction facilities and after removal num .
location of facilities relative to permanent work and regulated aquatic resources num .
plan and elevation views of facilities showing regulated aquatic resources num .
anticipated high water elevation during use of the facilities num .
waterway openings and clearances num .
type of bridge bent pier and superstructure construction wood steel concrete etc .
num .
quantity and type of material proposed for use num .
written description for installing operating maintaining and removing facilities including proposed construction techniques containment plans equipment stockpile and storage areas temporary erosion and sediment control measures site re vegetationrestoration and weed control plans num .
estimated time the temporary facilities are to be in place and num .
a plan for and written description of existing structure removal if applicable as described in subsection numc .
shape and contour areas disturbed by the installation or removal of temporary construction facilities to match adjacent undisturbed ground upon removal of the facilities .
submit copies of the plans and application packages their modifications or their revisions to the project manager .
the department will review the plans and application packages their modifications or their revisions and either request revisions or submit to applicable resource and regulatory agencies within num calendar days .
resource and regulatory agency review time does not begin until the department submits the application to the applicable agencies .
do not begin work on temporary construction facilities or modifications to approved plans until receiving written approval from the regulatory and resource agencies .
c. existing bridge and structure removal .
furnish the project manager a plan and written description detailing how the existing bridges andor structures are to be removed .
include in the description what methods and equipment are to be used to remove the bridge deck superstructure piers footings and end bents and if applicable containment plan .
conduct work in accordance with section num .
provide the anticipated start date of removal work and estimated time to complete the work .
include details of erosion sediment and pollution control and containment measures used during removal .
remove contractrelated debris from the regulated aquatic resources within num hours of placement .
maintain constant progress on all instream work until completed .
num seeding a .
temporary seeding .
temporarily seed or implement other soil stabilization measures approved by the project manager on all disturbed soil areas as required by permitsauthorizations .
when no permit is required temporarily seed or implement other soil stabilization measures approved by the project manager on all disturbed soil areas num edition water pollution control num and stream preservation num when grading activities will not resume for a period of num calendar days or more by the numth day after the last disturbance .
permanently seed areas not requiring further disturbance if they fall within the seeding dates .
b .
erosion seeding .
conduct erosion seeding on freshly exposed slopes steeper than numhnumv that will not be top soiled or redisturbed unless implementing other soil stabilization measures in accordance with permits or as approved by the project manager .
manually broadcast seed the disturbed areas at the completion of each day regardless of season .
excessively rocky slopes that can not be excavated by ripping are exempt from erosion seeding .
broadcast seed with the following mixture and rates species lbs pls per acre cereal barley num pryor slender wheatgrass num mt origin canada wildrye num erosion seeding does not replace or substitute for final seeding activities specified in the contract .
num method of measurement temporary erosion and sediment control devices for use within the project limits are measured as lump sum and will not be measured separately .
only erosion and sediment controls within the project rightofway and installed in accordance with manufacturer specifications or the detailed drawings will be paid for .
bmps and associated permit costs for contractor furnished material sources staging areas plant sites or any other site not within project limits are not measured for payment .
permit fees and monitoring costs associated with obtaining and maintaining permit coverage for ground disturbance areas both within and outside the project limits are considered incidental to the project and are not measured separately for payment .
normal maintenance of bmps in accordance with permit requirements and the contract are considered incidental to the work and no additional measurements will be made .
maintenance includes removal of bmps no longer required removal of sediment and debris in front of and around bmps repair and replacement of incorrectly installed devices mobilization and travel for inspections and maintenance and maintenance until the permit is terminated or transferred .
replacement of satisfactory bmps requested by the department at the final inspection will be measured in accordance with the erosion control rate schedule .
num temporary erosion and sediment controls units temporary erosion and sediment control tesc devices are measured by the unit of control devices used and accepted .
a unit is the base value for establishing the relative value of each type of tesc device .
the relative value of each tesc device in units is shown in the erosion control rate schedule .
temporary and erosion seeding are measured parallel to the ground line and include seedbed preparation fertilizing and seeding .
these will not be used to correct deficiencies of lump sum items .
num basis of payment no additional payment will be made for the fees or monitoring costs associated with the general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activity .
include these num water pollution control num edition and stream preservation num costs in the temporary erosion control bid item .
include fees associated with transferring the permit in the lump sum temporary erosion control bid item .
failure to implement bmps identified in the swppp update the swppp as required by the construction general permit or conduct bmp inspections and submit inspection reports renders the bmps unacceptable .
no payment will be made for bmps installed and the total paid to date on progress estimates for bmps will be deducted on the next monthly progress estimate until swppp deficiencies are remedied and the inspection reports are completed and copies received by the project manager .
payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit temporary erosion control unit temporary erosion control ls lump sum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the work in accordance with the contract .
num temporary erosion and sediment control lump sum partial payment for temporary erosion control will be monthly based on the lump sum contract price as follows table num temporary erosion control lump sum progress payments of contract amount paid of erosion control bid amount first estimate after start of erosion control work num num num num num num num substantial work complete date num include the cost of temporary erosion control in the cost of the lump sum item .
anticipate probable adverse weather and stream flow conditions .
a request may be submitted for compensation resulting from the addition of bmps due to acts of god described in subsection num or extra work added by change order .
include documentation in the request that demonstrates such an event has occurred .
payment for quantities required by an event or extra work and approved by the project manager will be by a change order and in accordance with the erosion control rate schedule contained in the contract at a unit price of num per unit .
the installation of additional bmps requested by the department at the final inspection will be added by change order and paid for in accordance with the erosion control rate schedule .
num temporary erosion and sediment control units temporary erosion and sediment controls are paid for at the contract unit price per temporary erosion control .
the units of each type of temporary erosion control paid for will be calculated by multiplying the measured quantity of each device by the assigned value per units shown in the erosion control rate schedule included in the contract .
payment for completed and accepted temporary erosionsediment control devices will be made in accordance with one of the following categories num .
category no .
num new installation .
when a device is new and used for the first time it will be paid at num of the rate schedule .
num edition water pollution control num and stream preservation num num .
category no .
num reuse .
when a previously used bmp material that meets contract specifications is placed in a new location it will be paid at num of the rate schedule .
maintenance of bmps in accordance with the mpdesnpdes permits and the contract is not paid for separately .
include this work in the unit price bid for temporary erosion control devices .
no additional compensation is made for the removal of bmps that are no longer required .
num water pollution control num edition and stream preservation num num section num structure excavation num description structure excavation is excavating bridge foundations and all other structure foundations .
the item includes disposing of excess or unsuitable material from the excavations backfilling to the original ground level bailing pumping draining sheeting shoring and cribs .
num structure excavation type i structure excavation type i is excavating dewatering shoring and cribbing backfill and compaction for the excavation .
num structure excavation type ii structure excavation type ii is excavating dewatering backfill and compaction for the excavation excluding shoring and cribbing .
num shoring and cribs this is constructing and removing all shoring and cribs cofferdams or caissons and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals to complete the work .
num reserved num construction requirements num general the plan excavation lines in the contract are estimated .
excavate all foundations to the plan elevations and dimensions .
removing boulders logs and other obstructions found in the excavation is incidental to this work .
remove timber sheeting and other material used in the excavation before backfilling .
remove and stockpile all excavated material that is suitable for backfill .
num treatment of foundation materials when the excavation reaches the designated depth dewater clean and maintain the excavation until the foundation bed is inspected .
clean and fill rock seams and crevices with concrete mortar .
obtain the project managers approval of the foundation before placing concrete on the foundation .
place concrete without disturbing the bottom of the excavation .
minimize disturbance of the natural ground outside the excavation pay limits except as required for constructing cofferdams .
num cofferdams submit drawings and calculations prepared by a professional engineer showing the proposed method of cofferdam construction and dewatering procedures before starting the work .
the cofferdam must meet osha requirements .
ensure cofferdams or cribs for foundation construction are watertight to permit dewatering .
provide clearance within the cofferdam for constructing forms inspection of the form exteriors and for pumping .
realign or enlarge the cofferdams or cribs that are tilted or moved laterally during the work to provide work clearance at contractor expense .
timber bracing may be left in cofferdams or cribs extending into the substructure masonry with the project managers written approval .
num structure excavation num edition num when weighted cribs are used to resist the hydrostatic pressure acting against the bottom of the foundation seal use an anchorage to transfer the entire weight of the crib to the foundation seal .
when the foundation seal is placed vent or port the cofferdam at the cofferdam design low water level .
the foundation seal depths in the contract are based on the estimated normal watersurface elevations or are consistent with those satisfactorily used on past projects .
the specified seal thickness is a minimum .
the contractor may request an increased seal depth .
submit the request in writing to the project manager for approval .
any approved increase in seal depth and associated costs are at contractor expense .
repair or replace failed cofferdams foundation seals or both at contractor expense .
pump out the cofferdam and place the remaining masonry or concrete in the dry after meeting the time limit in subsection num .
remove all cofferdam or crib material after the substructure is complete without disturbing or marring the finished work .
num pumping water from cofferdams pump interior foundation enclosures without disturbing the inplace concrete .
do not pump for at least num hours after placing concrete unless pumping from a sump separated from the concrete work by a watertight wall .
num inspection place the footings as soon as practical after the excavation depth and the foundation material are approved .
drill holes or drive rods in the excavation bottom to determine the materials quality when requested by the project manager .
excavate the spread footings and take rod soundings at each individual substructure unit and submit rod soundings simultaneously for the footing elevation approval .
num backfilling once approved backfill and compact all excavated areas without damaging adjacent structures to match the existing ground line .
place backfill to be covered by roadway embankment in maximum numinch num mm loose thickness continuous horizontal layers .
compact each layer in accordance with subsection num .
remove and dispose of backfill containing large or frozen lumps wood or other deleterious materials .
do not jet or pond the backfill .
serrate or step the slope bounding the excavation for abutments and wingwalls .
place coarse gravel or broken stone around drain holes in wingwalls or abutments as shown in the contract .
backfill around piers and in front of abutments and wingwalls with material large enough to resist erosion .
if acceptable material is not available the project manager may order stone or lean concrete backfill paid for as extra work .
place backfill against masonry abutments and wingwalls in accordance with subsection numb .
allow culvert related concrete work to cure num calendar days before backfilling .
dispose of excess material at contractor expense in accordance with all applicable laws rules and regulations .
num edition structure excavation num num num method of measurement num structure excavation type i and type ii measurement in cubic yards mnum is based on the volume bounded on the sides by vertical planes num inches num mm outside of the footing neat lines on the top by the original undisturbed ground surface at the time excavation begins or by the lines in the contract and on the bottom to the specified footing elevation or the elevation directed by the project manager .
calculations for tie beams overhangs or similar volumes extending beyond the footing lines are computed from lines num inches num mm outside of and below neat lines .
the computed structure excavation includes only those portions not contained in the volume of footing excavation .
num shoring and cribs shoring and cribs used with structure excavation type i are not measured for payment .
shoring and cribs used with structure excavation type ii are measured by the lump sum .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit shoring and cribs lump sum structure excavation type i cubic yard mnum structure excavation type ii cubic yard mnum additional approved material for backfill provided from other sources is paid for as extra work .
payment includes the costs of obtaining the material processing handling and transporting to the project .
the cost of placing and compacting the additional material and disposing of unsuitable material is included in the contact unit price for structure excavation .
no payment is made for additional material placed outside structure excavation pay limits and slope lines to comply with safety regulations .
no payment is made for additional material to replace material removed from the excavation rendered unsuitable by improper excavation handling or stockpiling methods .
partial payments for structure excavation type i or ii will be made based on the total quantity as follows num .
num when removed to plan elevation .
num .
num when backfilled and compacted .
num .
num when the area is cleaned up to the project managers satisfaction .
partial payments for shoring and cribs will be made based on the lump sum contract unit price as follows num .
num when shoring and crib is in position .
num .
num when driven to final elevation .
num .
num when shoring and crib is removed and the area is cleaned up to the project managers satisfaction .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num structure excavation num edition num num section num equipment use num description this describes the equipment to be used for the contract work .
num reserved num construction requirements num general requirements provide equipment in good mechanical condition having sufficient power to perform the work .
repair or replace equipment not meeting these requirements .
num motor graders use selfpropelled motor graders either tandem or allwheel drive equipped with pneumatic tires .
equip the graders with a moldboard at least num feet num m long with a cutting edge a scarifier with nine or more teeth having minimum dimensions of num x num x numinch num x num x num mm and poweroperated controls .
the motor grader manufacturers power rating must be at least num horsepower num kw .
num dozers use dozers of any standard type attached to a crawler tractor of at least num horsepower num kw having poweroperated controls .
furnish dozers a minimum num inches num m wide .
the dozer and tractor is considered a single unit .
num rollers a .
general .
provide rollers and compaction equipment of standard manufacture bearing the manufacturers identification label .
roller weight is the manufacturers rating .
use selfpropelled rollers capable of reversing direction without backlash .
keep rollers in good mechanical condition with positive accurate steering control .
use adequately powered trucks or tractors for pulltype rollers .
other than traction units operate rollers separate and distinct from other equipment .
equip all rollers with selfcleaning devices that prevent material from adhering to the wheels or tamping surfaces .
b. smoothwheeled rollers .
use smoothwheeled selfpropelled rollers meeting one of the following num .
tandemtype weighing up to num tons num mt or num .
threewheeled type weighing a minimum num tons num mt or num .
towed steeldrum rollers weighing a minimum num tons num mt .
c. tamping rollers .
use tamping rollers with grids drums or shells surrounded by metal studs pads or similar elements that compress small areas of material .
d. pneumatictired rollers .
use pneumatictired rollers meeting the following num .
twoaxle type straight or oscillating num .
rigid framed providing a platform or body for ballast loading num .
effective rolling width of at least num feet num m num .
minimum working weight capacity of num pounds num kg per inch width of tire tread num .
smooth tires no tread equal in size and diameter num .
rear axle tires spaced to overlap the tread gap of the preceding two tires num equipment use num edition num num .
uniform tire pressure not varying from each other by more than num psi num kpa and num .
selfpropelled or tractor or truck drawn tractive power .
operate the rollers while turning to prevent tearing or loosening of the material being rolled or the adjacent material .
do not use wobblewheeled pneumatictired rollers for bituminous surfacing work .
e. vibratory rollers .
use vibratory rollers capable of obtaining the required compaction .
num watering equipment furnish and operate pneumatictired water equipment having spray bars capable of uniformly distributing water over the surface area .
the control valves must be positive closing to prevent leakage .
num test trailer transport and setup transport stateowned test trailers from a designated location to the project site and return it to a designated location as directed .
contact the project manager for details concerning the transport of the trailer at least num calendar days prior to plant mix operations .
the contractor is responsible for all required permits .
purchase minimum num insurance for the trailer and its contents .
provide written proof of the insurance to the project manager prior to moving .
verify that the department has prepared the trailer and contents for transport .
repair or replace all contents and trailer damage occurring in transport at contractor expense .
do not move the trailer without the project managers permission .
provide a level parking area the required blocking and electrical power service for the test trailer .
locate and construct the parking area a minimum num feet num m from the plant mix dryer drum mixing plant and storage silo unless otherwise directed to accommodate the numfoot x num foot num m x num m trailer .
transport set up and make the trailer fully operational at least num days before starting plant mix paving .
park block level reblock relevel and unblock the trailer as directed .
supply electrical power num hours a day num days a week .
suspend paving work during power interruptions or periods of insufficient power to the trailer .
furnish and install a continuous numampere num to num volt single phase num hertz power supply to the trailer .
the power must be independent from the hot plant operation .
have the source connected by a montana licensed electrician using a four wire connection .
num method of measurement num equipment use equipment use when specified as a bid item is measured by the hour for the hours performing the work and includes furnishing the equipment including operator servicing repairs .
time in moving equipment from point to point on the project and for repair and servicing is not measured .
equipment used in the work but not specified as a bid item is incidental to the work .
num test trailer transport and setup test trailer transport and setup is measured by the mile km for the actual miles km moved .
it includes insurance transporting blocking unblocking leveling furnishing and installing electrical power and associated wiring removing power and wiring and all other necessary resources to complete the item of work .
maintenance reblocking and releveling is incidental to the work and is not paid separately .
the mileage shown in the contract is an estimate only and may be adjusted by the project manager .
num edition equipment use num num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit dozer hour motor grader hour test trailer transportsetup mile km payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num equipment use num edition num num section num obliterate roadway num description obliterate roadway includes removal of the existing roadway and related items rehabilitating the abandoned roadway area by scarifying and shaping and seeding .
num reserved num construction requirements grade and contour abandoned roadways to blend with the new roadway or existing terrain .
if not specified in the contract dispose of the existing bituminous materials in conformance with applicable laws rules regulations and the montana solid waste management act .
after the old roadway surfacing is removed salvage the topsoil from areas to be graded and perform the rough grading .
grade and contour the obliterated roadway to blend with the new roadway and adjacent terrain .
spread the salvaged topsoil and seed the obliterated roadway area .
work construction scars sharp breaks and steep slopes or cuts to blend with the terrain .
existing aggregate surfacing material may be used to construct fills when covered with num inches num mm of soil capable of supporting plant growth .
existing bituminous materials used for embankment of the new roadway must conform to the requirements of subsection num .
remove and dispose of bituminous materials old structures guardrail and other non salvageable items not included in other contract items for removal at contractor expense .
remove and neatly store all material designated as salvageable to prevent damage .
the species of seed seed bed preparation fertilizing mulching and application rate is specified in the contract .
num method of measurement obliterate roadway is measured in stations to the nearest whole station along the centerline of the roadway obliterated .
topsoil is measured in accordance with subsection num .
seeding is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit obliterate roadway station seeding acre ha topsoil cubic yard mnum material obtained from the obliterated roadway and used in the construction of the new roadway is measured and paid for as unclassified excavation in accordance with section num .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num obliterate roadway num edition num num section num aggregate surfacing num description this work is producing and placing one or more courses of aggregate surfacing on a prepared surface or producing and stockpiling aggregate surfacing .
num materials num aggregates obtain aggregates from sources meeting section num requirements to produce material in accordance with subsection num and the following subsection requirements crushed base course num and num crushed cover aggregate num crushed top surfacing num and num sand surfacing num selected surfacing num furnish bridge end backfill in accordance with subsection num .
num binder binder material for binding and gradation requirements is fine natural soil particles or crusher dust free from grass roots weeds humus or other deleterious matter .
num blending material blending material is selected natural or crushed mineral aggregate combined with the produced aggregate to meet specifications .
do not use pit strippings overburden or other deleterious material as blending material .
furnish and add blending material to aggregate surfacing materials when required to meet gradation requirements .
the blending material must not increase the liquid limit and plastic limit of the surfacing material .
num aggregate treatment choose the material that will be used to treat the aggregate which may include mcnum emulsified prime calcium or magnesium chloride or other material approved by the project manager .
furnish liquid magnesium or calcium chloride in accordance with subsection num requirements .
furnish liquid asphalt in accordance with section num requirements .
if used furnish mcnum listed on the qpl .
blotter material is material with num passing the inch num mm screen and having a pi of num or less .
num construction requirements num sampling testing and acceptance a .
production control .
develop a quality control sampling and testing plan for production and be responsible for all sampling and testing for gradation and mechanical fracture control during aggregate production .
b .
acceptance sampling and testing .
the project manager will randomly select samples taken by the contractor and witnessed by an inspector for gradation and fracture testing from processed material in its final position on the roadway in accordance with mt num .
samples for other tests will be taken at the point of production .
num aggregate surfacing num edition num the following acceptance tests are used gradation mt num mechanical fracture mt num the quantity represented by num samples is a lot when production schedules and material continuity permit .
the project manager may establish a lot consisting of a quantity represented by num to num consecutive random samples when there are short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
c. acceptance .
surfacing aggregates are evaluated for gradation and mechanical fracture on a lotbylot basis .
the upper and lower limits in the gradation tables in section num are the upper and lower limits in the evaluation formulas .
the specified minimum fracture is the lower limit .
acceptance is made in accordance with subsection num .
num equipment a. rollers .
use rollers in accordance with subsection num .
b. watering equipment .
use watering equipment in accordance with subsection num .
c. scales .
furnish scales in accordance with subsection num or use certified permanently installed commercial scales .
furnish and have readily available at least num numpound num kg weights for testing contractor furnished scales .
furnish housing for the scale recording devices .
scale accuracy must be  of num at any weight .
alternate weigh methods or devices may be acceptable if they produce the required accuracy .
platform and beltconveyor scale requirements are as follows num .
platform scales .
use platform scales having the length to weigh an entire vehicle in an unbroken operation .
trucktrailer combinations may be weighed separately if the scale approaches are a. compacted gravel or asphalt b .
long enough and level with the scale platform to accommodate the entire truck trailer units and c. continually maintained .
release all brakes as the unit is weighed .
num .
beltconveyor scales .
beltconveyor scales may be used for nonasphaltic materials when meeting the requirements of subsection num and the following a .
the scale meets the national bureau of standards requirements for beltconveyor scales except as modified below .
b .
a daily staticload test is made after approximately  hour of continuous belt conveyor operation and whenever the air temperature varies num f num c or more .
have a calibration test performed once daily and whenever the daily staticload test shows adjustments are required .
c. make calibration computations calibration procedures and results and related documents available for the project managers review .
clearly mark test chains with calibration constants .
carry test chains and test weights in protective containers and make immediately available for beltconveyor scale testing .
d. perform accuracy checks by checking the average of num or more sequential payloads of hauling units on approved platform scales .
the acceptable accuracy is num of the payload of the average hauling unit .
if the recording odometer of the beltconveyor scales in use is graduated to numton num kg increments and is a cumulative recording process differences in readings and variations less than num edition aggregate surfacing num num numton num kg may carry over from one hauling unit to another .
conveyor weight conformation is based on the tonnage obtained from readings taken from the sealed odometer at the beginning and end of each check period .
the number of check loads will be increased should the test results fluctuate .
furnish a lock to secure the recording tape odometer totalizer calibration adjustment and clocktime imprinter .
the project manager will lock the equipment and retain the keys before materials are delivered to the roadway .
num reject dispose of reject material produced from department sources as directed .
num crushed aggregate course when crushed aggregate course is a bid item construct the aggregate surfacing section to the specified typical cross section and profile grade .
select one of the following two options to construct the aggregate section num .
full depth crushed base course .
num .
top num foot num mm crushed top surfacing remaining depth crushed base course .
indicate the selected option and the grade of crushed base course type a grade num or type a grade num before beginning aggregate production .
only one grade of crushed base course will be permitted .
if option num is selected use type a grade num crushed top surfacing .
quality assurance lot sizes test intervals and material tolerances will be based upon the materials selected .
num aggregate surfacing construction a .
surface preparation .
do not place aggregate surfacing material on any of the following num .
any surface not meeting the dry density requirements for that surface num .
a rutted or frozen subgrade or aggregate surface or num .
any surface not meeting grade or surface smoothness specifications .
b. pugmill mixing .
pugmill mix all surfacing aggregates except crushed cover aggregate .
uniformly mix aggregate surfacing and water in a central plant pugmill mixer .
proportion all blending material filler and binder by weight to within num of num of the specified quantity before mixing .
add the water needed to reach the specified density .
additional water may be added only once to the aggregate surfacing once its placed on the roadway to replace moisture lost to surface evaporation .
if additional water is needed pick up the mixture and remix it in the pugmill .
after pugmilling transport place and spread aggregate surfacing on the roadway .
spread in maximum numinch num mm compacted layers to the required grade and typical section .
spot fill low areas by scarifying roadway spreading aggregate and compacting to specified density .
c. road mixing .
when specified place mix and spread the surfacing aggregates on approved surfaces at optimum moisture using motor graders or other approved equipment .
water may be added to the aggregate to reach optimum moisture during or after crushing .
once uniformly mixed spread in maximum numinch num mm compacted layers to the required grade and typical cross section .
roller compact the spread layer .
correct or remove equipment from the work failing to maintain uniform gradation of the material for the entire width and thickness of the roadway .
d. compaction .
compact aggregate surfacing to num of the target density .
num aggregate surfacing num edition num the initial target density is the average of the maximum density of at least num tests on samples representing the material to be compacted .
maximum density is determined in accordance with mt num .
the project manager may take samples from the materials placed on the roadway .
they will be tested and the results averaged to determine a new target density for the material remaining to be placed .
the project manager will establish a target density for each course grade and type of surfacing aggregate .
a new target density will be established if the aggregate characteristics change .
the department will test the lifts of surfacing aggregate in numfoot long num m sections based on full typical section width .
the inplace dry density of each lift is determined within each section at num randomly selected locations .
the average of the num tests must be a minimum of num of the target with not more than num out of num tests being less than num of the target .
the number of tests will be prorated for sections with partial lengths and widths .
in prorated sections the average of the tests must be a minimum of num of target density .
be responsible for controlling compaction and all necessary control testing .
notify the project manager once compaction is complete on a section so it may be tested .
recompact sections not meeting density requirements .
recompacted sections will be tested at num new random locations .
compaction and testing will continue until the section meets density requirements .
densities will be determined in accordance with mt num mt num and mt num .
e. finishing .
finish each course of compacted aggregate surfacing to the specified grade and section .
the final lift will be accepted in accordance with subsection num .
use trimmings on the inslopes on sections of uncompleted roadway or return to the pit area .
when quantities are measured by the ton mt excess material returned to the pit is deducted from the pay quantities .
f. curing .
allow the final lift of crushed aggregate course to cure for a minimum of num hours and until inplace moisture content is num or more below optimum moisture content or a maximum of num final moisture content whichever is lower .
meet these requirements prior to aggregate treatment or paving .
notify the project manager when a section is complete and ready for department testing .
the inplace soil moisture content will be determined on the final lift of surfacing aggregate in numfoot num m long sections .
moisture content will be tested within each section at num random locations .
not more than num test may be above the target value .
the number of tests will be prorated for sections with partial lengths .
additional tests may be taken at the project managers discretion .
the contractor is responsible for corrective actions on sections not meeting moisture content requirements .
after corrective actions have been taken the sections will be tested at num random locations or prorated as determined by the project manager .
g. restrictions .
the project manager may restrict equipment speed and load weights to prevent damage to existing and new work public thoroughfares or safety .
unstable or pumping material is unacceptable .
rework or remove and replace the material prior to placing additional lifts or materials .
h. surface smoothness .
finish the aggregate surface to the specified grade within table num tolerances .
num edition aggregate surfacing num num table num surface smoothness aggregate size tolerance distance numinch num mm and larger numfoot num mm to numfoot num mm num feet num m numinch num mm and less numfoot num mm num feet num m num shoulder gravel compact shoulder gravel to provide a firm hard surface .
finish the slope to provide a smooth surface from the edge of pavement to the catch point .
furnish gravel in accordance with table num gradation requirements .
table num shoulder gravel gradation requirements percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num cold milled pavement is not required to meet the above gradation when used as shoulder gravel .
num traffic gravel furnish traffic gravel in accordance with subsections num or num .
traffic gravel is not evaluated in accordance with subsection num .
place traffic gravel in the locations and quantities directed by the project manager .
milled andor pulverized plant mix material may be used as traffic gravel in accordance with the following conditions num .
submit in writing a detailed plan showing locations for the use of the milled or pulverized material .
include an updated traffic control plan and stockpile locations .
num .
place all milledpulverized material below the finished subgrade elevation unless approved in writing by the project manager .
num .
do not millpulverize areas outside the planned limits unless approved in writing by the project manager .
num .
num of the milledpulverized material must pass the numinch num mm sieve .
num aggregate treatment furnish and apply aggregate treatment on aggregate surfaces .
submit the materials and application rates to be used for aggregate treatment to the project manager num business days before beginning the construction of the aggregate surfacing .
the material must bond with the aggregate and the treated surface must be durable under vehicular traffic .
apply aggregate treatment material and necessary blotter according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num bridge end backfill place bridge end backfill full width of the roadway embankment typical section to num feet num m behind the base of the pile cap then ascending on a numhnumv slope .
the top of the bridge end backfill is subgrade elevation .
when the bridge end backfill does not daylight at an embankment slope to provide drainage extend the bridge end backfill num feet num mm beyond the wingwall num aggregate surfacing num edition num and daylight to the slope facing the span .
place bridge end backfill material in conformance with moisture and density requirements of section num .
do not contaminate bridge end backfill with water while performing bridge work .
num method of measurement num aggregate aggregate surfacing blending material fillers binder water producing handling mixing hauling placing spreading compacting trimming use of trimmings maintenance and all necessary incidentals to complete the work is measured by the cubic yard mnum or ton mt as specified .
when removing oversize surfacing material from the roadway the oversize material is measured by the ton mt returned to the aggregate source and deducted from the total surfacing material placed on the roadway .
a .
measurement by weight .
aggregate surfacing is measured by the ton mt in accordance with subsection numc .
excess material removed from the roadway and returned to the pit area is deducted from the pay quantities .
b .
measurement by volume .
traffic gravel and shoulder gravel are measured by the cubic yard mnum .
aggregate surfacing is measured by the cubic yard mnum in accordance with subsection num from num .
plan dimensions num .
haul vehicles or num .
inplace roadway or stockpile volumes .
when measured in place each course thickness of each grade of surfacing aggregate will be measured at random locations in a section .
the section length and number of measurements is the project managers discretion .
the thickness measurements for each section are averaged and the average must equal or exceed the plan thickness .
the minimum measured thickness at any location must be at least plan thickness less  the largest aggregate size permitted for the material .
bring all sections of a completed course not meeting these specifications into compliance before placing the next course .
aggregate surfacing for small or irregularly shaped areas ordered in writing by the project manager are measured in the haul vehicle in accordance with subsection num .
aggregate surfacing to fill in subgrade low areas or placed outside the lines and slopes shown in the contract or established by the project manager is not measured for payment .
num bridge end backfill bridge end backfill is measured by the cubic yard mnum .
num reserved num reserved num compaction compaction is incidental to the aggregate surfacing .
num crushed aggregate course the entire aggregate surfacing section will be measured as crushed aggregate course regardless of the construction option selected in accordance with subsection num .
num edition aggregate surfacing num num num aggregate treatment aggregate treatment is measured by the square area .
blotter material is not measured separately for payment and is to be included in the bid price for aggregate treatment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit aggregate cubic yard mnum or ton mt aggregate treatment square yard mnum bridge end backfill cubic yard mnum crushed aggregate course cubic yard mnum or ton mt shoulder gravel cubic yard mnum traffic gravel cubic yard mnum binder is not measured separately but is to be included in the cost for aggregate material .
payment at the contract unit price for traffic gravel includes all costs necessary to furnish and place the gravel .
sale of excess crushed traffic gravel meeting all specifications is the contractors option .
traffic gravel meeting all specifications that is crushed and stockpiled on the project but not placed or sold will be paid for at num of the contract unit price .
traffic gravel from a commercial source or a source supplying multiple projects and not transported to the project is not measured for payment .
if milledpulverized plant mix is used on any portion of the project no payment for excess traffic gravel will be made .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num aggregate surfacing num edition num num section num bituminous pavement pulverization num description this work consists of processing the existing plant mix surfacing with existing crushed aggregate course additional crushed aggregate course or combination of these to restore the roadway section .
num materials furnish crushed aggregate course in accordance with subsection num and one of the following subsections crushed aggregate course type a grade num num crushed aggregate course type a grade num num num construction requirements num pulverization pulverize the bituminous surfacing to the depths specified in the contract .
pulverize the existing material so that num by weight passes a numinch num mm sieve .
num equipment equipment used to pulverize the existing surfacing must not reduce the aggregate size in the existing surfacing .
num mixing add crushed aggregate course as necessary to construct the roadway to the specified typical section and profile grade .
uniformly mix the pulverized material and crushed aggregate course by pugmilling or by using the pulverization equipment .
num compaction compact the pulverized mixture in maximum numinch num mm compacted lifts to num of the target density .
the target density will be determined by one of the following methods a. pugmill mixing .
mt num determines maximum density when the pulverized plant mix and crushed aggregate course are blended at a constant ratio by pugmill .
the initial target density is the average of the maximum density of at least num tests on samples representing the material to be compacted .
b. inplace mixing .
mt num determines maximum density when inplace pulverized plant mix and crushed aggregate course mixtures are combined at varying ratios .
the project manager will determine target densities and moisture corrections .
a new target density will be established if the ratio of pulverized material and crushed aggregate course change by more than num or the project manager determines the pulverized material characteristics or site conditions change .
num testing and acceptance each lift of pulverized mixture material will be divided into numfoot long num m sections .
the inplace dry density of each lift will be determined within each section at num randomly selected locations .
the average of the num tests must exceed num of the target density with no more than num out of the num tests being less than num of the target density .
be responsible for controlling compaction and all necessary quality control testing .
notify the project manager when compaction is complete on a section so it can be tested .
recompact sections not meeting density requirements .
recompacted sections will be tested at num new random locations .
num bituminous pavement pulverization num edition num compaction and testing will continue until the section meets density requirements .
num method of measurement num aggregate virgin crushed aggregate course is measured by the ton mt in accordance with subsection numc or by the cubic yard mnum .
num pavement pulverization pavement pulverization is measured by the square yard mnum based on the bottom width of the pulverized material .
the contract unit price may be adjusted if the average pavement depth varies by more than numfoot num mm from plan and the project manager issues a written order to increase or decrease the pulverization depth .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit crushed aggregate course ton mt or cubic yard mnum pavement pulverization square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num stockpiled surfacing aggregate num description this is stockpiling surfacing aggregates at the specified location .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with subsection num and the contract requirements .
num aggregate stockpiling methods clear stockpile sites of weeds roots stumps rocks and other contaminating matter .
dispose of this material in accordance with subsection num or level as directed .
make the stockpile floor firm smooth well drained uniform in crosssection and able to support the stockpile .
place an aggregate bed on the floor to prevent stockpile contamination .
construct stockpiles in at least num layers .
place each layer approximately num feet num m high before starting the next layer .
prevent each layer from spilling down over the next lower tier .
do not drop material stockpiled by conveyor more than num feet num m. deposit the material in succeeding merging cone piles .
do not permit the piles to exceed num feet num m in height .
level each completed layer to num feet num m thick .
operate stockpiling trucks to produce a stockpile width that exceeds the single dump trucks width .
do not dump over the stockpile sides .
maintain separation between different gradation stockpiles to prevent aggregates from intermingling .
use equipment and methods to prevent segregation degradation or contamination of the aggregate when constructing stockpiles or delivering materials .
department sieve test samples are taken from the stockpile to determine degradation .
remix and restockpile segregated stockpiles .
bring stockpiled material failing specifications back within specifications at contractor expense .
num method of measurement num aggregate stockpile surfacing aggregate is measured at the stockpile site by the ton mt or cubic yard mnum in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit aggregate ton mt or cubic yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num stockpiled surfacing aggregate num edition num num section num cement treated base num description this work is producing and placing one or more courses of a mixture of water hydraulic cement and aggregate or soil on a prepared surface in conformity with the lines grades and thicknesses established in the contract .
num materials num cement furnish type i or ii portland cement listed on the qpl in accordance with subsection num .
blended hydraulic cement that conforms to one of the following may be substituted aashto m num type ip or type ip ms astm cnum type gu or type ms fly ash may be used to replace a maximum of num of the cement by weight .
furnish fly ash in accordance with aashto m num class c requirements .
mixtures with fly ash must meet all of the requirements of cement treated base ctb .
num water furnish water in accordance with subsection num requirements .
num aggregate obtain aggregates from sources in accordance with section num requirements to produce aggregates in accordance with subsection num requirements .
stockpile aggregates in accordance with subsection num .
num blending material blending material consisting of selected natural or crushed mineral aggregate may be combined with the produced aggregate to meet gradation requirements .
for fine aggregate passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit may not exceed num and the plasticity index may not exceed num tested in accordance with mt num .
num composition and proportioning develop and submit a proposed ctb mix design for approval .
submit the mix design a minimum of num business days before production .
develop a mix design with cementitious materials content that ensures a numday unconfined compressive strength of num num psi num num kpa in accordance with mt num and is a minimum of num the weight of the dry aggregate .
include the following items as part of the mix design submittal num .
cement and fly ash certifications num .
optimum moisture content and maximum density determined in accordance with mt num num .
aggregate gradations determined in accordance with mt num num .
soilcement losses moisture changes and volume changes swell and shrinkage produced by the repeated wetting and drying of hardened soilcement specimens determined by aashto t num num .
soilcement losses moisture changes and volume changes swell and shrinkage produced by the repeated freezing and thawing of hardened soilcement specimens determined by aashto t num .
the maximum freezethaw weight loss is num num .
numday compressive strength tests determined in accordance with mt num num cement treated base num edition num num .
atterberg limits determined in accordance with mt num and num .
sand equivalent determined in accordance with mt num or aashto t num alternate method no .
num .
acceptance of the mix design will be based on a review of the submitted results for all the above testing procedures .
do not place ctb until the submitted mix design has been approved .
num construction requirements num aggregate production testing and acceptance a .
general .
perform all work meeting the approved jobmix target values within the specified tolerances .
sample and test aggregates during production to control gradations .
b .
acceptance sampling and testing .
the project manager will randomly select samples of the stockpiles taken by the contractor and witnessed by an inspector for acceptance of the aggregates physical properties excluding combined gradations .
aggregate gradation samples will be taken before hydraulic cement and water are added to the mixture .
provide aggregate samples as directed by the project manager using an aggregate sampling device just before the aggregate enters the pug mill mixer .
the approximate quantity represented by each sample is num tons num mt .
additional samples may be taken and tested .
the quantity represented by num samples will represent a lot whenever production schedules and material continuity permit .
the project manager may establish a lot consisting of a quantity represented by num to num consecutive samples when there are short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
c. acceptance .
ctb is evaluated for gradation requirements on a lotbylot basis .
acceptance is determined in accordance with subsection num .
num weather limitations do not mix or place ctb when the ambient temperature is below num f num c or the ground temperature is below num f num c. do not mix or place cement treated base when the weather forecast for the project site includes a predicted temperature of num f or below for the following night .
do not incorporate frozen aggregate in the ctb or place on a frozen subgrade .
num subgrade preparation prepare the subgrade in accordance with section num .
trim the subgrade to the thickness tolerances in accordance with subsection num .
num mixing and placing mix the ctb in a central plant .
proportion the aggregate and cement by weight .
water may be proportioned by weight or by volume .
use weigh systems and meters accurate to within num of the total quantity batched and are equipped to indicate the total quantity of each ingredient batched between onehalf and num hours .
calibrate the feed system before production mixing begins .
periodically verify the mix ingredient proportions from the weigh indicators .
produce ctb having a minimum of num cementious materials .
maintain cementious content to within num of the job mix target at any periodic check and within num for each days num edition cement treated base num num production .
mixing will be suspended until corrections are made if the cement content is not maintained within the above tolerances .
do not lower cement content during production that will result in freezethaw losses exceeding num based on mix design testing .
uniformly mix aggregate cement and water .
modify mix procedures when evidence of a nonuniform mix is identified .
place ctb in num to numinch num to num mm compacted lifts .
place all lifts required to achieve full depth within num hours .
replace any partial depth section damaged prior to placement of successive lifts as directed by the project manager at contractor expense .
keep the compacted material of previous lifts moist until placement of successive layers .
keeping lower layers moist or furnishing and applying curing seal to partial depth layers is incidental to the ctb .
num compaction compact the ctb to num of the maximum dry density within num hours of mixing .
the moisture and density relationship is determined in accordance with mt num using samples taken from the aggregate stockpiles before starting mixing operations .
if a moisture and density test varies from the running average as determined in accordance with mt num during production a new moisturedensity relationship will be determined .
moisture and density tests will be taken in accordance with mt num on the roadway approximately every num cubic yards num mnum .
five tests will represent one lot of production .
remove and reprocess any uncompacted sections where the weather or contractor operation has increased the average moisture content above optimum by more than num .
removed mix may be reprocessed as aggregate for producing ctb .
if the density of any section is less than or equal to num of the maximum dry density num additional tests will be taken in that section and the average of all num test results will represent the section .
the average density for the num tests must be at least the specified density with none of the num tests less than num of the maximum dry density .
remove any section with an average density less than or equal to num of the maximum dry density .
removed mix may be re processed as aggregate for producing cement treated base .
ctb with densities between num and num is evaluated on a lotbylot basis in accordance with subsection num .
num finishing shape the compacted surface to the specified lines grades and cross sections .
finish and compact to produce a smooth dense surface free of compaction planes cracks irregularities or loose material .
complete the surface finishing within num hours of compaction .
scarify and recompact surface deformations in the base caused by equipment .
do not permit the moisture content to fall below the specified optimum during finishing .
apply water in a uniform fog spray .
num construction joints construct straight verticalfaced transverse joints at the end of each days work and when ctb operations are delayed or stopped for more than num hours .
do not place additional material until the transverse joint has been approved by the project manager .
construct straight vertical faced longitudinal joints in compacted material that has been in place for more than one hour by cutting vertically approximately num inches num mm from the existing edge .
dispose of the cut material in accordance with subsection num .
moisten joints prior to placing adjacent ctb material .
repair all construction related damage to finished sections of the ctb at contractor expense .
num cement treated base num edition num num protection and curing when the ctb is finished to grade apply the specified bituminous curing seal at num to num gallons per square yard num to num lmnum .
keep the ctb surface moist between the final compaction and application of the curing seal .
apply the curing seal within num hours of finishing the cement treated base to grade .
before applying the curing seal ensure the base surface is tightly knit free of all loose material and has sufficient moisture to prevent asphalt penetration .
apply the specified blotter material at approximately num pounds per square yard num kgmnum when directed .
the actual application rate of curing seal and blotter may be adjusted by the project manager .
remove ctb areas that have absorbed the curing seal down to a hard clean surface within num hours of the curing seal application .
remoisten and patch the area with approved cement treated material .
reapply the curing seal as directed by the project manager .
apply the curing seal and blotter material in accordance with section num .
num curing period do not perform any work on the ctb for num calendar days after the curing seal is applied .
do not place pavement on the ctb until the compressive strength reaches num psi num kpa .
num maintenance maintain the finished surface and seal before placing the wearing course .
make all repairs or patches the full depth of the base .
repair damage to the curing seal or cement treated base as directed by the project manager at the contractors expense .
remove any loose material from the ctb surface prior to paving operations .
num surface smoothness and thickness requirements finish ctb in accordance with subsection num .
num use of trimmed material ctb trimmings may be used for shoulder construction in lieu of aggregate subject to the following num .
the shoulder subgrade is prepared in accordance with subsection num .
num .
hardened material is reworked to the maximum size specified for aggregate placed on the shoulder .
num .
the trim material does not exceed num of the shoulder aggregate depth num .
the trim material is uniformly distributed in the shoulder area before spreading additional shoulder material .
num testing and acceptance of ctb samples for determining the compressive strength will be taken in accordance with mt num .
test method mt num will be used to mold cylinders for strength testing .
the approximate quantity represented by each sample is num cubic yards num mnum .
additional samples may be taken and tested .
the compressive strength tests will be conducted at num days and the material represented will be accepted or rejected in accordance with table num .
any corrective action is at contractor expense .
the contractor may make additional cylinders to determine strength gain and to maintain quality control .
num edition cement treated base num num table num pay factors for ctb cement treated base lot acceptance strength x psi num psi num kpa strength x psi strength pay factor pf x num pf num num x num pf num num x num pf num num num x num x num pf num remove and replace num method of measurement num cement treated base ctb is measured by the cubic yard mnum of inplace volume .
ctb placed outside the lines and grades shown in the contract or established by the project manager is not measured for payment .
no measurement is made of the width required for forms or equipment operations .
gravel used in trimmings and lateral support sections outside the planned typical section dimensions is not measured for payment .
blending material is not measured for payment .
num curing seal curing seal is measured by the gallon l or by the ton mt in accordance with subsection num .
num blotter material blotter material is measured by the square yard mnum based on the length and width of ctb placed and accepted .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit blotter material square yard mnum cement treated base cubic yard mnum curing seal gallon l or ton mt no separate payment will be made for cement fly ash blending material or surface preparation .
include the cost in the unit price bid for ctb .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num cement treated base num edition num num section num plant mix surfacing num description this work is producing furnishing placing and compacting plant mix asphalt pavement .
plant mix pavement is num or more courses of plant mixed aggregate hydrated lime or chemical additive when required and bituminous material constructed on a prepared foundation .
warm mix surfacing warm mix is plant mix surfacing which has been modified with additives or processes that allow a reduction in the temperature at which plant mix surfacing is produced and placed .
num materials provide aggregate from sources meeting the section num requirements .
the contractor is responsible for all sampling testing and control of the aggregate .
furnish the project manager the quality control test results upon request .
ensure that the aggregate when combined at the job mix formula meets table num and subsection num .
num aggregate meet aggregate requirements in accordance with subsection num .
for commercial mix when no aggregate size is specified use either inch num mm or inch num mm nominal aggregate sizes .
num hydrated lime furnish hydrated lime in accordance with subsection num .
sample fillers and hydrated lime in accordance with mt num .
num asphalt cement furnish asphalt cement in accordance with section num .
asphalt cement modified with warm mix additives will be tested with the additives and must meet the contract requirements .
num additives for warm mix comply with the warm mix technology manufacturers recommendations for incorporating additives andor processes when producing warm mix .
comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding receiving storage and delivery of warm mix additives .
mix warm mix at a minimum temperature of num f num c and within the range recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the department .
use asphalt additives listed on the qpl for the production of warm mix .
use foaming technology that is manufactured and marketed for the purpose of producing warm mix .
ensure a manufacturers technical representative is present during production and placement of warm mix for at least the first num tons num mt of mix placed and as directed by the project manager for the remainder of the project .
this requirement may be waived if successful experience in warm mix construction is demonstrated .
in addition to the information specified in subsection num provide the following information at least num calendar days before warm mix production num .
warm mix technology andor warm mix additives information num .
manufacturers established recommendations for usage num plant mix surfacing num edition num num .
manufacturers established target rate for water and additives the acceptable variation for production and documentation showing the impact of excessive production variation num .
warm mix technology material safety data sheets num .
temperature ranges for mixing and compacting num .
asphalt binder performance grade test data over the range of warm mix additive percentages proposed for use num .
the warm mix design and testing sample preparation may differ from conventional hot mix asphalt .
provide manufacturers sample preparation recommendations for warm mix design and testing and num .
include the binder suppliers recommendations for warm mix additive content methods for incorporating warm mix additive into mix design samples and mixing and compaction temperature ranges .
num recycled asphalt pavement rap up to num rap by weight may be incorporated into mix used in the top numfoot num mm and up to num rap by weight may be incorporated into mix used in lower lifts .
if rap is included in the job mix formula and the final mix meet all of the plant mix requirements .
it is recommended that at least num separate rap stockpiles be produced .
num emulsified asphalt furnish an emulsified asphalt when required meeting the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements produce plant mix in accordance with table num table num table num table num num and form cbnumqavm s. produce plant mix in a plant capable of accurately proportioning and uniformly mixing all ingredients .
do not begin plant mix production until receiving notification that the departments mix design verification is complete .
for commercial mix produce plant mix with actual asphalt cement content within num of the mix design or field established job mix formula .
for noncommercial mix set the initial job mix targets before producing more than num tons num mt of plant mix surfacing .
plant mix produced prior to setting initial targets is defined as startup mix .
furnish the project manager copies of form cbnumqavm s with the proposed job mix targets for vma vfa vtm and da .
once the job mix targets are set quality assurance qa will be applied to all subsequent plant mix produced .
no pay incentive or disincentive will be applied to the plant mix until the targets are set .
produce startup mix meeting the criteria listed in accordance with the startup job mix range in table num .
a hamburg wheel track test hamburg will be run when the produced mix does not meet all the criteria specified in accordance with the startup job mix range in table num .
the contractor may revise the job mix targets one time during the contract .
submit revised job mix targets no later than num business days following completion of plant mix production or initial job mix targets will be used to determine payment .
if more than one project is included in the contract tied projects the job mix targets may be revised for each project only if the projects use different mix designs .
submit to the project manager num signed copies of form cbnumqavm s with the revised job mix targets for vma vfa vtm and da .
the revised targets will be applied retroactively to all plant mix produced after the initial targets are set and payment will be recalculated .
no monetary time or other compensation will be allowed for department actions required due to the setting of initial targets e.g .
pvalue shutdowns etc .. num edition plant mix surfacing num num num mix design submit to the project manager num copies of a plant mix design following aashto r num and meeting aashto m num .
include the binder suppliers recommended mixing and compaction temperature ranges .
this compaction temperature range is for testing purposes only .
choose the design air voids target to be the lowest value within the range of num to num as long as all other criteria are met .
report the da for the target asphalt content .
the mix design is to be produced on a total weight of mix basis .
on contracts with multiple gravel sources or combination of gravel sources provide a mix design and meet all the requirements for each source or combination of sources and suppliers .
for mix designs using rap furnish the asphalt content and gradation of the rap prior to mixing and after mixing with the virgin aggregate .
furnish all specific gravities .
furnish samples of aggregate from each stockpile to produce an numpound num kg sample when combined at the mix design blend ratio and num gallons num l of the asphalt cement .
the department has num calendar days from receipt of the mix design materials and signed mix design documents to review the mix design .
the mix design verification consists of passing hamburg test results and a review of the submitted mix design documents to ensure all applicable design and aggregate requirements have been met .
tensile strength ratio test results do not have to be submitted with the signed mix design documents but must be received and reviewed before a mix design will be considered verified .
contract time will be extended for the actual contract time the contractors paving start date was delayed as verified by their most recent submitted schedule and only for contract time assessed after the num day verification time frame .
no additional compensation is allowed for these departmentcaused delays .
contract time will not be extended if the delay occurs between november numst and april numth .
use aashto t num to determine the mixture resistance to moisture induced damage modified to compact the numinch num mm diameter specimens to num inches numinch num mm num mm at num num air voids .
meet a tensile strength ratio of num or greater .
a change in the asphalt supplier or aggregate sources will not require a new mix design provided no change in the established job mix targets is requested and the aggregate and hamburg requirements are met .
establish job mix targets immediately if changing asphalt supplier or aggregate source prior to setting initial targets on noncommercial mix projects .
for commercial mix any mix produced after a change in supplier will be considered production mix and subject to full disincentives .
provide the apparent and bulk dry specific gravities and absorption for the aggregate and the specific gravity for asphalt cement when there are changes in the sources .
in lieu of developing a new mix design a previous department verified mix design may be requested for transfer .
to be eligible for transfer the transferred mix design must utilize the same material constituents from the same sources and in the same proportions as the original mix design .
mix design transfers will not be considered if the design traffic warrants different mix design criteria .
approval for transferring a mix design is at the discretion of the department and may require hamburg testing reverification .
proposed transfers with variations to the original mix design such as asphalt supplier or other factors such as changes to the crushing operation which could create uncertainty in the performance of the mix design will be subject to re verification testing .
when submitting a request for a mix design transfer furnish quantities from each stockpile to produce a numpound num kg sample if the department determines hamburg testing reverification is necessary .
num hamburg wheel track testing hamburg provide the project manager a sample of plant mix surfacing material for hamburg acceptance after initial job mix targets have been established for noncommercial mix and as num plant mix surfacing num edition num directed by the project manager for commercial mix .
the department may require hamburg samples at any time including during the production of startup mix .
if production noncommercial plant mix fails the hamburg make adjustments to produce plant mix meeting the requirements specified in the contract .
after a failing hamburg no more than num tons num mt of plant mix may be produced until passing hamburg results are received .
when num consecutive hamburg samples do not meet the requirements suspend production and submit a revised mix design and samples for verification and hamburg testing .
the initial mix design requirements will be used for verification .
do not resume production until the revised mix design is verified and hamburg mix design requirements are met .
plant mix lots represented by samples that do not meet hamburg specifications are not eligible for qa incentives including ride and density incentives .
for noncommercial mix remove and replace any startup plant mix represented by a failing hamburg test .
for commercial mix remove and replace any mix represented by a failing hamburg test .
plant mix removal and replacement is at no cost to the department .
num test procedures plant mix will be evaluated in accordance with the following test procedures mt num sampling bituminous materials mt num method of test for bulk specific gravity of compacted bituminous mixtures mt num ignition oven burn procedure mt num gradation of aggregate recovered by mt num mt num maximum specific gravity of bituminous mixtures rice method mt num method of establishing field target density for plant mix surfacing density control mt num gyratory compaction of bituminous mixtures mt num wheel tracking test procedure hamburg device num composition of mixtures a .
job mix formula .
establish target asphalt cement and warm mix additive content if applicable .
base the target asphalt cement content on design and field gyratory mix test results .
mix design specific gravities will be used during plant mix production unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
include num hydrated lime by total weight of mix as part of the aggregate gradation .
b .
sampling .
furnish samples of plant mix surfacing in accordance with mt num as directed by the project manager .
the project manager will randomly select when plant mix samples are taken .
sample in accordance with mt num .
a department inspector will witness plant mix sampling .
furnish the sample to the inspector immediately after it is taken or deliver the sample to the departments designated test location after the inspector seals the sample in a tamper proof container .
plant mix sampling will begin after the initial daily num tons num mt of plant mix has been produced or when a hot plant is cleaned out and num tons num mt of plant mix has been produced .
no sampling delay will be permitted at any other time unless approved by the project manager .
num acceptance commercial plant mix surfacing the asphalt content used for calculations is determined in accordance with mt num .
the da is calculated in accordance with mt num and the gradation determined in accordance with mt num on the aggregate remaining after the ignition oven test .
num edition plant mix surfacing num num a numton price reduction in the unit bid price for plant mix surfacing will be applied for any start up mix represented by a test not meeting the vma vfa vtm or da specified .
a numton price reduction numton maximum in the unit bid price for plant mix surfacing will be applied to production mix for each test not meeting the vma vfa vtm or da specified .
for commercial plant mix startup mix is the first num tons num mt of mix produced and production mix is all subsequent mix .
price reductions will be assessed on the quantity of material represented by each failing sample .
the quantity of material represented by each sample is the total tons of material produced divided by the total number of samples representing the material .
a minimum of num sample will be taken on projects with a plan quantity of num tons num mt or more and samples will be tested at a minimum rate of one per num tons num mt .
commercial plant mix will not be tested on crossovers detours guardrail widening patching or where the volume is less than num tons num mt .
acceptance in these areas will be based on conformance with the established mix design proportions or agreed upon adjustments .
compact these areas to num of a control strip as determined necessary by the project manager .
num acceptance of noncommercial plant mix surfacing qa the properties listed in table num for noncommercial plant mix are designated for acceptance on a lotbylot basis in accordance with subsection num .
the pay factor in table num is applied to plant mix surfacing lots for vma vfa vtm and da .
the asphalt content used for calculations is determined in accordance with mt num .
the da is calculated in accordance with mt num and the gradation determined in accordance with mt num on the aggregate remaining after the ignition oven test .
the approximate mix quantity represented by each sublot is num tons num mt .
the quantity represented by num tests or approximately num tons num mt of mix constitutes a lot whenever production schedules and material continuity permit .
a lot represented by num to num consecutive random sublots will be established when there are short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
all other contract items are evaluated for acceptance in accordance with the applicable specifications covering those items .
each element of a lot will be evaluated for pay adjustments .
all the individual test results in the lot for the element to be evaluated will be averaged and the percent of price reduction for the lot determined by the applicable formula .
f is the price reduction factor to be applied for each element as shown in table num and table num .
table num table of pay factors incentive item f factor maximum pay factor vma num num vfa num num vtm num num da num num when adjustments are being made for one of the two reasons in accordance with subsection num the department may require additional samples to test the material being produced in addition to the planned random samples .
these additional tests will be used to determine if the adjustments are effective and whether production may continue .
these tests will be used to identify obviously defective sections .
num plant mix surfacing num edition num num quality incentive allowance for each element with a p value of less than num the incentive is calculated by subtracting the calculated p value from num to determine the pay factor .
the maximum pay factor for each element is num .
an additional num incentive will be applied to the lot payment if the sum of the pay factors for the individual elements for a lot is num or greater .
the maximum pay factor for a lot is num .
num equipment a. mixing plants .
use mixing plants that produce a mix meeting the contract requirements .
adapt the mixing plant as required by the manufacturer to introduce warm mix technology .
plant adaptations may include additional plant instrumentation the installation of asphalt cement foaming systems and warm mix additive delivery systems tuning the plant burner and adjusting the flights in order to operate at lower production temperatures andor reduced tonnage .
b .
weigh system .
num .
automatic weighing .
use state certified automatic weigh systems to weigh materials .
ensure the weigh accuracy is within plus or minus num of the true weight throughout the use range .
include in the system an automatic printer that provides the following information a contract number b project number as shown in the contract c item name as shown on detail estimate d date e time f ticket number consecutive g haul unit number h net tons mt in load to nearest num ton i a subtotal of tons mt for each haul unit since the beginning of the shift .
j an accumulated total for all haul units since the beginning of the shift .
use a preprogrammed printer or one equipped to prevent manual override of any weight information .
have the weigh system tested certified and sealed by the state bureau of weights and measures after each plant move and before production for a project .
immediately stop production should the printer malfunction or breakdown and do not resume until corrected .
delivery of material from storage or surge bins will be permitted only if the weight can be maintained within weigh specifications .
if an independent certified scale is within a num mile num km round trip distance from either end of the project the project manager will randomly reweigh loaded vehicles at least num times per project .
retest the plant weigh system any time the difference between the recheck and the plant system exceeds  of num of the load .
any weight difference will be addressed in accordance with subsection num .
num .
manual weighing .
the contractor may manually weigh and record weights instead of using an automatic weigh system .
ensure manual weighing includes platform scales in accordance with subsection numc a competent weigh person and dump person .
direct the weigh person to record on department furnished forms weights to the nearest num pounds num kg as well as the other required information regarding delivery and placement .
num edition plant mix surfacing num num certify that weights and totals furnished are a true and correct record of materials delivered and placed in the work .
deliver the records and totals to the project manager before num a.m. the next work day following the shift .
num safety requirements install and maintain stairs ladders walkways and all other plant facilities meeting state and federal safety requirements .
provide access to the plant mix within the trucks for taking samples and mix temperature data .
num burner fuel restrictions use one of the approved fuels below to heat and dry aggregates .
propane butane natural gas fuel oil grades num num and num only coal epa specificationused oil fuel epauof may be used instead of the approved burner fuels provided table num requirements are met .
table num epa specification used oil fuel requirements physical properties property range api gravity num viscosity at num f num c saybolt flurol num pour point num fnum c flash point minimum num f num c water by distillation under num solids by separation under num ash under num sulfur average num kinematic viscosity at num f num c num centistokes kinematic viscosity at num f num c num centistokes chemical properties element or compound permitted level vanadium under num ppm num mgl cadmium under num ppm num mgl chromium under num ppm num mgl lead under num ppm num mgl arsenic under num ppm num mgl total halogens under num ppm num mgl pcbs under num ppm num mgl furnish a copy of certified test results from the supplier for each load of epauof delivered to the project .
furnish plant manufacturer information showing the plant burner is designed and num plant mix surfacing num edition num equipped to burn epauof or grade num fuel oil .
upon request provide a numquart num l sample of epauof from the tank on the project .
immediately stop using epauof or grade num fuel oil if burner flame outs or other evidence of incomplete combustion or mix contamination is evident .
begin using one of the other approved fuels to complete the work .
remove and replace all contaminated plant mix at contractor expense .
no additional compensation will be allowed .
num dry warm mix additive hydrated lime feed system introduce dry hydrated lime into drum dryer mixing plants just below the asphalt cement introduction point .
introduce dry warm mix additive as directed by manufacturer .
ensure the system provides positive accurate material feed and is automatically synchronized to the aggregate feed .
ensure the system indicates the weight entering the mixing unit on a timecoordinated basis .
weigh using an automatic indicating electronic system .
the lime may be weighed directly or the storage container including lime may be weighed .
provide a continuous digital readout showing the weight or rate of feed in tons mt per hour .
record the information using a production monitorrecorder system or by a decumulating balance ticketprinting system .
record the information at minimum numminute intervals or as directed .
silo or storage container system weights are not used for acceptance during filling or transfer .
limit filling or transfer periods to one hour per three hours of plant operation .
record and furnish start and finish times for filling or transfer and the total quantity added .
suspend mixing for erratic feeding or failure to feed hydrated lime to a minimum of num of the job mix formula .
do not resume until corrected or repaired .
num flow rate meter measure the asphalt cement and liquid warm mix additive if applicable discharged into the mixing unit using a flow rate meter with totalizer and temperature compensation .
ensure the totalizer records up to num gallons num l and is certified to num of the measured quantity .
use a flow rate meter and totalizer that automatically corrects to a temperature of num f num c with an operating range of num to num f num to num c. locate the totalizer readout in the plant control room so it is readily accessible to the inspector .
ensure the flow rate meter automatically shuts off any time asphalt cement is diverted or stops entering the mixing unit .
calibrate the flow rate meter and totalizer before the start of the project and as necessary during production .
the project manager will witness the calibration .
provide the equipment and assistance for initial and subsequent calibration checks and furnish the project manager a copy of all calibration checks .
use a calibration volume of at least num gallons num l. ensure the weigh scales have been tested and certified .
furnish the project manager num copy of a test report showing the asphalt cement specific gravity .
spot check failure will require retesting and certification of the above .
the project manager will establish the spot check interval .
num edition plant mix surfacing num num num production monitor recorder use recording equipment that automatically monitors and records on a time coordinated basis the aggregate lime warm mix additive and asphalt cement weight entering the mixing unit .
the records may be continuous chart recorder or digital printout .
ensure that chart recorders clearly record asphalt cement content changes of num or more and aggregate feed rate changes of num or more .
ensure the digital printout equipment records the days total production at minimum numminute intervals or the interval directed by the project manager .
digitally display the aggregate warm mix additives and asphalt cement rates in tons mt per hour and daily totals .
display lime by tons mt per hour or on a decumulating balance .
ensure the monitor system operates on unprocessed signals from measuring devices .
provide the project manager continuous access to the recorder during production .
submit the permanent record to the project manager daily .
operate the productionmonitor recorder at all times during production .
stop production when the recorder is not operational .
num plant mix preparation mix the aggregate all additives and asphalt cement to produce a homogeneous mixture .
ensure all aggregates are thoroughly and uniformly coated with bitumen .
immediately suspend operations if aggregate is not being completely dried prior to mixing .
remove dispose of and replace all mix that is damaged by burning improper mixing or fails to meet the specifications at contractor expense .
maintain the mix discharge temperature within the asphalt cement manufacturers recommended mix temperature range not exceed num f num c. the discharge temperature will be periodically checked and recorded .
remove and replace any mix produced when the mix discharge temperature exceeds the maximum temperature at contractor expense .
num roadway equipment a. pavers .
use selfpropelled pavers that spread shape and finish the combined plant mix material to the specified profile and cross slope .
immediately stop paving if the paver tears shoves segregates or otherwise damages the plant mix and repair or replace the paver before resuming paving operations .
equip the paver with a mobile grade reference system that provides a uniform pavement profile .
ensure the paver maintains the transverse slope at all times and is able to adjust the slope throughout superelevated curves .
ensure auger extensions are used to match the screed width .
equip the paver with an attachment that produces joints in accordance with subsection num as the plant mix is placed .
b .
trucks .
remove trucks from service that leak fluids .
when directed cover each load with canvas or other approved material to protect the mix at contractor expense .
c. rollers .
furnish and use rollers that compact the plant mix to the specified density .
remove rollers that crush the paving aggregates or otherwise damage the plant mix and replace the damaged plant mix at contractor expense .
d. cleaning agents .
do not use diesel fuel as a cleaning agent or as a release agent for any paving equipment or operations .
use a commercially manufactured release agent approved by the project manager .
num plant mix surfacing num edition num num existing surface preparation dispose of existing bituminous surface designated to be removed in accordance with subsection num .
rework all existing bituminous surfaces designated to remain in place as specified .
before placing the leveling course clean the existing surface of dirt and loose extraneous material .
apply a prime or tack coat of bituminous material to the cleaned surface as specified .
correct dips depressions sags excessive or nonexistent crown and other surface irregularities using a premixed bituminous mixture .
spread the mixture in numinch num mm compacted layers .
correct surface irregularities exceeding num inches num mm deep using untreated aggregate material before leveling with a bituminous mixture .
num tack coat apply tack coat in accordance with section num and the contract .
apply tack coat on the prepared surface existing surfacing to be overlaid and between lifts when pavement is constructed in multiple lifts .
num surface conditions weather limitations and paving dates stop plant mix paving when the surface temperature is less than num f num c the surface is wet the roadbed is unstable or the project manager determines adverse weather conditions prevent the proper handling finishing or compacting of the mix .
complete all sections of plant mix surfacing to be open to traffic during winter shut down to the full plan width and thickness excluding the seal and cover .
complete this work meeting the specifications before the november numst paving cessation date .
the project manager will suspend time assessment between november numst and november numth when the next scheduled significant work item is paving and all grading gravel and other operations affecting the safe and convenient use of the roadway by the traveling public are complete .
submit a written request to the project manager and obtain written approval in order to pave after november numst .
and before april numth .
plant mix surfacing placed after november numst and before april numth is at the contractors risk and subject to the following conditions the surface temperature to be paved is at least num f num c measured by the project manager .
all applicable specifications are met .
make permanent repairs and restore partially completed pavement to the required profile section and condition at contractor expense before placing the remaining lifts .
this is not a waiver by the department of any other contract requirement regarding the work sequence or traffic operation .
if the paving operation causes transverse joints spaced at less than mile num m suspend work until the next april numth .
no payment is made for the plant mix or asphalt cement on progress estimates between november numst and april numth for partial width or thickness .
promptly repair damage to all partial width or thickness of plant mix surfacing used by traffic during this period for any reason including suspension of work due to adverse weather .
provide all required interim traffic striping and traffic control on partially completed pavement at contractor expense .
failure to promptly make repairs and provide interim striping and traffic control is cause for the department to perform or have the work performed and deduct the cost from monies due or that may become due the contractor .
num edition plant mix surfacing num num payment for partial width or thickness pavement in acceptable condition will be made on the estimates following the end of the period on the next april numth .
num spreading and finishing place and spread the mix in accordance with table num .
thinner lift thicknesses must be approved by the project manager .
table num minimum lift thickness aggregate size minimum lift thickness inch num mm numfoot num mm inch num mm numfoot num mm inch num mm numfoot num mm place and spread the mix to the widest practical width on the approved surface .
place shoulderwidening material with approved equipment .
establish and maintain line control for paving .
the project manager will furnish the contractor the necessary information to establish these controls .
maintain the paving control line tolerance within numfoot num mm of a true line from the existing reference points .
failure to maintain the paver control line within the specified tolerance is cause for corrective action or pavement removal and replacement as directed by the project manager at contractor expense .
include the cost of furnishing horizontal line control in the plant mix surfacing bid item .
remove and replace segregated pavement areas behind the paver with new plant mix before initial rolling begins .
correct all segregated areas at contractor expense .
on small or irregular areas approaches turnouts around manholes inlets walls and on other areas not readily accessible to a paver plant mix may be spread to the specified thickness using a specialty paver or other approved methods .
compact these areas as directed .
remove and replace all plant mix that is segregated loose broken contaminated damaged or otherwise defective with new plant mix that meets contract requirements at contractor expense .
remove any plant mix dropped from equipment onto any existing or new plant mix surfacing as directed by the project manager .
roadways having a design esal of num or less may be opened to traffic or to haul units subject to the project managers approval .
roadways having a design esal of num or greater may be opened to traffic and haul units when the mat is compacted and the surface cools to num f num c. num constructing joints continuously place each lift and provide at least a numinch num mm offset between longitudinal joints in successive lifts .
offset transverse joints in successive lifts by at least num feet num m. correct joints that do not meet the surface tolerance requirements in accordance with subsection num uniformly coat the exposed face of all joints excluding those formed by echelon paving with a double shot of emulsified asphalt before placing the abutting course .
construct longitudinal joints in the top lift of plant mix at the centerline or lane line .
if these locations are not practical construct the joint outside the wheel paths as approved by the project manager .
num plant mix surfacing num edition num construct a vertical transverse joint the full lift depth if the mix cools below the low temperature in accordance with subsection num .
remove loose material brush the joint face with asphalt and compact the fresh mix against the joint face when paving is resumed .
taper the end of paving lifts at bridge ends and on roadways under traffic to a minimum numhnumv ratio .
when paving of the lift resumes remove the taper and construct the transverse joint .
ensure transverse joints in lifts of plant mix surfacing or other lifts to be used by traffic for num calendar days or more do not vary more than inch num mm from any point on a taut numfoot num m string line placed parallel to centerline .
taper the longitudinal paving joint edges at a numhnumv to numhnumv slope .
compact the joint between abutting passes to the specified plant mix density .
do not permit an exposed longitudinal joint length to exceed one days paving run .
sign the new pavement end at the close of work each day meeting the projects traffic control plan and the contract .
construct the joints at bridge ends or other rigid structures after the existing base is prepared and compacted .
apply a coat of emulsified asphalt to the portions of structures abutting the plant mix surfacing .
num compaction compaction control testing and density acceptance testing complete compaction rolling within the temperature range recommended by the asphalt cement manufacturer included in the mix design or before the mat temperature falls below numf num c. compaction rolling after the temperature is below num f num c is cause to suspend paving operations .
compaction rolling is rolling in the vibratory mode .
the project manager may adjust the minimum num f num c temperature if compaction rolling damages the new pavement or has received written approval from the asphalt cement manufacturer .
compact warm mixes in accordance with subsection num .
perform all necessary density testing to control compaction .
once the plant mix is spread struck off and surface irregularities are corrected compact to the plant mix to at least num of target maximum specific gravity as determined in accordance with mt num with the following exceptions num inch num mm mixes with plan depths of less than numfoot num mm .
num any mix placed directly on a crushed aggregate surfacing .
compact plant mix placed over any typical section containing ctb to num for the full width of the typical section .
provide core samples of the compacted plant mix from the roadway .
core locations will be randomly selected based on the tons mt of mix placed .
core the locations selected after all rolling is complete and before the roadway is opened to traffic .
the center of the core location will not be within num inches num mm of longitudinal paving joints num inches num mm of a shoulder hinge point or where the planned nominal thickness is less than numfoot num mm .
the pavement density is determined from cores taken at randomly selected locations after all rolling is complete and before the roadway is open to traffic .
density acceptance by cores does not apply to leveling or isolation lifts that have a depth of less than numfoot num mm thick .
take cores after all rolling is complete .
provide two numinch num mm cores the full depth of the plant mix surfacing extracted from within a numinch num mm radius of each designated location .
mark the core as directed .
separate the plant mix lift to be tested from the total core .
cut the core to the actual lift thickness within numinch num mm .
the department recommends using a saw to separate the num edition plant mix surfacing num num lift to be tested from the total core .
perform this work within the project limits or other approved location .
the inspector will witness all of the above activities before traffic is permitted to use the plant mix lift being tested .
furnish the core immediately to the inspector after it is removed marked and separated .
do not remove the cores from the inspectors visual control at any time .
recore as directed any time either the contractor requirements or procedures within this section are not met .
the test results of the replacement core to be used in the qa evaluation for the lot represented will be the actual relative inplace density unless it exceeds num then num will be used for the relative inplace density of that core in the qa evaluation .
num for inch nummm mixes with plan depths of less than num foot num mm then num will be used for the relative inplace density of that core in the qa evaluation .
num for any mix placed directly on a crushed aggregate surfacing and then num will be used for the relative inplace density of that core in the qa evaluation .
the plant mix in the sub lot represented is considered to be not meeting density specifications .
remove free water from each core hole place and compact new hot plant mix not exceeding numinch num mm lifts to the finished surface immediately after the core is removed .
if approved by the project manager fill with a commercially manufactured quick setting nonshrink grout to the finished surface .
apply a double shot of emulsified asphalt over the core holes when the patch material has set .
mark each core as directed by the inspector witnessing the coring .
mt num is used to establish the target rice density .
the bulk specific gravity mt num determined for each core will be divided by the target rice density in effect at the time the plant mix was produced to determine the relative inplace density .
the average of the results of the pair of cores from each location will be expressed as the percent of relative density .
all results will be reported to the tenth of one percent num .
the approximate mix quantity represented by each sublot is num tons num mt .
additional locations and tests may be required .
the quantity represented by num tests or approximately num tons num mt of mix constitutes a lot whenever production schedules and material continuity permit .
a lot represented by num to num consecutive random sublots will be established when there are short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
all costs of furnishing the cores will be considered incidental to the plant mix surfacing item and no separate measurement or payment will be made .
plant mix surfacing is evaluated for density on a lotbylot basis in accordance with subsection num .
num pavement repair cut out the defective pavement section to at least numfoot num mm depth or as directed by the project manager .
clean the sides and bottom of the repair area and apply tack coat to the surfaces .
fill the repair area with contract specified mix level and compact to the specified density and surface smoothness .
num surface tolerance for flexible pavement a .
ride specification .
construct all surfacing courses to provide completed plant mix pavements that meet surface smoothness levels derived from the iri for the category specified in the contract and that meet the surface profile requirements for the finished surface .
surface smoothness and surface profile will be analyzed from data collected by the department using a class i laser road profiler following department procedures for num plant mix surfacing num edition num profiler operations .
the iri will be measured in inchesmile regardless of the unit of measure used on the contract .
target iri values are determined by project category based on the opportunities for improving the ride by the prepaving iri value paving constraints or by a combination of these as follows num .
category i projects target iri values num to num inches per mile projects with num or more opportunities for improving the ride .
single lift overlays with a prepaving iri value less than num inmi num .
category ii projects target iri values num to num inches per mile single lift overlays with a prepaving iri greater than or equal to num inmi and less than num inmi num .
category iii projects target iri values num to num inches per mile urban projects with a posted speed limit of num mph or less and curb and gutter controlling num or more edges of the paving projects with high prepaving iri value projects with an average prepaving iri value greater than or equal to num inmi and num or more opportunities to improve the ride are considered a category i project .
projects with an average prepaving iri value greater than or equal tonum inmi and one opportunity to improve the ride must have a postpaving iri less than or equal to num of the prepaving iri .
there is no pay adjustment factor based on smoothness corrective action is required to produce a postpaving iri less than or equal to num of the prepaving iri at contractor expense .
each opportunity to improve the ride is one of the following placing a gravel base or surfacing course placing plant mix base placing cement treated base placing pulverized plant mix surfacing milling cold recycling milling and laydown or each full numfoot num mm increment for inch num mm aggregate mix num foot num mm increment for inch num mm aggregate mix and numfoot num mm increment for inch num mm aggregate mix of new plant mix surfacing .
leveling and isolation lifts are not included as an opportunity to improve the ride .
correct surface profile defects greater than num inches num mm in a distance of num feet num m within num calendar days of notification but prior to seal and cover or plant mix seal operations .
correct surface profile defects by milling and filling deficient pavement depths or by diamond grinding excess pavement depths .
corrected surface profile defects will be retested and evaluated .
pavement thickness will be measured after profile corrections are made .
ensure corrected pavements do not create a transverse height difference between adjacent lanes exceeding inch num mm .
fog seal corrected areas if the roadway is not chip sealed prior to winter shutdown .
the department will test for surface smoothness and surface profile prior to the placement of seal and cover or plant mix seal on the final lift of plant mix surfacing pavement .
testing will consist of num passes in each travel lane .
data collected for each num edition plant mix surfacing num num wheel path will be averaged for that lane .
tests will be performed within num business days extended by rain or other inclement weather conditions of completion of all mainline paving .
the department will test divided highways within num business days extended by rain or other inclement weather conditions of completion of mainline paving for each direction of travel .
ensure that the entire finished lane width to be tested is not impeded and is available to department personnel at the time of testing .
test results will be furnished within num business days .
if the entire final lift of pavement can not be completed before winter shutdown data will be collected for all roadway sections paved through the final lift .
evaluation of the remaining pavement will be performed once the paving is completed .
the surface smoothness analysis will be used to determine the actual iri for calculating pay factors for the surfacing section .
actual iri values will be determined on all mainline travel lanes including climbing lanes passing lanes and ramps that are num miles num km or longer .
bridge decks will be included only if they are paved as part of the project .
smoothness data will not be evaluated for the following roadway sections num .
climbing lanes and passing lanes less than num miles num km long num .
turning lanes num .
acceleration and deceleration lanes less than num miles num km long num .
shoulders and gore areas num .
road approaches num .
horizontal curves num feet num m or less in centerline radius and pavement within the superelevation transitions of these short radius curves or num .
pavement within num feet num m of bridge decks approach slabs and the terminal paving points of the project .
areas requiring corrective work will be identified using the surface profile measurements of the finished surface .
correction of profile defects will not be cause to reevaluate any section for surface smoothness except for locations identified as remove and replace as described below .
quality incentive allowances will be used to offset any price reductions on progress estimates .
remove and replace any num mile num km segment of roadway requiring corrective action .
remove and replace the segment by milling num feet num mm or to the lift line if within num feet num mm whichever is greater and replacing with new material meeting the contract requirements .
remove and replace sections of roadway less than num miles num km that do not meet the applicable iri requirements for the project category unless other corrective action is approved by the project manager .
sections requiring removal and replacement or other corrective action will be rerun once the corrective work has been performed .
the maximum pay adjustment factor for the affected segment after corrective action is num .
disincentives will be applied if applicable .
all work to prepare the roadway for testing including sweeping grinding and traffic control prior to the ride test is incidental to the work and is not measured for payment .
all work to complete any corrective action and retesting including but not limited to sweeping and traffic control is incidental to the work and is not measured for payment .
include all costs and resources to prepare the roadway for surface tolerance testing in the plant mix surfacing item .
b .
surface smoothness .
finish the surface of the final lift to the specified grade and cross section meeting the surfacing smoothness values for all paved areas excluded from the ride specification in accordance with subsection numa .
the contractor will be num plant mix surfacing num edition num notified of sections to be corrected within num business days after the surface was placed .
perform all corrective work at contractor expense .
table num values specify the maximum allowable variance and divergence from the mean constructed grade .
table num maximum allowable variance and divergence surface total variation per num feet rate new plant mix numfoot num mm num plant mix overlays num mm numfoot num mm num plant mix overlays num mm numfoot num mm no rate note the rate is applicable only to the longitudinal direction .
the mean constructed grade for each section is the planned grade or a grade parallel to plan grade acceptable to the project manager .
surfaces will be checked for compliance at joints bridge ends and other sections where ride characteristics or other evidence indicates the surface tolerance is outside the specifications .
surface smoothness is measured longitudinally in numfoot num m sections at numfoot num m intervals and transversely at numfoot num m intervals .
correct out of specification plant mix surfacing by diamond grinding cold milling a minimum depth of num feet num mm the full width of the defect but not less than the paver width or other approved method .
if removing and replacing extend the repair area for a minimum of num feet num m each side of the defective pavement and fill with like material compacted to the specified density .
ensure the corrected pavement and adjoining surface meet the smoothness specifications .
num rumble strips construct rumble strips when specified .
cut the rumble strips into the finished plant mix surfacing .
use a machine equipped with a rotary type cutting head capable of making the cuts to the dimensions and pattern shown in the detailed drawings .
produce the rumble strips without tearing and snagging the pavement .
remove resulting debris from the roadway before opening to traffic .
do not allow debris to enter any waterways .
establish a control line and locate the rumble strips on the shoulder num inches num mm outside of the travel lane .
the offset may be adjusted to avoid longitudinal pavement joints .
do not place rumble strips where concrete barrier rail or other roadside features prevent placement as specified .
do not cut rumble strips if the seal and cover operation will not be completed before winter shutdown .
if seal and cover is not scheduled to be completed within num business days after cutting rumble strips fog seal the finished rumble strips .
apply fog seal to finished rumble strips as follows num .
apply a double shot of emulsified asphalt meeting section num for fog seal .
num .
keep traffic off the fog seal until the emulsion has cured to notack .
num .
apply the fog seal to the rumble strip for each lane in the direction of travel for that lane .
num method of measurement num plant mix surfacing plant mix surfacing is measured by the ton mt on approved scales after complete mixing of all ingredients .
the pay weight includes the asphalt cement and hydrated lime in the mixture .
num edition plant mix surfacing num num num commercial plant mix surfacing commercial plant mix surfacing is measured by the ton mt on approved scales after complete mixing of all ingredients .
the pay weight includes the asphalt cement and hydrated lime in the mixture .
num asphalt cement when not included in another item asphalt cement is measured by the ton mt as specified to the nearest ton mt in accordance with subsection num excluding antistripping additive .
num hydrated lime when not included in another item hydrated lime is measured by the ton mt in accordance with subsection num .
hydrated lime exceeding num by total weight of mix is not measured for payment as hydrated lime .
num rumble strips rumble strips are measured by the mile km along the centerline of the roadway less all gaps in the rumble strips due to ramp terminals objects etc .
each individual line of rumble strips is measured separately .
fog seal for rumble strips is not measured for payment .
num tack coat tack coat is incidental to the plant mix surfacing and is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit asphalt cement ton mt commercial plant mix surfacing ton mt hydrated lime ton mt plant mix surfacing ton mt rumble strip mile km for commercial plant mix no separate payment will be made for asphalt cement fillers hydrated lime and additives .
the contract unit price for rumble strips will be adjusted as shown in table num table num price adjustments due to line deviations line deviation from the true line price adjustment num to numfoot num to num mm in num feet num m none num to numfoot num to num mm in num feet num m num price reduction greater than numfoot num mm in num feet num m correct as directed payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num plant mix surfacing num edition num num section num bituminous materials num description this work is the furnishing and applying bituminous materials on bases and surfacing .
num materials furnish bituminous materials meeting section num and the contract requirements .
num construction requirements mix and apply bituminous material meeting the applicable requirements in sections num num num num and num .
num materials source obtain the project managers approval of the bituminous source before delivering the material to the project .
do not change the source of supply once work is started without the project managers written approval .
num sampling a .
general .
take bitumen samples other than products accepted under quality assurance at the point of delivery on the project .
the contractor or designated representative is responsible for sampling the bituminous materials on the project in accordance with mt num .
drain off and discard at least num gallon num l of the bituminous material before drawing samples .
draw num onequart num l samples from each shipment witnessed by the project manager .
submit both samples to the project manager for testing .
one sample will be tested and the numnd sample will be retained for use in accordance with subsection num .
equip all transport vehicles with a spigot or gate valve in the unloading line or in the tanker at the centerline of the tank or in the pressure line from the unloading pump or at another approved location .
the spigot or gate valve diameter must be between  and inch num and num mm .
locate the spigot or valve to prevent plant dust or other sample contamination .
b. asphalt sampling quality assurance sampling .
sample asphalt cement for plant mix surfacing and base and plant mix seal course using a sampling device located in the line between the storage facilities and the mixing plant .
provide a sample of the asphalt cement entering the mixing plant .
one approved in line sampling device is shown in aashto t num .
place the samples in department furnished containers .
give the samples to the project manager immediately after sampling .
the project manager will randomly designate the time of sampling based on the tons mt of asphalt cement incorporated into the completed mix produced .
the approximate quantity of asphalt cement represented by each sample is num tons num mt .
the project manager may require additional samples and testing .
six samples represent approximately num tons num mt of asphalt cement and constitute a lot whenever production schedules or material continuity permit .
the project manager may establish a lot consisting of the quantity represented by any number of consecutive random samples from num to num inclusive when necessary to represent short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
num bituminous materials num edition num num shipping ship the bituminous material in clean uncontaminated fully insulated cars or trucks sealed by the supplier after loading .
num testing bituminous materials are accepted on the test results of samples selected and tested in accordance with subsection num by the department or its authorized representative .
num acceptance a .
general .
provide the project manager a copy of the original bill of lading and a copy of the certificate of compliance with each shipment .
ensure the certificate is signed by the suppliers representative and attests that the bituminous material meets the departments specifications for the type and grade of material provided and that the shipping container was inspected and found free of contamination .
the certificate of compliance is the basis for tentative material acceptance and use .
b .
failures .
if a shipment of bituminous material fails to meet any of the specifications the material will be accepted at a num price reduction of the bituminous material cost if the test results are within the tolerances shown in table num .
if a shipment fails to meet any one of the specifications after twice the allowable tolerances have been applied the price reduction will be num of the unit price bid for bituminous material when it is paid as a separate item or the invoice price when it is part of a bid item .
if a shipment fails to meet any one of the specifications after triple the allowable tolerances have been applied the project manager may reject the material and require its removal from the work or the project manager may accept the material at a num price reduction of the cost of the bituminous material .
the cost of the bituminous material for calculating price reductions is the materials contract unit price .
if a shipment fails more than one of the specifications the failure causing the largest percentage price reduction is assessed .
num edition bituminous materials num num table num schedule of tolerances test allowable variation remarks from min .
specification requirement from max .
specification requirement penetration distillation residues num num residue from distillation num of total distillate num ml may be added or subtracted at any distillation temp .
before calculating the recovered viscosity cutback asphalts emulsified asphalts num num num num ductility num flash test cutback asphalt num particle charge no tolerance materials in violation of spec .
and any aggregate used in conjunction with its use will at the project managers discretion be either rejected or paid for at a unit rate not to exceed num of the cost of the materials .
num loading and application temperatures the project manager will designate the recommended application temperature ranges in accordance with table num .
do not heat bituminous mix any higher than is necessary for proper hauling and placing .
do not introduce aggregate into a mixer higher than num f num c above the bituminous material temperature .
furnish the project manager with data on the temperatureviscosity relationship of each asphalt to be used on the project .
the data must cover the recommended temperature range and viscosities at which the asphalt may be used .
the project manager will use this data to specify the temperature at which the material will be used .
num bituminous materials num edition num table num recommended application temperatures for bituminous materials liquid asphalts rc mc and sc grade loading temp .
max.num f c spraying temperature mixing temp .
of aggregates for mc sc liquid asphalts min .
f c max .
f c num num num as required to achieve viscosity of num centistokes num sec .
saybolt furolnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num emulsified asphalts grade mixing temperature spraying temperature min .
f c max .
f c min .
f c max .
f c slow and medium setting num num num num num num num num rapid setting num num num num num num num num asphalt cements grade mixing temperature spraying temperature max .
f c all penetration grades established by project manager num num notes num .
line temperatures num .
temperature viscosity charts provided by manufacturer num alternate type or grade of bituminous materials the engineer may change or substitute in writing the type and grade of bituminous material specified .
payment for the changed or substituted bituminous material is the contract unit price for the type and grade of bituminous material plus or minus the difference in contractors cost at the refinery between the specified and substitute type and grade .
num performance graded asphalt binder pgab furnish pgab meeting table num requirements for the binder specified in the contract .
pg num pg num and pg num binders after aging in the rolling thin film oven and testing in accordance with aashto t num must meet the following pull rate num inches per minute num cm per minute sample temperature num f num c and ductility numfoot num cm minimum .
notify the project manager in writing before making changes to the pgab components .
num edition bituminous materials num num a. pgab shipping handling and storage .
ship handle and store the pgab following the suppliers requirements .
furnish a copy of the requirements before delivering the pgab to the project .
ensure that the suppliers requirements are consistent with the material manufacturers .
pgab exhibiting separation crusting or foaming during delivery or in storage tanks will be rejected .
b .
sampling .
sample the pgab in accordance with subsection numb .
a sample is num onepint two num ml containers of pgab .
c. acceptance .
the department will grade samples representing each lot in accordance with the pgab grading system and table num with duplicate containers retained for testing in case of dispute .
pgab is accepted in accordance with subsection num using an f factor of num .
the p value is determined for the high temperature components of the resulting grade e.g .
num num etc .
using the formula p tl ar xn x f the p value is determined for the low temperature component of the resulting grade e.g .
num num etc .
using the formula p xn ar tu x f positive p value is added to determine the lots total price reduction .
no disincentive will be assessed for p values less than num based upon the departments initial grading .
this disincentive exclusion in p value will not be applied to averaged results described below .
if the calculation results in a price reduction p value of num or greater the contractor may make a written request for an independent laboratory to grade the duplicates for the lot in question .
ensure the department receives the written request within num calendar days of the notification of price reduction .
the contractor and the department will agree upon the choice of independent laboratory before release of the duplicate samples for testing .
the independent laboratory results will be averaged with the results provided by the department .
the averaged results are binding on both parties for acceptance and payment of the material in question .
the p value will be calculated based upon the averaged results with no exclusion allowed for results less than num .
pay the cost of the duplicate testing on a per lot basis if the price reduction is confirmed or increased .
the department will pay the cost of the duplicate testing on a per lot basis if the price reduction is reduced .
the ductility requirement has no tolerance .
immediately stop paving if the binder fails the ductility requirement .
do not start paving until binder meeting the specifications is furnished .
num method of measurement bituminous material is measured by the gallon l or the ton mt as specified in the contract .
if measured by the gallon l the volume of bituminous material is determined at a temperature of num f num c or corrected to this using the appropriate group table designated in the astm dnum volume correction tables .
transport bituminous materials measured by the gallon l in tanks certified as to capacity .
provide a measuring rod and calibration card with each tank .
railroad tank cars must have available inage and outage tables and dome capacity charts .
when measured by the ton mt the bituminous material weight is measured on scales furnished by the supplier or on public scales close to the source .
weigh each transporting vehicle for bituminous materials other than railroad tank cars empty and loaded .
the weight num bituminous materials num edition num difference is used for computing the tonnage metric tonnage .
furnish an approved scale that can weigh the transporting unit in an unbroken operation .
test and seal the scales at contractor expense when directed .
for plant mix operations the bituminous material may be weighed by the plant scales if approved .
if railroad tank cars transport the bituminous materials the railroad car weights may be used for computing the weight of bituminous material if the loaded cars are weighed over track scales .
the stenciled tare on the car used for determining the net weight is subject to verification .
use flow rate meters in accordance with subsection numdnum to measure the material .
document meter readings by invoices .
the project manager may take tank stabs for verification purposes .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bituminous material gallon l or ton mt payment includes all costs to furnish deliver heat haul and apply the bituminous material .
for plant mix operations the maximum volume of bituminous material eligible for payment on a shift basis is the target bituminous content plus num .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num crack sealing num description this work consists of routing cleaning and sealing the transverse and specified longitudinal cracks in accordance with subsection num in the roadway surface with the specified sealant .
num materials a .
crack sealant .
use a sealant that is listed on the qpl and in accordance with table num .
table num crack sealant specifications property requirement cone penetration num f num c dmm astm dnum num cone penetration num f num c dmm astm dnum modified num min .
flow num f num c numh astm dnum numinch nummm max .
resilience num f num c astm dnum num to num bond num f num c num ext .
astm dnum pass num cycles recommended pour temperature num f num c safe heating temperature num f num c asphalt compatibility astm dnum pass submit a num pound num kg sample for the first lot of the sealer proposed for project use to the helena materials bureau for testing at least num calendar days before its intended application .
submit the sample in its original packaging with the batch number legible .
do not use the first lot of sealant before it is approved .
the department will take num random sample from each additional lot for testing .
b .
backer rod .
furnish backer rod that is listed on the qpl .
the backer rod must be compatible with the crack sealant placement temperature listed in table num and also meet astm dnum type num sized for cracks in accordance with subsection num .
c. blotter material .
use toilet paper or an approved liquid blotter material .
the liquid blotter must be a commercially manufactured surfactant .
provide blotter that is not detrimental to the crack sealant or the surfacing material .
num construction requirements num general work half of the roadway at a time .
limit routing and crack sealing work to num maximum nummile num km work area .
submit the type of blotter material and application rates to be used to the project manager num calendar days before beginning crack seal operations .
the application rate must be sufficient to protect the crack sealant material .
num routing rout all existing cracks that are between  and numinch num and num mm wide .
rout all longitudinal cracks to produce straight inch num mm vertical walls and a inch num mm wide flat bottom reservoir .
num crack sealing num edition num rout the transverse cracks to produce straight inch num mm vertical walls and a numinch num mm wide flat bottom reservoir .
rout when the roadway is dry .
remove and dispose of the routed material from the roadway before opening the roadway to traffic .
num cleaning the reservoir and crack must be dry and free of dust dirt and loose materials immediately before placing the backer rod if applicable and applying the sealant .
num sealing install backer rod in cracks numinch num mm wide and larger .
place sealant material as soon as practicable after the routed cracks are deemed clean and dry .
do not rout further than sealant can be placed during the same days shift .
follow the sealant manufacturers handling mixing and application temperature requirements .
meet the following requirements ensure no moisture is present in cracks or reservoirs to prevent bubbling and non adhesion of sealant during installation apply sealant filling the reservoir flush to the top using a pressure type applicator do not allow sealant to collect or pool at the low end of crack or reservoir elevation open the completed work to traffic once the sealant does not track and repair or replace all seal work damaged by traffic at contractor expense .
seal previously repaired cracks to restore water resistance .
spread and smooth the sealant as required to seal the reservoir but do not exceed num inches of spread sealant on the roadway .
apply blotter material to all sealed cracks .
num temperature limitations do not rout when the mat temperature is below num f num c. apply the sealant when the roadway surface temperature is between num and num f num and num c. num method of measurement crack sealing is measured by the pound kg of material placed .
blotter material is not measured separately .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit crack sealing pound kg blotter material is included in the contract unit price and is not paid for separately .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num tack coat num description the work is furnishing and applying emulsified asphalt to a prepared aggregate constructed bituminous or concrete surface before placing bituminous surfacing .
num materials num bituminous material furnish emulsified asphalt meeting section num requirements for the type and grade specified .
the project manager may change or substitute the type and grade of emulsified asphalt to be used in accordance with subsection num .
a one step change in grade will not change the contract unit price .
the contractor may substitute cssnum emulsified asphalt for ssnum emulsified asphalt for tack coat .
num construction requirements num weather limitations apply tack coat to a dry surface .
apply the tack coat when the ambient temperature is num f num c or higher or when the surface temperature is num f num c and rising .
do not place plant mix on any surface with a tack coat until the tack coat has cured breaks as determined by the project manager .
apply the tack coat after the project manager has approved the surface to receive the bituminous material .
apply tack coat subject to the surface conditions and weather limitations in accordance with subsection num .
num equipment use equipment in accordance with subsection num .
num application of emulsified materials dilute emulsified asphalt to a num ratio with water unless other approved proportions are directed by the project manager .
apply diluted emulsified asphalt for tack coat as specified by the project manager at a minimum rate of num gallon per square yard num lmnum .
when a double shot of emulsion is called for in the contract apply num applications at the minimum rate specified above .
ensure the first shot is cured prior to applying the second .
num maintenance of surface maintain tack coated surface until covering with subsequent surfacing .
repair all defects deterioration or disintegration of the underlying surfacing course or courses as directed .
num traffic control and protection of highway structures furnish traffic control meeting the approved traffic control plan and section num .
furnish highway structure protection in accordance with subsection num .
num method of measurement emulsified asphalt is measured by the gallon l. num tack coat num edition num when not specified as a contract pay item emulsified asphalt is not measured or paid for but is incidental to and included in the payment for other items of work .
water for diluting emulsified asphalt used in the work is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit emulsified asphalt gallon l payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
the emulsified asphalt quantities in the contract are estimated and may be increased or decreased with no adjustment of the contract unit prices .
num section num seal coat num description seal coat is the application of a bituminous material covered with aggregate on an existing roadway surface .
num contract time in cases where seal coat and pavement marking application are the only remaining items of work contract time will be charged in accordance with subsection num beginning the first working day following the july numth independence day holiday .
submit written notice to perform seal coat work prior to the july numth independence day holiday or holiday weekend .
time charges in accordance with subsection num for seal coat work performed prior to the july numth independence day holiday will commence on the date indicated in the contractors written notice .
in cases where seal coat and pavement marking application are the only remaining items of work as of august numst contract time will not be charged after august numth if seal coat work is not performed .
contract time will be charged in accordance with subsection num beginning on the day seal coat work begins from august numst through august numst if seal coat work is performed .
submit written notice to perform seal coat work from august numst through august numst .
num materials num general furnish aggregate and bituminous materials that are compatible .
submit compatibility test results for each aggregate source for informational purposes .
one recommended compatibility test method is mt num .
num bituminous material furnish material in accordance with table num .
num cover aggregate furnish cover aggregate in accordance with subsection num .
the responsibility for furnishing the aggregate source is specified in the contract .
num construction requirements num sampling testing and acceptance the project manager will randomly select samples taken by the contractor and witnessed by an inspector for gradation and fracture testing .
sample from the belt on the chip spreader in accordance with aashto t num procedures or at another location approved by the project manager .
the following acceptance tests are used mt num gradation mt num mechanical fracture the quantity of material placed in num square yards num mnum is considered equivalent to a numton num mt lot and the quantity of material placed in num square yards num mnum is considered equivalent to a numton num mt sublot for the purposes of aggregate analysis and acceptance .
the quantity represented by num samples is a lot when production schedules and material continuity permit .
the project manager may establish a lot consisting of a quantity represented num seal coat num edition num by num to num consecutive random samples when there are short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
surfacing aggregates are evaluated for gradation and mechanical fracture on a lotbylot basis .
the upper and lower limits in the gradation table table num are the upper and lower limits in the evaluation formulas .
the specified minimum fracture values are the lower limit .
acceptance is made in accordance with subsection num .
num aggregate and bituminous material application rates determine the application rates for aggregate and bituminous material used to complete a test section and the project .
submit the following for informational purposes before starting full production or any time the source of aggregate or bituminous material changes num .
aggregate and bituminous material application rates num .
bituminous materials suppliers recommended ambient and pavement surface temperatures num .
bituminous material suppliers recommended application temperature range and num .
elapsed time between the application of the bituminous material and the cover aggregate .
before starting full production or after changing sources of either aggregate or bituminous material complete a test section at least num feet num km long to verify the following num .
optimum bituminous material and aggregate application rates num .
time frame to complete each phase of the seal coat operation to meet the requirements for opening the roadway to traffic and num .
roller type number of passes and pattern of rolling operations .
do not begin production seal coat work until the test section has been placed and approved by the project manager .
num seal coat limitations the following conditions govern seal coat work num .
perform seal coat operations between may numst and august numst .
num .
do not perform seal coat work during the numhour period immediately preceding a holiday or a holiday weekend except for pilot car operation in accordance with subsection num .
num .
perform seal coat work when both the ambient and pavement surface temperatures meet the bituminous material suppliers recommended temperatures .
num .
stop seal coat work at least  hour before sunset to include equipment off of the roadway and placement of traffic control devices for nonconstruction activities .
num .
do not apply bituminous material to damp or wet roadway surfaces .
num .
do not apply bituminous material to plant mix pavement which has been placed in accordance with the contract within the previous num hours .
num protection of traffic and highway structures provide traffic control meeting section num and the approved traffic control plan .
provide highway structure protection in accordance with subsection numb .
provide dust control during sweeping and brooming .
num surface preparation do not apply bituminous material unless the roadway surface is free of all dust dirt and foreign material .
remove excess crack seal blotter material placed in accordance with the contract prior to seal coat operations .
num edition seal coat num num num reserved num application of seal coat materials apply bituminous material at the rate established by the test section .
apply the bituminous material within the bituminous material suppliers recommended temperature range .
ensure that transverse and longitudinal joints are smooth and match the adjacent surfaces .
keep meet lines to a minimum .
locate longitudinal joints at the centerline or lane line .
obtain approval from the project manager to construct the joint at any other location .
for requests to apply full roadway width bituminous and aggregate applications in a single continuous operation provide the project manager num copies of a sequencing plan that ensures the least traffic impact for approval at least num business days before the planned operation .
uniformly apply the cover aggregate on the bituminous material at the rate established by the test section .
when constructing longitudinal joints one recommended method is to cover the joint with aggregate and sweep the aggregate back before applying adjacent bituminous material .
when longitudinal joints are covered to permit vehicle cross over sweep back the cover aggregate to expose the joint before applying adjacent bituminous material .
num warranty the contractor warrants the seal coat work .
if the seal coat experiences chip loss tracking flushing or bleeding at any time between the date the seal coat is completed and the numst wednesday in december of the same calendar year perform repairs to the seal coat and replace pavement markings covered by the repairs at no additional cost to the department .
areas of cover material loss determined to result from means beyond the contractors control snow plow damage tire chain damage or others are not considered under these warranty requirements .
final determination regarding cover material loss will be made by the engineer .
when repairs are deemed necessary reference is made to the departments seal coat warranty administration guide .
submit a detailed repair plan to the project manager for approval within num calendar days of notification of required repairs .
the repair plan must address the area of failure and transitions required to ensure a uniformly bonded smooth surface .
make warranty repairs in accordance with the provisions of this specification when performing warranty work .
furnish traffic control meeting section num requirements at no additional cost to the department .
num application of blotter material monitor the finished seal coat and apply blotter material on live oil areas throughout the specified warranty period .
live oil is defined as bituminous materials that have not fully set or bonded to cover material particles .
live oil has a glossy appearance and is present in tracking flushing and bleeding conditions .
failure to apply blotter material within num hours of written notification by the project manager will be cause for the department to have the work performed .
costs incurred by the department associated with application of blotter material will be deducted from subsequent progress estimates .
num sweeping and brooming provide a roadway free of loose cover material .
in curb and gutter and guardrail sections remove and dispose of all loose cover material from the roadway and sidewalks .
do not allow material to get into the storm drain system or any aquatic resource .
correct surface irregularities affecting the ride quality at the contractors expense .
a .
initial sweeping and brooming .
remove all loose cover material before terminating pilot car use dispose of the material if required .
if pavement markings are not placed within num hours of completion of the seal coat work the department may have work performed and deduct the costs from monies due to the contractor .
traffic control num seal coat num edition num beyond these num hours unless ordered by the project manager is at the contractors expense .
apply final pavement markings as specified elsewhere in the contract .
b .
final sweeping and brooming .
perform final sweeping and brooming operations to remove excess loose material no sooner than num calendar days before final pavement markings .
num method of measurement num bituminous material bituminous material used for seal coat work is measured by the gallon l or by the ton mt in accordance with subsection num .
num cover aggregate aggregate for cover type num and aggregate for cover type num is measured by the square yard mnum based on the length and width of seal coat placed and accepted .
num fog seal bituminous material used for fog seal is measured by the gallon l or by the ton mt in accordance with subsection num .
num traffic control traffic control is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num rolling rolling is not measured for payment .
num sweeping and brooming initial sweeping and brooming and the disposal of excess material necessary for traffic control operations as outlined in accordance with subsection numa are not measured for payment .
final sweeping and brooming operation is measured by the course mile cr km .
a course mile cr km is defined as a roadway portion consisting of num travel lanes and adjacent shoulders or turn lanes for a num mile km length .
roadways with additional travel lanes or that require less than full width sweeping will be prorated .
traffic control from an approved plan necessary for final sweeping and brooming is measured in accordance with section num .
num water water used for dust control or wetting chips is not measured for payment .
num blotter material blotter material is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bituminous material gallon l or ton mt cover type num square yard mnum cover type num square yard mnum final sweep and broom course mile cr km traffic control see subsection num payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num edition seal coat num num num excess crushed cover aggregate sale of excess crushed cover aggregate is the contractors option .
the contractor can not sell material from departmentowned or departmentoptioned sources without a written agreement establishing and providing royalty refunds to the department .
the department may purchase acceptable unused crushed cover aggregate remaining in the stockpile if the quantity exceeds num tons num mt .
the conditions of purchase are described in subsection num .
haul from the stockpile site to the site selected by the project manager will be by the most practical route as determined by the project manager .
payment for haul is num cents per tonmile num mt per num km for distances exceeding num feet num m. num seal coat num edition num num section num bituminous surface treatment num description this work is applying num or more coats of bituminous material on a prepared aggregate roadway surface covering each application with aggregate surfacing material .
num materials num bituminous material furnish the specified bituminous material in accordance with section num .
num aggregate furnish the specified aggregate in accordance with section num .
num construction requirements num equipment maintain the following equipment on the project throughout the work .
a .
distributor .
one pressure distributor for bituminous material with a minimum num gallon num l capacity insulated tank internally heated .
equip the distributor with a fullcirculating spray bar num .
at least num feet num m long num .
capable of numfoot num mm incremental length adjustments up to num feet num m num .
having vertical nozzle adjustment that conforms to the roadway crown num .
capable of lateral shifting of the entire spray bar while operating and num .
with vertical height adjustment capable of maintaining a preset height above the road surface .
use spray bars and flatslotted nozzles designed to not clog during intermittent operation and provide positive cutoff of the bituminous material .
use positiveacting flow control valves to produce a uniform unbroken spread of bituminous material .
remove or repair distributors not uniformly distributing the bituminous material .
ensure the distributor has devices and charts to provide for accurate rapid determination and quantity control of the bituminous material application .
equip the distributor with a pressure pump pressure gauge thermometer well thermometer and a calibrated fluid content gauge .
use pneumatictired distributors meeting legal load requirements .
b. rollers .
furnish pneumatic tired rollers in accordance with subsection numd .
c. aggregate spreader .
provide one selfpropelled aggregate spreader num .
equipped with at least num pneumatic tired wheels on num axles num .
capable of uniformly spreading the material over the full width of the bituminous material and num .
the spreader application rate being independent of motive power .
d. cleaning equipment .
use power brooms blowers or hand brooms .
e. watering stockpiles .
provide equipment for wetting the cover aggregate stockpiles when required .
f. watering equipment .
furnish waterdistributing equipment in accordance with subsection num .
g. scales .
furnish scales in accordance with subsection numc .
num bituminous surface treatment num edition num num existing surface preparation prepare the aggregate to receive bituminous surface treatment to the requirements and tolerances found elsewhere in the contract .
when required apply a light uniform water application to the roadway surface just before applying the bituminous material .
do not exceed num moisture by weight in the top num inches num mm of the aggregate course .
when required apply an aggregate treatment at the rate directed before the initial application of bituminous surface treatment .
apply the aggregate in accordance with section num .
num sweeping clean the roadway surface of all dust dirt and foreign material before applying the bituminous material .
num application of bituminous material apply the bituminous material with a maximum allowable variation of num gallon per square yard num lmnum from the specified application rate .
apply bituminous material only with the project managers approval .
apply the material when the surface temperature is at or above num f num c. do not work when rain wind or temperatures would prevent obtaining the specified results .
uniformly apply the bituminous material at the temperature and rate specified .
provide uniform surface cover and true lines .
ensure high viscosity bituminous materials are covered with aggregate within num minutes .
apply bituminous material to produce smooth and consistent transverse and longitudinal joints in successive applications with the adjacent completed surfaces .
longitudinal joints may be from num to num inches num to num mm wide but not overlap at the application ends .
prevent lapping at transverse joints by inserting a drip pan under the nozzles if necessary .
before continuing the application spread protective sheets over the treated surface on the cover aggregate to provide bituminous coverage at the joint .
apply the material to keep meet lines to a minimum .
the project manager may approve full width application of bituminous material and cover aggregate in a single continuous operation .
reapply bituminous material at joints where the uncovered bituminous material has set and does not bond the aggregate at contractor expense .
num application of cover material when directed water the stockpiled cover aggregate before spreading it on the bituminous material .
cover the first bituminous material application within num minutes .
uniformly cover all bituminous material with cover aggregate at the specified rate .
when directed use brooms to uniformly distribute the cover aggregate .
avoid displacement or loosening of the cover aggregate .
do not permit haul trucks and traffic to drive on any uncovered bituminous material .
furnish traffic control for fresh spread cover aggregate areas as specified in the traffic control plan .
before applying the adjacent bituminous material broom all joints the full width to remove loose aggregate .
num rolling roll the cover aggregate immediately after spreading within num minutes of spreading .
use selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers with a ground contact pressure of between num psi num kpa and num psi num kpa .
provide num rollers for each aggregate spreader used .
num edition bituminous surface treatment num num roll parallel to the centerline starting on the low side of the lane and working towards the crown or high side .
overlap roller passes at least num inches num mm .
continue rolling until a smooth compacted surface is produced .
avoid displacing or loosening the cover material while rolling .
num curing and cleaning when the rolling is completed on each surface course and the surface is accepted it may be opened to traffic .
allow the surface to cure for at least num calendar days .
repair all surface defects in the treated surface immediately with the specified bituminous material or use a premix bituminous aggregate at contractor expense .
cover areas of excess bituminous material with aggregate and roll at contractor expense .
when the project manager determines the first course of bituminous material and cover aggregate has cured and set all repairs have been accepted all excess cover aggregate is removed clean the surface of dirt dust and foreign materials .
begin construction of the succeeding course on the cleaned surface .
num completion when the final course is complete open the surface to traffic for num days using the specified traffic control .
during this time broom and roll the surface as required .
repair all surface defects in accordance with subsection num .
cover all areas exhibiting excess bituminous material with aggregate and roll it .
num protection of traffic and highway structures a .
traffic control .
furnish traffic control meeting the contract requirements and section num .
b .
structure protection .
cover exposed bridge elements culverts curbs gutters guard fences road signs and other roadside structures to protect them from splash or spray when applying bituminous material .
clean these same items of all bituminous material dirt or other material caused by the contractors operations .
repair all contractor caused damage to the highway or structures at contractor expense .
num method of measurement num bituminous material bituminous material is measured by the gallon l or the ton mt in accordance with subsection num .
num cover aggregate cover aggregate is measured by the ton mt or the cubic yard mnum measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery on the roadway as specified in the contract and in accordance with subsection num .
num traffic control traffic control is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num existing surface preparation where base construction is a part of the contract with bituminous surface treatment the items of work for surface preparation are incidental to and included in payment for the base construction .
num bituminous surface treatment num edition num where bituminous surface treatment is applied to an existing aggregate surface the work for existing surface preparation is incidental to and included in payment for the bituminous surface treatment .
num rolling and watering rolling and watering are incidental to other items of the contract and not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bituminous material gallon l or ton mt cover aggregate cubic yard mnum or ton mt traffic control see subsection num surface sweeping or cleaning watering of aggregate stockpiles and the roadway surface repairing damaged surfaces or surfaces with excess bituminous material and protection and repair of structures specified in accordance with subsection num are incidental to and included in payment for other items of the contract .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num cold milling num description this work is the removal of existing bituminous pavement at the locations and depth specified in the contract or designated by the project manager .
num reserved num construction requirements num equipment use a poweroperated cold milling machine equipped to control cross slope and to establish profile grade from the existing pavement or an external reference .
num general do not start cold milling until the surfacing plant is fully operational .
starting at the center of the road begin milling on a longitudinal line parallel to the centerline with succeeding passes progressing to the outer edge of the pavement unless approved by the project manager .
remove all thin delaminated or loose layers of existing pavement left after cold milling .
replace the milled pavement at bridge ends and cattle guards with new bituminous surfacing the same day leaving no transverse joints in the milled areas .
if new surfacing can not be placed on the milled area the same day transition at no less than a numhnumv to the original surface .
the completed milled surface is to be free from transverse and longitudinal irregularities exceeding inch num mm when measured with a numfoot num m straightedge .
each successive pass will be pulled even with the previous and not staggered .
after cold milling do not leave the remaining pavement exposed to traffic more than num hours before placing the plant mix surfacing .
the num hour duration may be modified by the project manager depending on the durability of the milled surface .
the contractor will be responsible to repair any damage that occurs to the roadway prior to plant mix paving .
do not proceed with paving without the approval of the project manager .
replacing existing pavement is a separate operation from any succeeding overlay or lift .
num milling a .
connections .
mill the existing bituminous surfacing from bridge decks bridge approaches cattle guards and project connections at the locations specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num .
bridge decks .
mill the depth shown in the contract or as adjusted to meet field conditions .
num .
bridge ends .
mill full depth from the bridge end out for a distance of num feet num m prior to the milling taper .
for milling depths less than or equal to num feet num mm mill a taper distance of num feet num m. for milling depths greater than num feet num mm mill a taper distance based on a rate of num feet per num feet num m per num mm of milling depth .
num .
cattle guards or railroad crossings .
mill full depth from the cattle guard or railroad crossing out for a distance of num feet num m prior to the milling taper .
mill a taper distance of num feet num m. num cold milling num edition num num .
project connections .
for milling depths less than or equal to num feet num mm mill a taper distance of num feet num m. for milling depths greater than num feet num mm mill a taper distance based on a rate of num feet per num feet num m per num mm of milling depth .
b .
milling at other designated areas .
mill the existing pavement at the locations widths and depths specified .
the depth is measured below the existing pavement plane projected from points on undistorted pavement near the centerline and the edge of the driving lane .
c. cold milling for seal and cover .
meet the following requirements when seal and cover goes directly on the cold mill surface num .
use a cold milling cutting head having maximum inch num mm tooth spacing .
num .
equip the milling machine with automatic controls and sensors on both sides to maintain the specified grade and transverse slope .
num .
do not operate the milling machine in excess of num feetminute num mminute unless it can be demonstrated to the project manager that the milled surface can meet the plant mix overlay surface tolerance specified in accordance with subsection numb .
num .
do not begin placing the seal and cover until all cold millwork is complete .
num salvage of pavement millings salvage haul and stockpile the milled pavement to the specified site .
milled pavement is the contractors property when specified and must be removed from the project .
num replacing removed pavement pave all milled areas in the contract with the specified bituminous mixture placed to the specified depth .
grades will be provided at numfoot num m intervals for placing the new pavement for num feet num m from each bridge end and num feet num m from cattle guards .
set a wire line for grade control with intermediate supports to prevent wire deflection exceeding numinch num mm .
stop paving if the deflection exceeds numinch num mm and make appropriate corrections .
apply a tack coat on all milled areas before paving .
num traffic control furnish traffic control in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement cold milling is measured by the square yard mnum of pavement removed to the specified depth .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit cold milling square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
the contract unit price may be adjusted if the project manager issues a written order to increase or decrease the milling depth .
num section num portland cement concrete pavement num description this work is the construction of pccp on a prepared subgrade or base course .
num materials num concrete furnish concrete in accordance with section num for class pave concrete .
a .
cement .
furnish type i or ii portland cement listed on the qpl in accordance with subsection num .
b. airentraining admixtures .
furnish airentraining admixtures in accordance with subsection num .
c. aggregates .
furnish aggregates in accordance with subsection num .
d. water .
furnish water for concrete in accordance with subsection num .
num reinforcing steel steelwire fabric and steel bar mat sizes and dimensions are specified in the contract .
furnish steelwire fabric reinforcement in flat sheets .
furnish bar mats and bars of structural or intermediate grade as specified in the contract .
furnish all reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num .
num dowel bars and sleeves furnish grade num plain round dowel bars in accordance with aashto m num .
bar dimensions and placement in the pavement are specified in the contract .
do not use bars having burrs or other deformation that restrict slipping in the concrete .
before delivery to the project coat onehalf the length of each dowel bar with one coat of zinc or tar paint .
furnish sleeves for dowel bars meeting the contract requirements .
num tie bars furnish grade num deformed steel bars in accordance with subsection num .
the length size and spacing of the bars are specified in the contract .
num expansion joint filler and joint sealing material furnish expansion joint filler and joint sealing material listed on the qpl and in accordance with subsection num .
num curing compound furnish type num curing compound in accordance with subsection num .
num construction requirements num equipment a .
general .
do not begin paving operations until all equipment and tools for the pavement construction are available at the site .
ensure the equipment is in good mechanical condition adjustment design and capacity .
adjust repair or replace equipment failing to produce the specified work .
use handling batching mixing and concrete transporting equipment in accordance with section num and the following .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num use batch plants for projects having num cubic yards num mnum or more pccp that proportion aggregates and cement by weight using automatic and interlocked proportioning devices .
use nonagitating hauling equipment with smooth mortartight metal bodies that completely discharge the concrete at a uniform rate without segregation .
provide covers when necessary to prevent the concrete from drying out or being exposed to weather related moisture .
use bellydump trucks only with the project managers written approval .
remove and dispose of concrete remaining in haul units before reloading with fresh concrete .
b. stationary side forms .
use metal side forms strong enough to resist displacement from concrete and mechanical equipment pressures .
use flexible or curved forms for curves with numfoot num m radii or less .
forms must num .
hold abutting sections in alignment num .
be adjustable for vertical and horizontal curvature num .
have a minimum depth equal to the specified concrete edge thickness num .
not have horizontal joints num .
have a base width greater than or equal to the depth num .
have at least num staking points for each num feet num m of length that securely lock to the form stake and num .
have flange braces and staking pockets that extend outward on the base at least  the height of the form .
use wooden forms only with the project managers written approval .
include in the request to use wooden forms complete details showing they meet the requirements for steel forms regarding strength lines grades and depth .
do not use forms in poor condition in the work .
repaired forms must be inspected and approved before use .
c. placing consolidating and finishing equipment .
place consolidate and finish concrete in accordance with section num .
operate only rubbertired equipment on adjacent pavement .
pad crawler units to prevent pavement damage .
keep the adjacent pavement and form tops clean to provide good contact with tires or crawler units .
num .
slipform pavers .
use slipform pavers having automatic controls for longitudinal and transverse grade from continuous wire control lines .
maintain the control wire tension support interval and sensor operating pressure to prevent control wire deflection in excess of numinch num mm below supports at mid span .
immediately stop paving operations when deflection exceeds numinch num mm and resume once corrected .
use selfpropelled slipform pavers to place and finish the concrete that are capable of negotiating all grades without external tractive force .
equip the slipform paver with an auger or other approved strikeoff device to distribute the concrete to a uniform depth ahead of the screed .
use sliding forms that are laterally rigid to prevent spreading .
use slipform pavers that consolidate the plastic concrete by internally vibrating the full paving width and depth .
use transverse vibrating units that do not project outside the specified paving section thickness and are positioned ahead of the screed a minimum distance equal to the pavement thickness .
a series of longitudinal num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num vibrating units may be used as an alternate .
vibrators may be the immersed tube type or a series of equally spaced longitudinal vibrating units .
the maximum spacing of each unit in a series of longitudinal units is num inches num mm measured centertocenter of the units .
each vibratory unit must provide at least num vibrations per minute with the amplitude visibly perceptible on the concrete surface within numfoot num mm of the entire length of the vibrating unit .
equip the paver with a tachometer or other approved device for measuring the actual vibration frequency .
num .
auxiliary finishing equipment .
use finishing equipment behind the slipform paver that automatically maintains alignment from an external reference .
provide hand floats edging tools and other handfinishing equipment to finish the surface as specified .
steel concrete hand tools are prohibited from being used on the project as a finishing aid .
num .
stationary side form method .
submit details for all equipment proposed for spreading strikeoff consolidating screeding and floating before use .
num .
roadbed planers .
equip the roadbed planer with adjustable steel cutting edges mounted in a rigid frame to trim the roadbed to the specified elevation and crown under all operating conditions .
the planer wheels must ride on the forms or adjacent pavement .
num .
concrete spreaders .
use a selfpropelled spreader that uniformly spreads the concrete between forms and has an adjustable blade or head for striking off the concrete to the required height and crown .
num .
vibrators .
use fullwidth concrete slab vibrators of the surface pan type or the internal type with immersed tube or multiple spuds .
the vibrators may be mounted on the spreader the finishing machine or on a separate carriage .
do not allow the vibrators to come in contact with the joint load transfer devices the subgrade or side forms .
use vibrators in accordance with the following surface vibrators having a minimum frequency of at least num impulses per minute .
tube vibrators with a minimum frequency of at least num impulses per minute .
spud vibrators with a minimum frequency of num impulses per minute .
handoperated or machinemounted spudtype internal vibrators next to forms having a minimum frequency of num impulses per minute .
num .
bridge deck finishing machines .
use transversefinishing rotating drum bridge deck finishing machines when stationary side forms are allowed .
num .
mechanical floats .
use mechanical floats that produce a surface true to the required crown and smoothness free from honeycomb or excessive mortar .
ensure the float makes accurate incremental adjustments to the required crown without interrupting the float operation .
the mechanical float may be selfpropelled or attached to the rear of the transverse finishing machine .
num prepaving conference attend a prepaving conference conducted by the department to be held at least num hours before paving starts .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num the conference topics will include equipment construction methods specification requirements and lines of communication .
the conference must include the foreman other contractor personnel that will supervise the concrete paving operations and key department inspection personnel .
num aggregate sampling and testing furnish aggregates that meet the gradation requirements fineness modulus and deleterious material limits specified in subsection num .
provide all sampling and testing to meet these requirements during aggregate production .
num aggregate production produce aggregate in accordance with section num .
produce and stockpile at least  of the quantity of each size aggregate necessary to produce the plan quantity of pccp before paving operations begin .
num acceptance of aggregate a .
sampling and testing .
the project manager will determine when samples are taken and will test the aggregate for acceptance .
furnish and operate the aggregate sampling devices witnessed by the project manager .
take samples at a point immediately before the aggregates are combined and enter the mixer witnessed by the project manager .
samples may be split to a minimum num pounds num kg .
furnish the samples to the project manager immediately after sampling .
acceptance samples will be randomly selected .
the approximate quantity represented by each sample is specified in mt num .
additional samples may be selected and tested .
b .
lot size .
the concrete quantity in each days production constitutes a lot whenever production schedules and material continuity permit .
the project manager may establish a lot consisting of the quantity represented by any number of consecutive random samples from num to num inclusive if the project manager determines it is necessary due to production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
c. acceptance .
pccp is evaluated for price adjustment on a lotbylot basis in accordance with subsection num when deviation from specified aggregate gradation limits fineness modulus limits for fine aggregate or percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve for coarse aggregate occurs on num or more tests for a lot .
payment for a lot where a price reduction applies in accordance with subsection num is calculated using the following formula price reduction contract unit price x num x pnum x lot quantity where p the percent reduction in contract unit price as defined in subsection num .
lot quantity the plan quantity in cubic yards mnum or square yards mnum of the pavement section where the lot was placed .
num mixing mix concrete in accordance with subsection num .
num transporting concrete transport concrete in equipment in accordance with subsections num and num .
num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num num placing and finishing concrete submit a plan for placing and curing pccp to the project manager for approval a minimum of num business days before the start of paving work .
include specific detail of joint layout at manholes water valves drop inlets monument boxes and other structures in the pccp section .
place and finish concrete using either the slipform method or the stationary side form method using bridge deck finishing equipment .
place the fresh concrete on the prepared roadbed as close as possible in front of the paving machine to minimize concrete handling .
do not routinely use frontend loaders or other equipment at the paver for moving the fresh concrete once its placed on the roadbed .
place concrete hauled in nonagitating equipment within num minutes from when the ingredients were charged into the mixer .
dispose of concrete hauled in nonagitating equipment that does not meet slump requirements at contractor expense .
place concrete hauled in agitator trucks within the time limits in subsection numa .
distribute the concrete to the specified slab thickness with the finished surface at the specified grade once the concrete is consolidated and finished .
do not use vibrators to distribute concrete .
place concrete only after the foundation course or subgrade has been approved by the project manager .
prepare the foundation course ahead of the paving operation equal to the anticipated daily production .
place concrete around manholes or other structures once the structures are brought up to the required grade and alignment .
dampen the base or subgrade with a fine water mist immediately before placing concrete .
do not permit freestanding water to puddle on the surface .
if concrete placing is delayed or stopped in excess of num hour construct an emergency transverse construction joint as directed .
except for emergency transverse joints do not construct a joint at any location other than as directed or specified .
construct the pavement in full lane widths in a single operation .
construct longitudinal joints between lanes or sections in accordance with subsection numf .
do not place concrete in longitudinal sections until the adjacent slab is num days old or has reached a minimum compressive strength of num psi num kpa determined by testing the standard cylinders cured under the same environmental conditions as the slab .
a. slipform method .
num .
general .
place the concrete with a slipform paver in accordance with subsection numc that spreads consolidates screeds and floatfinishes the fresh placed concrete in num pass .
operate the slipform paver to maintain a continuous forward movement .
ensure all concrete mixing delivering and spreading provides uniform progress without stopping and starting the paver .
if it is necessary to stop the paver immediately stop the vibrators and tamping .
maintain a uniform consistency in the concrete with a slump of num to numinch num num mm .
the paver may be set to form a numinch num mm or less battered edge while maintaining the top riding surface at the specified width .
apply additional hand vibration at construction joints as required for consolidation .
num .
finishing .
finish the concrete surface to meet subsection num .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num correct any pavement edge slump excluding specified edging exceeding inch num mm before the concrete has hardened .
if the edge slump on any numfoot num mm or longer length of hardened concrete exceeds numinch num mm remove and replace the entire panel between the transverse and longitudinal joints .
before the initial concrete set round the pavement edges on each side of the transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints to the required radius .
construct a welldefined smooth dense mortar finish radius .
hand finishing is permitted only for finishing sections with narrow irregular dimensions and to finish any concrete already deposited on the grade should a machinery breakdown occur .
grind high spots exceeding inch num mm using approved methods .
fill low spots exceeding inch num mm with an approved epoxybonded grout as directed .
b. stationary side form method .
num .
preparation of subgrade or foundation course .
once the roadbed is finished and compacted in accordance with section num trim shape and compact the subgrade or foundation course in accordance with section num to the specified lines grades and cross sections .
extend the finished subgrade num feet num mm beyond each side of the planned pavement width .
once the forms are set reshape and recompact all disturbed subgrade or foundation course using rollers or compactors working between the fine grading equipment and the paver .
test the subgrade or foundation course in advance of the paver for section and grade using an approved template .
mount the template on visible rollers with the tooth edge conforming to the required shape of the subgrade when riding vertically on the forms .
remove excess material and fill low areas to the finish elevation with subgrade or foundation material and compact to the specified density .
maintain the finished subgrade or foundation course in a smooth compacted undisturbed condition until the pavement is placed .
moisten the subgrade or foundation course as specified in subsection num when placing the concrete .
num .
form setting .
do not permit the forms to deviate more than inch num mm from the true plane of the form face or top .
do not permit the forms to warp bend or kink .
clean and oil forms before each use .
cut the compacted foundation course or the subgrade to grade providing firm contact for each form for its entire length at the specified grade .
fill low areas to grade in inch num mm lifts or less for num inches num mm on each side of the base of the form and compact to the specified density .
settlement or springing of forms under the finishing machine is not allowed .
the forms will be checked for alignment and grade .
make any corrections before placing the concrete .
correct unstable or disturbed forms or foundation courses and recheck the forms .
prepare the foundation course and forms ahead of the paving operation equal to the average daily production .
num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num leave the forms in place at least num hours after the concrete has been placed unless earlier removal is necessary to permit sawing of transverse weakened plane joints .
exercise care in removing forms to avoid damage to the pavement edges .
num .
strikeoff and consolidation .
strikeoff screed and consolidate the concrete with mechanical equipment to the specified crown and cross section providing a uniform surface texture .
avoid prolonged work over any area .
maintain a uniform ridge of concrete ahead of the front screed of the finishing machine except when making construction joints .
num .
floating .
following strikeoff and consolidation finish the concrete surface with a mechanical float in accordance with subsection numcnum .
num .
finishing .
finish the concrete surface to meet subsection numa or b. c. final surface finish .
handfloat the surface only as needed to produce a uniform surface and sharp corners .
adding finishing water to unfinished concrete is prohibited .
do not use excess mortar to build up slab edges or round the slab corners .
before the concretes initial set work the pavement edges along each side of transverse isolation joints transverse construction joints and fixed forms to produce a inch num mm continuous radius and a smooth dense mortar finish .
check the surface of the fresh concrete with a longhandled straightedge that is num feet num m or longer .
remove high areas indicated by the straightedge .
d. texturing .
after surface finishing texture all concrete surfaces within the travel lanes .
use either hand operated or mechanical tools to produce a uniform texture that conforms to the dimensions shown in the contract .
for artificial carpet and burlap drag furnish carpet or burlap that is long and wide enough to cover the entire pavement width and that produces a uniform texture .
clean drag periodically to remove encrusted mortar or replace with new burlap or carpet .
meet an average surface texture of num to numinch num num mm as measured by mt num sand patch test .
if repair of high spots or low spots results in surface texture loss repair the affected area to the specified texture at the contractors expense .
num .
design speed greater than num mph num kmh .
produce the final surface finish with transverse tining followed by longitudinal artificial carpet or burlap drag .
space transverse tines randomly as follows minimum spacing inch num mm maximum spacing numinch num mm and no more than num of the tines apart by more than numinch nummm .
use tines that are inch num mm wide with a tolerance of num inch num mm and apply them to a depth of  to inch num num mm provided minimum dislodging of the aggregate particles result .
num .
design speed less than num mph num kmh .
produce the final surface finish by broom texturing followed by a longitudinal artificial carpet or burlap drag .
produce a uniform texture with corrugations numinch num mm deep .
num protection of concrete from rain maintain materials at the project site to protect all unhardened concrete surfaces from rain .
when rain appears imminent stop paving operations and cover all surfaces of the un hardened concrete with the protective covering .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num num evaluation and repair of raindamaged concrete follow the american concrete paving association technical bulletin no .
num for the evaluation of and acceptable repair methods for raindamaged concrete .
all protective remedial and corrective work to produce acceptable pavement is at contractor expense .
num curing a. membrane .
after the concrete is finished and the free water has left the surface seal the entire surface area by machine spraying a uniform application of curing compound in accordance with subsection num .
apply the curing compound following the manufacturers recommendations before surface hair checking develops .
do not apply curing compound to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
if the groove coverage is not complete after the first application apply a second coverage in the opposite direction from the first .
apply the second application within num minutes of the first application .
ensure the equipment controls the curing compound application rate and uniformity .
use the coverage rate of num gallon per num square feet num lmnum or follow the manufacturers recommendations .
reapply membrane curing compound to areas protected for less than num hours and that are damaged by sawing rain or other causes .
b .
other methods .
the contractor may submit for approval other curing methods .
num handling and placing reinforcement keep reinforcing steel clean rust free straight and distortion free placed and held in position as specified .
store reinforcing steel out of the weather distributing only the steel needed for immediate placing within the work .
assemble and place reinforcement for bar mats as specified .
maintain bar mat placement during concreting operations .
tie all intersections .
lap all adjacent ends at least num bar diameters .
num joints construct the joints as shown in the contract .
submit an alternate plan for longitudinal and transverse joint layout with details that are determined by contractor sequencing to the project manager for approval a minimum of num business days before the start of paving work .
a. transverse expansion joints .
construct transverse expansion joints in accordance with the contract .
b .
expansion joints at structures .
construct and seal joints between concrete approach slabs and structures or concrete pavement as specified .
c. transverse construction joints .
make transverse construction joints as detailed in the contract at the end of each days run or where concrete work is interrupted for more than num hour .
form the joint using a clean plank cut to the plan cross section with an attached beveled strip to form a keyway .
remove the header and clean excess concrete on the subgrade and joint face before placing fresh concrete against the joint .
d. transverse contraction joints .
saw transverse contraction joints to the specified width depth and spacing using a powerdriven gang saw with at least num separate blades .
saw initial or control transverse contraction joints at numfoot num m intervals or another multiple of the specified joint spacing that reduces uncontrolled cracking with the num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num least number of initial contraction joints .
saw initial contraction joints as soon as possible after the concrete is placed .
do not permit the saw to tear or ravel the adjacent concrete .
saw the remaining contraction joints typically within num to num hours after concrete is placed .
be responsible for determining jointsawing methods sequences and timing to prevent random cracking .
immediately revise methods that cause random cracking .
repair or replace concrete defects resulting from errors in the work methods at contractor expense .
repair or replace broken slabs random cracks nonworking contraction joints near cracks and spalls along joints and cracks in accordance with subsection num .
protect saw cuts in concrete num hours old or less from rapid drying using twisted paper fiber or rope cords waterproof covering or other approved methods .
have at least one standby saw in good condition and additional saw blades at the job site during sawing operations .
cut curbs and gutters to the required depth to prevent erratic cracking .
immediately after the joints are sawed flush the groove with pressurized water and blow the groove out with compressed air to remove all dust water and slurry .
clean the groove using compressed air just before filling with joint filler .
place hotpoured joint sealer in sawed joints to within  to numinch num num mm of the pavement surface when the pavement temperature is at least num f num c. do not use polyethylene strips to form transverse contraction joints .
e. longitudinal joints .
saw longitudinal joints to the specified width and depth within num days of placing the concrete .
do not use plastic tape as a joint sealer .
saw and apply hotpoured joint sealer in accordance with subsection numd .
ensure the finished joint alignment is parallel to the centerline of the pavement and does not have irregularities exceeding numfoot num mm measured by a numfoot num m straightedge except for normal centerline curvature .
f. keyway longitudinal joints .
construct keyway joints as specified when adjacent pavement slabs are constructed separately .
num surface test test pavement surfaces in accordance with the following criteria using the straightedge method .
sections less than num feet num m in length .
sections within num feet num m of existing pavements or bridge ends .
sections within num feet num m of intersections requiring warping to match side streets .
sections having horizontal curves with a centerline radius less than num feet num m and the superelevation transitions of those curves .
sections having vertical curves with la kvalue less than num where l is the length of the curve in feet and a is the grade change in percent la less than num where l is in meters .
test all other surfaces in accordance with subsection numb .
a. straightedge .
once the concrete has hardened test the pavement surface with a numfoot num m straightedge placed parallel to the pavement centerline .
span each low spot and touch each high spot with the testing edge revealing all irregularities .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num correct all pavement showing a variation from the testing edge exceeding numinch per foot num mm per num mm from the nearest contact point with the testing edge or showing a total variation exceeding inch num mm from the num foot num m straightedge by grinding until the areas are within the above limits .
where the grinding methods would result in an unsatisfactory surface or in a slab thickness less than specified the affected pavement may require an adjustment in the contract unit price or removal and replacement in accordance with subsection num .
b. profilograph .
furnish a numfoot num m wheel base california type profilograph and a competent operator to measure the surface smoothness before joint sealing .
do not exceed a maximum num mph num kmh operational speed .
calibrate adjust and operate the profilograph following the manufacturers instructions and california test method num .
provide the project manager num hours advance notice before using the profilograph .
the project manager will witness all profilograph recordings .
the profilogram must record a scale of numinch to num feet num mm to num m longitudinally and numinch to numinch num mm to num mm vertically .
take a profile on a line parallel to and num feet num m inside the outside edges of each traffic lane .
run the profilograph parallel to the pavement edge at all times .
additional profiles may be taken to define the limits of an outoftolerance surface .
the project manager will determine the profile index using california test method num .
calculate an average profile index in nummile num m lane segments and segments greater than num feet num m with no adjacent lanes .
if a segment less than num mile num m remains for a lane that segment will be combined with the adjacent segment for an average profile index .
perform corrective work when the lane average profile index exceeds the value specified in table num .
remove all high points in excess of numinch num mm in num feet num m or less using a method approved by the project manager .
reprofile corrected areas to demonstrate that the segment is acceptable .
use the following definitions for category num and category num surfaces .
category num surfaces are through lanes with a speed limit of num mph or greater .
category num surfaces include ramps acceleration lanes turn lanes and all other lanes not meeting the criteria of category num .
lane segments containing both category num and category num criteria will be evaluated as category num .
contract unit price adjustments are made following table num .
the contractor may elect to perform corrective work to reduce the average profile index when it is less than the corrective index but greater than the incentive index .
incentive will not be paid on sections with an initial index requiring corrective work .
num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num table num contract unit price adjustment english lane average profile index inches per mileper num mile contract unit price adjustment category num category num less than num less than num num per square yard incentive pay num to num num to num contract unit price num to num num to num num per square yard deduction over num over num corrective work required metric lane average profile index mm per num kmper num m contract unit price adjustment category num category num less than num mm less than num mm num per square meter incentive pay num mm to num mm num mm to num mm contract unit price num mm to num mm num mm to num mm num per square meter deduction over num mm over num mm corrective work required the price adjustment applies to the entire area of concrete for the lane segment calculated using the plan lane width .
no payment is made for any section with an average profile index exceeding the corrective index until it is reworked and reprofiled to an acceptable profile index .
re profiled areas are not subject to incentive pay .
complete all corrective work before measuring the pavement thickness .
include all profilographing costs in the contract unit price for pccp .
perform all pavement corrections at contractor expense .
num correcting spall and cracks remove and replace pavement slabs cracked through the full depth into num or more parts .
repair pavement slabs containing a single diagonal crack intersecting the transverse and longitudinal joints within  of the width and length of the slab from the corner by removing and replacing the smaller portion of the slab .
repair broken slabs as directed .
groove and seal random cracks that penetrate the full depth of the pavement .
groove the top of the crack to inch num mm minimum depth and a width between  to inch num mm using an approved grooving machine .
use a vertical rotarycutting machine that can follow the crack path and widen the top of the crack to the required section without spalling or damaging the concrete .
remove all loose and fractured concrete and thoroughly clean and seal the groove with the sealant specified in the contract .
the project manager will determine what random cracks are tight dont penetrate the full depth of the pavement and will be left undisturbed .
when requested by the project manager determine the crack depth penetration by drilling and inspecting cores at contractor expense .
when a transverse random crack terminates in or crosses a transverse contraction joint fill the uncracked portion of the joint with epoxyresin mortar or grout and route and seal the crack .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num when a transverse random crack nearly parallels the planned contraction joint and is within num feet num m from a contraction joint route seal and fill the crack with epoxyresin grout or mortar .
when a transverse random crack is more than num feet num m from the nearest contraction joint in the pavement seal both the joint and the crack .
thoroughly clean the joints before filling with epoxyresin mortar or grout .
repair spalls by making a saw cut at least numinch num mm outside the spalled area and to a minimum depth of num inches num mm .
when the spalled area abuts a joint make a sawcut num inches num mm deep or num the slab thickness whichever is greater .
chip out the concrete between the saw cut and the joint or primary crack to solid concrete .
thoroughly clean the resulting cavity of all loose material .
apply a prime coat of epoxyresin binder to the dry cleaned surface of all cavity sides except the working joint faces to be retained .
apply the prime coat by scrubbing it into the surface with a stiff bristle brush .
place hydraulic cement concrete or epoxy resin concrete or mortar immediately following the prime coat application .
for spalled areas abutting working joints or working cracks penetrating full depth place an insert or other bond breaker to maintain the joint or crack during the patch repair .
num opening to traffic do not permit traffic or contractor equipment excluding joint sawing and sealing equipment on the concrete until flex beam test results indicate the concrete has developed a minimum num psi num kpa modulus of rupture .
prepare the concrete flex beams in accordance with mt num and test for modulus of rupture using aashto t num .
one test set consists of num beams .
take the concrete for the test beams from different concrete batches for each num square yards num mnum of concrete pavement and make at least num sets per day .
test the beam sets for modulus of rupture .
cure the test beams under the same environmental conditions as the pavement they represent .
the pavement represented by the beams may be opened to traffic when the average modulus of rupture of the set exceeds num psi num kpa and no individual beams modulus of rupture is less than num psi num kpa .
the contractor may select the time for testing the beams .
test the flex beams on or near the project using contractor furnished equipment and with a department inspector witnessing the tests .
include all costs to make cure and test the flex beams in the contract unit price for pccp .
opening to traffic does not constitute a final acceptance of the pavement .
the pavement is accepted upon confirmation of the numday flexural strength .
repair all concrete damaged prior to the final acceptance at contractor expense .
num integral curb construct the curb monolithically with the pavement .
construct the inside face of the curb true to the lines and grades in the contract using the finish specified for the concrete pavement including longitudinal floating and burlap drag finishing .
test the surface for longitudinal trueness with a straightedge while the concrete is still plastic .
meet the same surface requirements specified for the concrete pavement .
continue concrete pavement joints through the integral curb at the same locations of the same type and constructed in the same manner .
cure the integral curb as specified for concrete pavement .
num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num num weather and night limitations place concrete at night only with the project managers written approval .
stop concrete work when the ambient temperature falls below num f num c and do not resume until the ambient air temperature reaches num f num c and is rising .
do not place concrete on a frozen foundation course or subgrade .
remove and replace all concrete damaged by frost at contractor expense .
num protection of concrete cover the concrete with an approved commercial insulating blanket covering all pavement if the ambient temperature falls below num f num c during the cure period .
leave in place for num days .
the project manager may direct the leaving the blanketing in place beyond the numday curing period .
num pavement thickness construct concrete pavement to the specified thickness .
pavement not meeting the required thickness will be subject to replacement in accordance with subsection numb or to the price adjustments according to table num .
tolerances allowed for subgrade or base course construction do not modify the thickness requirements .
a primary unit of pavement is the pavement area placed in each days paving operations .
within each primary unit there may be several secondary units as specified in numbnum .
a. thickness verification .
num .
survey method .
thickness measurement locations will be determined by random sampling in accordance with mt num .
a minimum of num random locations will be tested for each num square feet num mnum of pavement placed within the primary unit .
elevations will be recorded to the nearest numfoot num mm .
measurements will be taken as follows the locations will be selected on the finished surface before paving and at the same location on the finished concrete surface .
the thickness variation will be determined by subtracting the planned thickness from the constructed thickness at each surveyed location .
variations exceeding the planned thickness will be considered as a num feet num mm deviation in the average .
the average of the measurements will represent the variation for that primary unit .
num .
coring method .
the project manager reserves the right to verify the thickness or resolve discrepancies by coring using mt num recording that measurement to the nearest numfoot num mm .
fill core holes with concrete of the same quality as used for the pavement at no cost to the department .
b. thickness deficiency .
num .
variation less than or equal to numfoot num mm .
if the thickness variation in a primary unit is less than numfoot num mm a deduction will be applied in the amount determined in table num times the area of pavement in the primary unit .
no incentive or contract adjustment will be allowed for constructed thicknesses exceeding the planned thickness .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num table num concrete pavement thickness deficiency pavement greater than num inches num mm average thickness deficiency price deduction feet mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num average thickness deficiencies greater than numfoot num mm are rounded to the nearest numfoot num mm and the deficiency adjustment made using table num .
num .
variation greater than numfoot num mm .
for each section in a primary unit with a thickness variation greater than numfoot num mm the project manager will determine the dimensions of the secondary unit area .
the secondary unit is made up of entire panels only .
panels are the areas bound by longitudinal and transverse joints and pavement edges .
c. acceptance .
the project manager will randomly measure the thickness in each panel adjacent to the panels in the primary unit which exceeded numfoot num mm by either the survey method or mt num .
measurements are taken in each panel until the panels which exceed numfoot num mm are isolated .
the project manager will determine which panels will require replacement and which may remain in place when the limits of the secondary unit have been defined .
acceptance will be in accordance with procedures a or b below a .
remove and replace the deficient panels at contractor expense with new concrete .
if the area to be removed is not bounded by longitudinal or transverse joints saw the weakened plane joints at contractor expense at the locations designated by the project manager .
lower the subgrade or base to meet the full thickness requirements .
replaced pavement will be tested for thickness requirements using additional secondary measurements and is subject to all of the contract requirements .
b .
the contractor may leave deficient pavement panels in place if the panels meet all of the other contract requirements .
a deduct equal to num of the contract unit price per square yard mnum will be imposed for those pavement panels left in place .
the department may deduct that amount from any monies due or that may become due the contractor in accordance with the contract .
the decision to leave a deficient panel in place will be by contract modification in accordance with subsection num .
the cost of all secondary thickness measurements made under this subsection will be deducted from any monies due or that may become due the contractor in accordance with the contract .
after isolating the secondary unit areas from consideration the average thickness deficiency of the remainder of the primary unit areas will be determined in accordance with subsection numbnum .
secondary measurements made outside of a secondary unit area will be used to determine an average in the remaining primary unit area in which the measurements are taken .
no contract adjustment will be allowed for meeting these requirements .
num edition portland cement concrete pavement num num num accelerated paving techniques submit a request with details for any proposed accelerated paving techniques to the project manager a minimum of num calendar days before use .
accelerated paving techniques may include but are not limited to admixtures cement alternative curing methods sawing methods and joint sealing .
num method of measurement furnishing and installing all tie bars dowels setting and maintaining wire control lines sawing longitudinal and transverse joints sealant reinforcing steel accelerated paving techniques and testing for opening to traffic is not measured for payment .
include all costs in the unit price of pccp .
num area measurement pccp is measured by the square yard mnum .
the measured width is from outside to outside of completed pavement including integral curb not exceeding the specified width or the width ordered by the project manager .
the length is measured along the centerline of the pavement surface .
fillets for widened sections or at drainage structures and similar locations placed monolithic with the pavement are measured as pavement .
areas constructed other than as pavement are deducted from the pavement area .
no deduction is made for any fixture located within the pavement limits that has a surface area in the plane of the pavement surface of num square yard num mnum or less .
integral curb included in the completed pavement is not measured separately for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit cement concrete pavement square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num portland cement concrete pavement num edition num num section num hydraulic cement concrete num description these are the general requirements for designing hydraulic cement concrete mixtures the ingredients mixing transporting placing curing testing and acceptance for all classes and uses of hydraulic cement concrete .
num materials provide cementitious materials and admixtures from sources listed on the qpl .
num cement furnish lowalkali hydraulic cements meeting the following requirements as specified in the contract a. furnish lowalkali portland cement in accordance with aashto m num type i ii iii or v. b. furnish lowalkali hydraulic blended cement in accordance with aashto m num type ip or is .
when fly ash or ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs is used in blended cement limit the replacement amount to the maximums specified in subsections num and num respectively .
c. furnish lowalkali hydraulic cement in accordance with astm cnum type gu he ms hs mh or lh .
d. meet the following requirements for all types of cement num .
the total alkali content does not exceed num calculated as the percentage of sodium oxide nao plus num times the percentage of potassium oxide knumo .
num .
use only num brand of any num type of cement on the contract except by written approval from the project manager .
different brands or grades if approved can not be used alternately in any num pour .
num .
do not use airentraining cements .
num fly ash when included in the mix design furnish fly ash in accordance aashto m num class c or f including optional chemical requirements as set forth in table num .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs when included in the mix design furnish ggbfs in accordance with aashto m num grade num or grade num .
num microsilica fume silica fume when included in the mix design furnish microsilica in accordance with aashto m num .
num admixtures when included in the mix design furnish admixtures in accordance with aashto m num .
ensure that the total contribution of chloride ions from all admixtures and airentraining agents does not exceed num parts per million chloride ions cl by weight of cementitious material .
all admixtures must be compatible with other constituents including cement silica fume ggbfs fly ash and other admixtures .
dose all chemical admixtures according to manufacturers recommendations unless trial batches provide adequate information for different dosage rates .
num airentraining agents include an airentraining agent in the mix design unless otherwise specified .
furnish an air entraining agent in accordance with aashto m num .
num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num num water all water used for concrete other than a potable municipal source must be tested according to asshto t num for acidity alkalinity and solids .
water must also be tested for chloride content according to astm dnum and sulfate content according to astm dnum .
furnish test results with the mix design submittal .
ensure the water does not contain oil acid alkali vegetative matter and is not brackish or salty .
any water source not in accordance with table num will be rejected .
table num water requirements requirement limit acidity maximum amount of numn naoh to neutralize num ml of water num ml alkalinity maximum amount of numn hcl to neutralize num ml of water numml maximum sulfate snum num maximum chloride num maximum solids organic num maximum solids inorganic num ph level between num and num note num note num water outside ph range may be used if there is no indication of unsoundness no significant change in the time of setting and cubes vary no more than num in compressive strength against those of concrete cubes made with water of known quality .
the concrete cubes must be cast cured and tested for compressive strength in accordance with aashto t num .
num aggregate furnish aggregates in accordance with subsection num .
num storage of materials a. cementitious materials .
store all bulk cementitious materials in metal silos bins or other approved storage .
provide storage facilities that permit convenient sampling and inspection .
store all sacked cementitious materials in weatherproof buildings or if approved in the open on raised platforms with waterproof covering .
partially set caked or lumpy cementitious material will be rejected .
b .
aggregates .
store aggregates in compartmented bins or other methods that separate the different aggregate sizes to prevent contamination and segregation .
suspend work until aggregate contamination or segregation is corrected .
build up aggregate stockpiles in a manner that avoids contamination and segregation .
remix segregated aggregate to the grading requirements at contractor expense .
when readymixed concrete is furnished the readymix producers stockpiled aggregates must meet all aggregate specifications .
establish separate stockpiles for department work if existing stockpiles do not meet specifications .
do not use contaminated or segregated aggregate removed from stockpiles in the work .
handle all aggregates to prevent segregation and to obtain uniformity of materials .
pile separated aggregates and aggregates secured from different sources in separate stockpiles .
provide sites which are level firm and free of all foreign materials for the stockpiles .
if aggregates are placed directly on the ground do not use material within num inches num mm of the ground level .
leave this material undisturbed to avoid contaminating the aggregate being used with the foreign material .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num num construction requirements num classification design and produce concrete using the classifications defined in table num .
table num concrete classification class use general general use concrete .
used for sidewalks curbs and slope protectors .
also used in precast products .
structure used for structural concrete .
use for all substructural work .
deck used for all superstructure concrete deck slabs and barriers .
overlay used on bridge deck overlays .
pave used for concrete pavement streets and highways .
pre used in all prestressed items .
controlled low strength material clsm used for bedding encasement and general backfill .
flowable fill density fill flowable mortar slurry cement backfill .
drilled shaft used for drilled shafts and piles .
scc selfconsolidating concrete used for precast drilled shafts and aesthetic structural components .
num composition of concrete design and produce concrete in accordance with table num .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num furnish the names of proposed suppliers and locations of proposed aggregate sources upon notice of award .
sources must be sampled tested and approved annually .
coordinate with the project manager for submitting samples for testing .
a .
design .
design the concrete mix as follows num .
submit a concrete mix design for each class of concrete to be used on a project .
meet all the requirements of mt num .
num .
design the concrete mix to meet table num requirements or the requirements stated below for specific classes of concrete .
state the design proportions in terms of aggregates in a saturated surface dry condition .
submit the proposed aggregate source and proportion computations .
submit a final mix design for approval at least num business days before intended use on form mtpccnum .
num .
furnish materials meeting the requirements of subsection num .
num .
submit a new design when proposing any change in material sources .
num .
the following supplementary cementitious materials scms may be used as partial replacement for hydraulic cement in the mix design .
a .
fly ash may be included in the mix design for up to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
combinations of various classes of fly ash may not exceed num by weight of the total cementitious material .
b. microsilica fume may be included in the mix design for up to num by weight of the total cementitious material when a minimum of num fly ash or ggbfs is also included in the mix design or when the mix design incorporates acceptable blended cement .
c. metakaolin may be included in the mix design for up to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
d. ground granulated blast furnace slag may be included in the mix design for up to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
when multiple scms are used in a design the total replacement rate may not exceed num by weight of the total cementitious material .
calculate the wc ratio as the total weight of water divided by the total weight of cementitious material .
num .
blended cements in accordance with subsection num may be used in the mix design .
num .
when type v cement is specified for sulfate resistance other cementitious material mixtures tested in accordance with astm cnum may be submitted for approval .
acceptance will be based on expansion less than num at num months .
num .
the mix design may include provisions that address special conditions of the project that would otherwise not be allowed .
the following provisions may be included in the mix design a .
delayed initial set .
the mix may be designed for delayed set time to allow for long haul or other project conditions .
when delayed set is included in the mix design the time requirements for placing the concrete in final position in accordance with subsection num may be replaced by time to final placement requirements included in the mix design .
include in the mix design information on the delayed set provisions of the design and specific time to final placement requirements .
support the time to final placement with test results from trial batches .
b .
slow strength gain .
the mix design may include cementitious materials or other admixtures that result in slow strength gain .
when a slow strength gain is included in the mix design include a recommendation for the age in days at which the num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num strength will be obtained .
the recommended age must be no less than num days and no more than num days .
support this recommendation with test results from trial batches .
upon acceptance the recommended age will be used in all provisions that refer to numday strength .
b .
class deck and overlaysf .
design and produce class deck and overlaysf concrete in accordance with table num and the following include silica fume and fly ash or ggbfs as scms in combination with compatible air entraining water reducing andor superplasticizing admixtures .
scms replacement quantities must meet the requirements of subsection num .
mix requires trial batch rapid chloride permeability test results in accordance with aashto t num less than num coulombs at num days or surface resistivity test results in accordance with aashto tp num greater than num kilohmcentimeters at num days .
submit a batching sequence procedure with the mix design including the amount of material charged and the time before the next material will be added .
include approximate mixer revolutions for each stage of the sequence .
alternative mix designs not in accordance with table num may be accepted provided the following requirements are met num .
include in the design compressive strength test results according to aashto t num for num num and num days .
the design must produce strengths in accordance with table num num by the specified age .
num .
include in the mix design shrinkage test results according to aashto t num .
the maximum allowed shrinkage for mix design acceptance is .num at num days .
num .
include in the mix design rapid chloride permeability rcp test results according to aashto t num .
the design must demonstrate a maximum of num coulombs at num days .
alternatively include in the mix design test results according to aashto tp num surface resistivity indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration .
the design must demonstrate a minimum of num kilohmscentimeters at num days .
num .
include in the mix design creep test results at num days according to astm cnum .
num .
include in the mix design modulus of elasticity moe results according to astm cnum .
num .
include in the mix design airvoid spacing results according to astm cnum modified pointcount method at numx magnification .
the average of all tests must not exceed num inches num mm with no single test greater than num inches num mm .
the total air content must exceed num .
num .
design and produce concrete maintaining a plastic air content of num num .
num .
submit a batching sequence procedure with the mix design including the amount of material charged and the time before the next material will be added .
include approximate mixer revolutions for each stage of the sequence .
c. class drilled shaft .
drilled shaft concrete is a highly workable concrete that can flow through dense reinforcement and adequately fill voids without segregation or excessive bleeding without the need for vibration .
drilled shaft concrete should not begin initial set until the placement is complete .
design and produce class drilled shaft concrete in accordance with table num and the following num .
set a target slump that meets the needs of the project .
set the target slump no lower than num inches num mm .
do not place drilled shaft concrete having a slump of less than num inches num mm .
num .
include with the mix design an estimate of the maximum time from producing the numst batch of concrete for a shaft to the anticipated completion of that shaft .
all concrete num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num used for the drilled shaft must maintain a minimum of a numinch num mm slump until num hours after the estimated completion .
num .
air entrainment may be used in drilled shaft concrete if needed to reduce bleed water or achieve certain placement properties num .
selfconsolidating concrete may be used for drilled shaft mix designs .
when used meet the above requirements and those of subsection numf .
d. latexmodified overlay concrete overlaylm .
design and produce overlaylm concrete in accordance with the following requirements num .
use only type i or type ii hydraulic cement .
num .
furnish concrete with a latex emulsion admixture rate of num gallons per cubic yard num lmnum .
use a latex admixture containing a polymer of num num styrene and num num butadiene with the polymer comprising between num and num of the total emulsion .
the emulsion must have a sodium alkyl sulfate stabilizer acting as an anionic surfactant polymer average particle size between num and num angstroms a weight of num to num pounds per gallon num num kgl at num f num c and a ph between num and num .
num .
protect the latex admixture from temperatures below num f num c and above num f num c at all times .
provide a thermometer capable of storing minimum and maximum temperatures and place it with any admixture stored on site .
replace admixture subjected to temperatures outside the range above at no expense to the department .
e. controlled low strength material clsm .
clsm is a mixture of hydraulic cement scms aggregate natural sands silty sands air entraining admixture and water .
clsm contains a low cementitious content for reduced strength development .
submit a mix design for approval including aggregate gradations cement and scm mill certifications proportioning and trial batch information .
num .
excavatable .
design and produce excavatable clsm in accordance with the following requirements a. unconfined compressive strength between num psi and num psi num num mpa determined by astm dnum .
b .
air content between num and num determined by astm dnum .
c. unit weight of num num lbsftnum num num kgmnum determined by astm dnum .
d. consistent flow producing a selfleveling product free of segregation determined by astm dnum e. do not use coarse aggregate in excavatable clsm .
maximum inch num mm nominal maximum aggregate size designs .
num .
nonexcavatable .
design and produce nonexcavatable clsm in accordance with the following requirements a. unconfined compressive strength greater than num psi num mpa determined by astm dnum b .
air content between num and num determined by astm dnum .
c. unit weight of num lbsftnum num num kgmnum determined by astm dnum .
d. consistent flow producing a selfleveling product free of segregation determined by astm dnum .
do not use materials in clsm with a plasticity index over num according to mt num .
furnish aggregates in accordance with table num .
num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num table num clsm gradations percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num high air generators or foaming agents may be used in lieu of conventional air entraining admixtures and may be added at the jobsite and mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
the requirements for percent air and unit weight are for laboratory mix designs only and are not intended for jobsite acceptance requirements .
produce a consistent mix that results in a flowable product at the time of placement which does not require manual means to move it into place .
secure tanks pipes and other members to be encased in clsm to prevent displacement during placement .
protect clsm from traffic until sufficient strength has been achieved for further construction operations .
the clsm may be mixed onsite or at a readymix plant and transported to the site .
keep the mix homogeneous and in a suspended condition to prevent settling of the materials prior to placement .
characteristics of clsm include consistency workability and plasticity such that the material is flowable selfcompacting and selfconsolidating during placement .
f. self consolidating concrete scc .
scc is a highly workable concrete that can flow through densely reinforced or complex structural elements under its own weight and adequately fill voids without segregation or excessive bleeding without the need for vibration .
scc may be used for classes general in precast or aesthetic placements only structure and drilled shaft concrete .
design and produce scc in accordance with table num and the following num .
num day compressive strength meeting the requirements of the class of concrete specified or established in the contract e.g .
class drilled shaft num psi num mpa .
many precast designs requiring class general concrete have varying design strengths .
num .
provide a slumpflow within num inches num mm of the target value and within the overall range of num to num inches num to num mm .
test in accordance with mt num .
when used for a drilled shaft design include in the design hourly slumpflow retention testing up to the desired placement time of the shaft .
num .
provide a maximum visual stability index vsi of num in accordance with aashto tp num .
num .
provide a maximum jring value of num inches num mm in accordance with aashto t num .
when used for a drilled shaft include in the design hourly jring testing up to the desired placement time of the shaft .
include the above test results in the mix design submittal .
if scc is used in the production of precast items meet the testing requirements in section num .
g. class structure concrete .
design and produce class structure concrete in accordance with table num .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num alternative mix designs not in accordance with table num may be accepted provided the following requirements are met .
num .
include in the design compressive strength test results according to aashto t num for num num and num days .
the numday results must exceed specified strength .
num .
include in the mix design shrinkage test results according to aashto t num .
the maximum allowed shrinkage for mix design acceptance is .num at num days .
num .
include in the mix design creep test results at num days according to astm cnum .
num .
include in the mix design moe results according to astm cnum .
num .
include in the mix design airvoid spacing results according to astm cnum modified pointcount method at numx magnification .
the average of all tests must not exceed numinch num m with no single test greater than numinch num m .
the total air content must exceed num .
num .
design and produce concrete maintaining a plastic air content of num num .
h. class pre concrete .
design and produce class pre concrete in accordance with table num .
include the following in the mix design .
num .
include in the design compressive strength test results according to aashto t num for num num and num days .
also include strength tests at intended detensioningrelease times e.g .
num hrs num hrs num hrs etc .
the numday results must exceed specified strength .
num .
include in the mix design shrinkage test results according to aashto t num .
the maximum allowed shrinkage for mix design acceptance is .num at num days .
num .
include in the mix design creep test results at num days according to astm cnum .
num .
include in the mix design moe results according to astm cnum .
i. prepackaged concrete .
prepackaged concrete or rapid set patching material must contain a product data sheet proving the product will meet the specifications required for its intended use .
prepackaged concrete is subject to project manager approval .
num batching mixing handling and sampling produce each class of specified concrete from approved material batched in the proportions specified in the approved mix design .
correct for moisture content variations .
all concrete aggregates are sampled using methods described in mt num using sample sizes used in mt num .
mt num will be used to calculate combined gradations .
the water may be proportioned by weight or volume .
proportion the cement and aggregates by weight .
the temperature of the combined material must be less than num f num c before the addition of cementitious materials .
concrete batch plants and operations must meet the requirements of astm cnum prior to producing concrete for any work including concrete for any field trial batches and shall meet the requirements throughout the production of concrete including the following a .
quality control .
when requested furnish documentation for all the plants equipment including each plants quality control procedures calibration records maintenance records and any other information pertinent to proper concrete production .
all measuring devices batching equipment trucks and mixers are subject to approval .
b .
water .
num .
weigh measurement .
ensure the weigh equipment measurements are not effected by pressure variations in the water supply lines .
the project manager may require an auxiliary tank for filling the weighing tank .
num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num num .
metering .
measure water volume by metering through a recording watermeter device accurate to within plus or minus num of the required volume or plus or minus num gallon num l whichever is less .
completely discharge wash water from the mixer before starting any batching operation .
c. cementitious materials .
num .
proportion cementitious materials by weight on all projects for all classes of concrete .
num .
ensure equipment for weighing cementitious material is accurate to within num of the true weight .
num .
weigh cementitious material to within num of the total cementitious material batch weight .
num .
weigh each cementitious material separately .
d. admixtures .
if using num or more admixtures in a single concrete batch add each admixture separately to prevent interaction of the different admixtures before mixing with other batch materials .
agitate admixtures to ensure homogeneous concentrations in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if using a mechanical dispenser for proportioning admixtures provide a site gauge or meter .
ensure unobstructed flow and accurate dosing of admixtures .
batch admixtures in accordance with astm cnum .
e. aggregate .
proportion aggregate by weight on all projects for all classes of concrete .
ensure equipment for weighing aggregates is accurate to within num of the true weight .
weigh aggregates to within num of the total aggregate batch weight .
weigh each size of aggregate separately .
f. batch ticket .
furnish the project manager a printed record of each batch in accordance with astm cnum .
include on the ticket any water or admixture added after the record is printed and the initials of the person making the additions .
approval is required before any addition to the mix after batching and initial mixing has been completed .
g. mixers .
use mixers that combine cementitious materials aggregates water and admixtures within the specified time to form a uniformly mixed mass .
meet the requirements of astm cnum .
operate mixers following the manufacturers recommendations .
the department may require uniformity testing .
when required meet the requirements of subsection num .
do not place concrete improperly or inadequately mixed in the work .
if incorporated remove the concrete at no cost to the department .
do not mix transport or place concrete using equipment with aluminum or aluminum parts that contact the concrete .
produce concrete in such quantity and at such a rate as proper placement and finishing will permit .
do not retemper partially set concrete .
do not use mixed concrete that has remained in the truck mixer drum longer than num minutes without agitation .
when silica fume is incorporated in the mix design the maximum mixer revolutions will be waived .
ensure a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed when the concrete is in a lowslump stage num to num inches num to num mm to properly disperse silica fume particles .
h. jobsite additions .
do not make any additions to the plastic concrete without the approval of the project manager .
onsite dosing of water or admixture in no way relieves the contractor of producing passing plastic and hardened concrete test results .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num num .
water .
do not exceed the approved wc ratio .
the addition of water is allowed only num time and a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed are required before discharge of concrete .
do not add water if part of the batch has been discharged as a wc ratio can not be determined .
do not add water if the slump is within specified range .
num .
admixture .
do not exceed manufacturers recommended dosage rates unless otherwise approved in the mix design stage .
only admixtures included in the approved mix design may be dosed onsite .
a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed are required before discharge of concrete .
do not add admixtures if any concrete has been discharged from the mixer other than the minimal amount for initial testing .
when the measured plastic air content or slump exceeds the upper test limit and there is time available within the discharge time limit specified rotate the load at agitation speed and retest the air content andor slump .
do not use additives to reduce the air content andor slump .
no other materials may be added to the concrete mixture .
num transporting concrete ensure that the capacity of the plant and transportation equipment provides a delivery rate to permit handling placing and finishing of the work .
time the delivery of loads to prevent the inplace concrete from taking initial set before succeeding layers or lifts are placed .
do not permit any layer or lift of concrete to remain exposed in excess of num minutes before being covered by fresh concrete .
document the method and time of delivery by batch tickets issued to the driver and signed by the inspector at the plant if present .
deliver the ticket to the inspector upon arriving at the project .
place concrete with a temperature between num and num f num and num c. meet the requirements of astm cnum and the following a .
revolving drum mixers .
discharge the concrete at the job and place it in final position within num hours after introducing the mixing water and cement .
if long hauls or other project conditions are expected meet the requirements of subsection numanuma .
when the ambient temperature is num f num c or above place the concrete in final position within num hour after the water and cement are introduced .
b. nonagitating transportation equipment .
do not use nonagitating transport equipment to transport concrete except when placing concrete pavement in accordance with section num .
num placing concrete place concrete in accordance with sections num num and num .
always place concrete as near as possible to its final position .
do not place concrete that has taken initial set .
do not place concrete num .
on frozen or icecoated ground or subgrade num .
against or on icecoated forms reinforcing steel structural steel conduits precast members or construction joints num .
under rainy conditions stop the placement of concrete before the quantity of surface water is sufficient to effect or damage surface mortar quality cause a flow or wash the concrete surface num .
in any foundation until the project manager has approved its depth and character num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num num .
in any form until the project manager has approved it and the placement of any reinforcing in it or num .
in any work area when vibrations from nearby work may harm the concretes initial set or strength .
ensure all reinforcement and other embedded items are clean and free from dried mortar rust scale oil or foreign matter before placing concrete .
remove all sawdust chips other construction debris and extraneous matter from the interior of forms before placing concrete .
treat the forms interior surfaces to prevent mortar adhesion .
moisten all foundations forms and contacting concrete surfaces with water just before the concrete is placed .
remove any standing water on surfaces which will contact with the concrete .
provide a method of concrete placement that has a consistent minimal impact on the concrete properties .
all equipment proposed for use in mixing conveying placing and compacting the concrete is subject to project manager approval prior to its use .
all the necessary equipment for any particular pour must be on site and proven to be in working condition before the pour commences .
ensure the equipment is well maintained suitable in kind and adequate in capacity for the work .
support bars to maintain their position as shown in the contract .
place and secure all reinforcing dowels and other embedded items as specified .
deposit concrete in small quantities at many points and then work or run it along the forms .
carefully fill each part of the forms depositing the concrete as close as possible to its final position working the coarse aggregates back from the face and forcing the concrete under and around the reinforcing bars .
deposit concrete around steel shapes and closely spaced reinforcing bars on num side of the steel uniformly working it until the concrete flushes under the steel to the opposite side before any concrete is placed on the opposite side or over the steel .
place concrete with means as to avoid segregation of the materials and the displacement of the reinforcement .
remove and discard any concrete that is segregated is too wet for use or is not of uniform consistency .
deposit concrete through an approved means when placement operations involve a free drop of concrete by more than num feet num m to prevent segregation .
place concrete in a continuous operation between expansion or construction joints .
thoroughly clean all chutes troughs and pipes after each run .
discharge any flushing water away from the forms and in place concrete .
once the concrete has taken initial set avoid jarring the forms or straining the projecting reinforcement ends .
a .
placement methods .
all placement methods are subject to approval .
num .
truck chute .
use metal or metallined troughs and chutes that extend to the point of deposit .
regulate the discharge .
num .
pumping concrete .
when concrete pumps are used for placement prior to use on the first placement of each day visually inspect the pumps water chamber for water leakage .
do not use a pump that allows free water to flow past the piston .
if a concrete pump is used as the placing system discard the pump priming slurry before placement .
eliminating the priming slurry from the concrete may require that several cubic yards of concrete are discharged through the pumping system and discarded .
use of a concrete pump requires a written plan to place the remaining concrete if the pump breaks down .
provide a pump that produces a continuous flow of concrete without air pockets .
arrange equipment so that the impact on the plastic air content of the concrete is num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num affected as little as possible and that the freshly placed concrete is not damaged by any form of vibration .
if boom angles will vary significantly furnish means to control air content variation .
num .
conveying concrete .
when a conveyor is used for placement prior to use on the numst placement of each day visually inspect the conveyor to ensure proper operation .
provide a belt free of tears and holes and operates smooth and free of bouncing and jarring to prevent segregation of the concrete .
protect the concrete while on the conveyor to prevent the concretes plastic properties from changing .
do not use a conveyor exceeding num feet num m. equip all conveyors with a dropchute and scraper to prevent segregation and mortar loss respectively .
once concrete placement begins ensure that there is proper and equal edge distance between the edge of the belt and windrow of concrete .
num .
bucketing concrete .
when a bucket is used for concrete placement prior to use on the first placement of each day visually inspect the bucket for proper working condition and contaminants .
the bucket should be clean and free of hardened concrete and excess of release agent .
once concrete has been discharged into the bucket do not place concrete back into a mixer to be altered or remixed .
b .
consolidation .
thoroughly consolidate concrete except scc during and immediately after depositing into the work .
consolidate the concrete by mechanical vibration subject to the following num .
apply the vibration internally unless otherwise approved or as provided herein .
num .
vibrate the concrete at a minimum num impulses per minute or as recommended by the vibrator manufacturer .
num .
the vibration must visibly affect the concrete mass producing a numinch num mm slump over a minimum numinch num mm radius .
num .
use enough vibrators to consolidate each batch immediately after its placed .
num .
vibrate the concrete around the reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into the form corners and angles .
num .
vibrate at the point of deposit in areas of freshly deposited concrete .
slowly insert and remove the vibrators from the concrete .
vibrate to thoroughly consolidate the concrete without causing segregation or forming localized grout areas .
num .
vibrate at uniformly spaced points and no farther apart than twice the radius over which the vibration is visible .
num .
do not apply vibration directly to or through the reinforcement or to nonplastic sections or layers of concrete .
do not use vibrators to transport concrete in the forms .
use plastic or rubber tipped vibrator heads when placing concrete near epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
num .
supplement vibration by spading and tamping to produce smooth surfaces and dense concrete along form surfaces in corners and locations impractical to reach with the vibrators .
refer to section num for consolidation requirements for concrete paving .
num weather and temperature limitations concreting during hot or cold weather requires an approved written plan to be implemented upon abrupt changes in weather conditions or equipment failures .
a .
hot weather concreting .
defined as jobsite conditions that accelerate the rate of moisture loss or rate of cement hydration of freshly mixed concrete .
do not place classes num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num deck or overlay concrete in temperatures exceeding num f num c. other classes of concrete may be placed in temperatures exceeding num f num c with project manager approval .
when hot weather concreting is anticipated submit a hot weather concreting plan for review and approval .
include detailed procedures including production placement finishing curing and protection of concrete during hot weather concreting .
do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising andor the evaporation rate is greater than num lbftnumhr .
num kgmnumh without an approved hot weather concreting plan .
do not place classes deck or overlay without an approved plan when the ambient temperature is greater than num f num c andor when the evaporation rate is greater than num lbftnumhr .
num kgmnumh .
when hot weather as defined above exists monitor site conditions air temperature humidity wind speed to assess the need for evaporation control measures beginning no later than num hour before the start of concrete placing operations .
continue to monitor site conditions at intervals of num minutes or less until specified curing procedures have been applied .
num .
materials .
produce concrete at a temperature such that its maximum temperature at discharge will not exceed the specified maximum allowable concrete temperature .
acceptable production methods to reduce the temperature of the concrete include shading aggregate stockpiles sprinkling water on coarse aggregate stockpiles using chilled water for concrete production substituting chipped or shaved iced for portions of the mixing water and cooling concrete materials using liquid nitrogen .
include in the submittals for hot weather concreting which methods will be used and in what order they will be initiated when multiple methods are to be used .
the substitution of other cooling methods will be considered by the department when requested in the submittal and accompanied by satisfactory supporting data .
num .
construction .
include in the plan methods that will be used to maintain surfaces that will come in contact with the plastic concrete below num f num c. include methods and equipment that will be used to keep the plastic concrete from cracking e.g .
fogging equipment burlap plastic curing compounds etc ..
describe devices or procedures that will be used to monitor wind speed temperature humidity and other weather variables determining evaporation rate .
also include a detailed description of curing practices that will be used to supplement standard requirements in hot weather placements .
protect the concrete against thermal shrinkage cracking due to rapid drops in concrete temperature greater than num f num c during the first num hours unless otherwise specified .
under hot weather conditions scheduling placements at otherthannormal hours may be advisable .
concrete showing evidence of plastic shrinkage cracking or thermal cracking will be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
b .
cold weather concreting .
defined as when the weather forecast predicts air temperatures below num f num c at any time during the specified curing and protection period following concrete placement .
assume all risk for placing concrete during cold weather .
replace frozen or damaged concrete at contractor expense .
remove ice snow and frost from the forms subgrade adjacent concrete and reinforcing bars before placing concrete .
do not place concrete on frozen base or subgrade .
when cold weather concreting is anticipated submit a cold weather concreting plan for review and approval .
include detailed procedures for production transportation num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num placement curing and temperature monitoring of the concrete during cold weather .
submit the plan a minimum of num calendar days prior to any concrete which is scheduled to be placed during cold weather .
prepare and submit a separate cold weather concreting plan for each concrete component which requires different methods of protection from cold weather .
clearly indicate which concrete components are covered by each submittal .
num .
cold weather plan .
include as a minimum the following items in the cold weather concreting plans a .
materials details and locations for insulating blankets enclosures or other methods to be used to protect concrete from cold weather .
b .
method for verifying the minimum concrete compressive strength has been reached to allow formwork and cold weather protection removal .
indicate whether cylinder testing or maturity method will be used .
c. recording thermometer information and location .
provide product data including type manufacturer model number and temperature range .
include proposed number and location of thermometers in the concrete .
d. heating equipment and locations if used .
provide product information on heating equipment and equipment placement .
num .
fresh concrete temperatures .
place fresh concrete with a temperature between num and num f num and num c. eliminate frozen lumps ice and snow before aggregates are used in production .
the contractor may warm stockpiled aggregates with dry heat or steam but not by applying flame directly or under sheet metal .
if the aggregates are in bins steam or water coils or other heating methods may be used if aggregate quality is not affected .
live steam heating is not permitted on or through aggregates in bins .
if using dry heat increase mixing times enough to permit the dry aggregates to absorb moisture .
use equipment and methods that heat the materials evenly .
do not add chlorides chemical admixtures or other ingredients to the concrete to prevent freezing .
num .
protection of concrete .
enclose the structure in such a way that the concrete and air within the enclosure can be kept above num f num c for a period of num calendar days or the specified curing period after placing the concrete .
ensure that the relative humidity remains above num within the enclosure .
before placing concrete provide adequate preheat to raise the temperature of the formwork reinforcing steel adjacent concrete and subgrade to at least num f num c. submit documentation for a temperature recording device for approval .
the device must be capable of recording temperatures a minimum of once per hour num hours a day for the entire curing period .
furnish and place enough temperature probes within the concrete to ensure the temperature of the concrete is adequately monitored .
install a minimum of num temperature probes within each concrete element .
ensure that the temperature probes can not be dislodged by the placement of concrete vibration or workers .
include at least num additional temperature probe to record ambient outside air temperature .
where heated enclosures are used include a temperature recording device inside the heated enclosure .
temperature probe locations are subject to approval .
submit the temperature recording device data to the project manager daily .
num .
end of curing period .
the conclusion of the curing period is defined when field cured cylinders meet design strength maturity meter readings are satisfactory or the num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num specified curing days are reached and all temperature recording data has been submitted .
a .
field cured specimens .
mold a minimum of num field cured cylinders per lot .
cast fieldcured cylinders in accordance with mt num .
place the cylinders at locations designated by the project manager and expose them to the same conditions as the concrete being placed until they are removed for testing .
test fieldcured cylinders within num hours after removal from cold weather protection according to aashto t num except that the moist cure period is omitted .
perform tests using a certified testing laboratory .
furnish the project manager certified copies of the test results .
cast enough cylinders to guarantee the required strength has been met for protection removal .
the department reserves the right to witness selected tests and testing procedures .
two cylinders constitute a test with the test value being the average of the num compressive strengths .
the average of all sets must meet the specified strength .
continue curing and protection until the tests indicate the specified compressive strength is reached .
b .
removing protection .
when the curing period has ended and the design strength is met withdraw protection and heating in such a manner so as not to induce thermal shock stresses in the concrete .
gradually reduce the temperature of the concrete at a rate not exceeding num f num c per hour .
do not exceed a temperature differential of num f num c between the core of the element and the surface of the element .
in addition the temperature differential between the surface of the element and the ambient air shall not exceed num f num c. ambient air temperature is defined as the temperature at midheight of the element and num inches num mm from the surface of the element .
all concrete must achieve a minimum of num psi num mpa before being exposed to freezethaw cycles .
the contractor is solely responsible for protecting concrete from inclement weather during the entire curing period .
permission given by the project manager to place concrete during cold weather in no way ensures acceptance of the work by the department .
should the concrete placed under such conditions prove unsatisfactory in any way the project manager has the right to reject the work although the plan and the work were carried out with the project managers permission .
num curing concrete continuously water cure any class of concrete used for bridge deck construction for num calendar days as specified below .
continuously water cure class overlaysf for num calendar days as specified below .
continuously water cure class overlaylm for num hours as specified below followed by a dry cure .
begin the dry cure at the end of the numhour wet cure period by removing the burlap and the polyethylene .
allow the concrete to undergo num hours of dry cure .
keep the bridge closed to traffic an additional num hours if the air temperature falls below num f num c during the cure .
allow no traffic on the overlay surface until the end of the dry cure and the transverse deck grooving has been completed .
continuously cure all other concrete surfaces for num calendar days by either water curing or liquid membraneforming curing compound as specified below .
design strength must be verified by fieldcured cylinders in accordance with aashto t num .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num do not place curing compounds on concrete that is still bleeding .
protect freshly placed concrete from freezing high temperatures large temperature differentials premature drying excessive moisture and moisture loss for the period of time necessary to develop the desired concrete properties .
protect exposed concrete surfaces from premature drying by covering with canvas plastic sheets with sealed joints burlap or other approved materials .
keep the concrete moist .
continually moisten uncovered surfaces by fogging .
do not allow water to drip flow or puddle on the concrete surface during fog misting when placing the burlap or at any time before the concrete has achieved final set .
the concrete surfaces against forms may be cured by leaving the forms in place for at least num calendar days .
keep the concrete surfaces moist after removing forms until surface repair is completed and one of the final cure methods described below is used .
surface repair includes removal of irregularities and repair of all depressions voids and air holes .
after placement cure concrete surfaces as follows a .
water cure .
keep all finished top surface concrete moist with a fine water mist until the burlap is placed .
place wet burlap in accordance with subsection num immediately behind concreting operations no later than num minutes after finishing .
do not use products having a laminated moisture barrier .
soak burlap for a minimum of num hours before use .
keep the burlap wet until concrete reaches sufficient strength to place soaker hoses or other effective means of providing moisture without marring the surface .
once a watering system is placed place an approved reflective type sheeting or blanket over the watering system in accordance with subsection num and cover to reduce evaporation .
the entire concrete surface must remain moist throughout the full cure period .
ensure the temperature of all water used in the water cure is within num f num c of the inplace concrete temperature .
secure covers and sheeting to prevent them from being lifted or displaced .
if an intermediate monomolecular film curing agent evaporation retarder is used apply the monomolecular film in a lightfog application using a pressure spray tank with an adjustable nozzle .
use a watertocuring agent ratio and rate of application both according to the manufacturers recommendations .
agitate the solution before each application .
apply the monomolecular film immediately after the final finishing operation is completed on any area .
do not perform finishing after application of the curing agent .
use of an evaporation retarder must be approved before use by the project manager .
furnish a product data sheet to the project manager before approval .
b .
liquid membraneforming curing compound .
furnish and uniformly apply a liquid membraneforming curing compound in accordance with subsection num over exposed surfaces .
deliver membranecuring compound to the job in the manufacturers original container clearly labeled with the manufacturers name and contents .
the compound must be ready to use as shipped by the manufacturer .
do not dilute the compound .
do not use curing compound without providing the project manager a manufacturers product data sheet .
use whitepigmented compound for pavements .
use a clear compound containing a fugitive dye on curbs sidewalks barrier rail substructure components and superstructure components other than those requiring a num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num water cure .
the clear compound must contain a fugitive dye that makes the film visible on the concrete for at least num hours after application but does not affect the concrete surfaces natural color after curing .
thoroughly mix and apply the compound following the manufacturers instructions or apply at a rate exceeding num gallon per num square feet num lmnum and ensure complete coverage with no transparent areas showing obvious color differential .
apply the curing compound immediately after the finishing operation using a mechanical pressure distribution system to provide uniform coverage .
during windy conditions equip the spray nozzles with hoods .
when concrete is placed in forms immediately apply the curing compound after form removal if the concrete has not reached its design strength .
a handoperated sprayer providing uniform coverage may be used to apply liquid curing compound to areas where a mechanical sprayer is impractical .
if the curing membrane is damaged from any cause during the curing period recoat the damaged areas immediately .
do not apply membranecuring compound to construction joint surfaces .
protect exposed steel during application of curing compounds .
c. steamcure for precast concrete items .
completely enclose or cover the casting beds for steamcured members using curing blankets or other approved flexible coverings .
provide a minimum num inches num mm of free air space between the enclosure or coverings and all concrete surfaces .
secure flexible coverings to prevent moisture loss .
provide moisture before the cure cycle to aid hydration and prevent surface cracks caused by rapid water loss from the concrete .
steam may be introduced before starting the cure cycle if the enclosure temperatures are maintained between num and num f num and num c. fogspray or cover the top surfaces of the members with wet blankets within num minutes after placing concrete to prevent moisture loss for a num hour period before the cure cycle .
begin the steamcure cycle after the concrete has been in place at least num hours .
maintain steam at num relative humidity applied so it does not damage the surface of the concrete forms or tendons .
raise the ambient temperature within the enclosures no faster than num f num c per hour to a maximum temperature between num and num f num and num c. maintain the temperature until the concrete has reached strength for transfer of prestress or design strength .
once the cure cycle is complete cool the precast items by decreasing the temperature within the enclosures no faster than num f num c per hour until the temperature difference between the inside and outside air is within num f num c unless otherwise approved .
keep a curing timetemperature record for each concrete pour in the casting bed .
provide num automatic temperaturerecording thermometer for each num feet num m or fraction thereof of continuous bed length used .
record curing temperatures continuously for the full curing cycle .
place the temperature sensors at approved locations .
supplement automatic recording thermometers with standard bulbtype thermometers placed at approved locations .
certify the accuracy of automatic recorders once each year or when the recorder accuracy is in question .
steam curing is not permitted without automatic recorders .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num the sideforms may be removed at the contractors discretion .
assume all responsibility removing forms before breaking the release cylinders .
concrete members damaged from early form removal will be rejected .
the cure cycle may be interrupted a maximum num minutes for form removal .
do not expose the members to belowfreezing temperatures within num calendar days of casting .
in place of the numday requirement the cure time may be based on the concrete strength .
the concrete strength is determined by the average strengths of num standard num x numinch num x num mm or num x numinch num x num mm cylinders cast from different batches of concrete used in each casting .
expose these cylinders to the same cure and temperature conditions as the precast items .
immediately test the cylinders according to aashto t num without further curing once they are removed from the cure area .
curing may be discontinued if the average strengths of the num cylinders equals or exceeds specified strengths .
protect the member from freezing temperatures for the num day period if the average compressive strength fails to meet specified strength .
cool all members as specified in this subsection .
cast compression cylinders for field tests of the numday strengths following mt num .
cast the number of test cylinders as required in subsection numc and mt num .
the contractor may submit in writing alternate curing methods for approval .
num testing and acceptance of concrete a .
sampling and testing .
furnish an adequate and representative sample of concrete in accordance with mt num from the point of placement to an area designated by the project manager for testing of concrete properties and molding of test specimens .
the department will take possession of the sample and begin the following applicable tests .
num .
compressive strength testing .
furnish samples for determining compressive strength following mt num .
test cylinders will be cast and cured following mt num and tested in accordance with aashto t num at a frequency determined by mt num .
test cylinders for scc will be cast and cured in accordance with mt num .
compressive strength tests may be molded at any time if inconsistency between batches is identified or suspected .
a compressive strength set consists of num test cylinders made at the same time from the same batch of concrete .
tests for plastic properties will also be run from the same sample used for compressive strength tests .
the contractor may make additional cylinders to determine strength gain and to maintain job control .
make additional cylinders anytime strengths must be determined before num days for cure times form removal posttensioning or any other scenario requiring fieldcured strength tests .
standard compressive strength tests will be made at num and num days except as specified below for concrete used in prestressed members .
the compressive strength results of the cylinders tested will determine if the concrete meets the required compressive strength in table num or specified in the contract .
num .
testing of plastic concrete .
perform quality control samplingtesting during the concrete placement including air content temperature and slump to maintain job control .
furnish samples for determining slump air and temperature in accordance with mt num .
slump will be tested in accordance with mt num .
air content will be determined in accordance with mt num .
temperature will be tested in accordance with astm cnum at a frequency determined in accordance with mt num .
plastic num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num properties tests may be run at any time if inconsistency between batches is identified or suspected .
slump flow and air content for scc will be evaluated in accordance with mt num and mt num .
plastic concrete will also be subjected to a visual test for segregation .
if segregation is identified by a halo bleeding aggregate agglomerations or aggregate settlement identified by a high sheen or bubbling during the slump test do not place the concrete .
take immediate steps to resolve the problem .
remove and replace any concrete placed showing signs of segregation at no expense to the department .
num .
flexural strength testing .
in addition to the compressive strength requirements class pave hydraulic cement concrete pavements require beam tests to determine the concretes flexural strength .
the number of flexural strength tests required for acceptance is determined by the department on a random basis .
the flexural strength results from num or a combination of the beams tested will be used to determine whether the concrete meets the required flexural strength specified in table num .
flexural beams made in the field will be cast and cured in accordance with mt num and tested in accordance with aashto t num .
num .
durability testing .
when applicable furnish samples for determining permeability following mt num .
test cylinders will be cast and cured following mt num and tested in accordance with aashto t num or aashto tp num .
the department may test hardened air content in accordance with astm cnum for acceptance .
num .
gradations .
samples for determining gradations of aggregates for concrete will be sampled in accordance with mt num and tested in accordance with mt num .
combined gradations are determined in accordance with mt num .
b .
acceptance of concrete .
the concrete must meet all contract specifications and the following num .
classes general deck pave structure overlay and drilled shaft concrete .
these classes of concrete are evaluated for acceptance on a lotbylot basis .
an individual lot is defined as a single days pour or every num ydnum num mnum of concrete poured i.e .
num ydnum num lot num ydnum num lots etc .
whichever is less excluding class pave .
an individual lot of class pave concrete is defined as a single days pour or every num ydnum num mnum of concrete poured whichever is less .
partial lots may be created or added to the preceding lot at the project managers discretion .
each lot is accepted or rejected based on the lot acceptance air tests strength tests gradation tests and when applicable permeability tests .
the pay factors for each lot accepted are determined from table num num num and num. a .
strength .
a minimum of num standard compressive strength sets will be made for each lot .
each set will be made from concrete taken from a separate batch or load randomly selected from all loads or batches in the lot .
for a lot less than num cubic yards num mnum the project manager may elect to make num set of compressive strength cylinders to represent that lot .
three cylinders from each set of cylinders are tested for compressive strength at num days and the fourth is tested at num days .
the test result is the average of the strengths of the num individual num day cylinder specimens unless an outlier is identified .
an outlier is defined here as num compressive strength specimen with a result differing from the average of the num closest compressive strength specimens num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num by greater than or equal to num of the averaged value .
if an outlier is identified that specimen will be removed and the average strength will be determined using the remaining num specimens .
the lot acceptance strength is the average of the test results for the lot .
table num concrete strength pay factors strength pay factors classes deck overlay structure general pave and drilled shaft concrete lot acceptance strength x psi num psi num kpa strength x psi strength pay factor pfs x num  num num x num  num num num  num num x num  num num num  num num x pfs num remove and replace the pay factors shown will be used when the department determines the concrete is acceptable at less than the specified strength .
the department may require removal and replacement or corrective action for any concrete not in accordance with the required strength .
b .
air content .
concrete air content will be determined in accordance with mt num or astm cnum .
the lot acceptance air content is the average of all the test results for the lot .
in cases where the measured air content within a lot varies by more than num percentage points a separate air content pay factor will be computed for each test result and the lot air content pay factor will be the average of the individual test result pay factors .
the pay factor for each lot based on air content is determined from the following table table num air content pay factors lot acceptance air content classes general pave deck overlay and structure concrete used when mix design incorporates num inch nominal maximum aggregate gradation air content x air content pay factor pfac air content x air content pay factor pfac x num  num x num  num num x num  num num  num x num  num num  num num x num  num num  num x num  num num  num num x remove and replace num x remove and replace num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num the pay factors shown will be used when the department determines the air content of the inplace concrete is acceptable at percentages less than specified .
the department may require removal and replacement or corrective action for any concrete not in accordance with the required air contents .
in addition to the air content pay factor coating concrete with an approved penetrating epoxy sealer at no cost to the department will be required any time concrete having an air content less than num num for concrete containing num inch nominal aggregate for classes deck overlay and structure concrete allowed to remain in place .
air content pay factors will not be used on class drilled shaft concrete .
c. permeability .
concrete permeability will be determined at num days in accordance with either aashto t num table num or aashto tp num table num .
the lot acceptance permeability is the average of the test results for the lot .
the pay factor for each lot based on permeability is determined from table num or num .
table num concrete permeability pay factors coulombs lot acceptance permeability x coulomb classes deck and overlaynum lot chloride permeability test result x coulombs permeability pay factor pfp num x  num num x num  num num num num num x num  num num num num x num num note num if class structure is specified for a bridge deck the incentive may be paid but no deduction will occur for permeability results .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num table num concrete permeability pay factors kcm lot acceptance permeability x kcm classes deck and overlaynum lot chloride permeability test result x kcm permeability pay factor pfp x num  num num x num  num num  num num x num  num num  num num x num note num if class structure is specified for a bridge deck the incentive may be paid but no deduction will occur for permeability results .
the pay factors shown will be used when the department determines the permeability of the inplace concrete is acceptable with results less than specified .
the department may require removal and replacement or corrective action for any concrete not in accordance with the required permeability .
d. gradation .
concrete aggregate gradations will be determined in accordance with mt num or mt num if applicable .
the lot acceptance gradation is the average of the test results for each lot of concrete placed .
num conventional gradations .
for concrete designed with conventional gradations not in accordance with the required range for an individual aggregate fraction in accordance with section num the project manager will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal of the material .
the department will adjust the contract unit price for the concrete item in accordance with the following formula .
when there is not a separate contract unit price for an item of work or the concrete is a minor component of the contract unit price the department will reduce payment based on the contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question .
 num num num where x the sum of the individual percentages out of range on each aggregate fraction .
pf pay factor num optimized gradations .
for concrete designed with optimized gradations not in accordance with the specified tolerances in section num the project manager will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal of the material .
the department will adjust the contract unit price for the concrete contract item in accordance with the following formulas .
when there is not a separate contract unit price for an item of work or the concrete is a minor component of the contract unit price the department will reduce payment based on the contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question .
the following pay factor will be used when all gradation tests in the num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num lot produce passing results with no individual aggregate fraction out of tolerance .
 num the following formula will be used when any gradation test produces a failing result or an individual aggregate fraction is out of tolerance .
 num num num num where x the sum of percentages out of tolerance on each individual aggregate fraction reported to the whole number .
y percentage out of tolerance on the no .
num num mm sieve fraction reported to the tenth of a percent .
pf pay factor the following formulas are used to calculate the olpf and unit price adjustment adj .
all pay factors pfs pfp pfac and pfg must be num or greater for the production lot to be eligible for positive adj incentive .
if any individually calculated pay factor pfs pfp pfac and pfg is less than num the maximum value for its companion pay factor pfs pfp pfac and pfg to be used in the olpf calculation for the respective production lot will not exceed num .
no olpf can exceed num .
       num  where adj price adjustment per pay unit to be applied to the production lot quantity price contract unit price for the pay item if a pay factor is not applicable to a specific class of concrete the pay factor pf will be num .
use table num to determine pay factors applicable to specific classes of concrete .
table num pay factors for concrete pf type deck overlay structure general drilled shaft pave pfs x x x x x x pfac x x x x x pfp x x pfg x x x x x x num .
class pre concrete .
class pre concrete is evaluated for acceptance on a lotbylot basis based on the average of the numday compressive strength cylinders and variation in test results as measured by the standard deviation .
each lot will be judged against the formula fc nums where s is the standard deviation of the strengths for the three numday cylinders .
fc is the concrete strength required for final acceptance as specified in the contract .
num edition hydraulic cement concrete num num a lot is defined as all the concrete that is placed in a single precast prestressed member .
lots with any actual average cylinder strengths less than that calculated from the above formula will be rejected .
three numday compressive test cylinders will be made for each lot and each num day test cylinder sample will be randomly selected from all batches or loads .
the strengths of other cylinders made from a sample and tested at an earlier age will not be considered for acceptance purposes .
the cylinders for acceptance will be cast in accordance with mt num sampled in accordance with mt num and tested in accordance with aashto t num .
the cylinders will be cured within the curing enclosure under the exact conditions and methods used to cure the prestressed member until transfer of prestress .
after transfer of prestress the cylinders will be transported and continue curing in accordance with mt num .
num .
controlled low strength material .
clsm is evaluated for acceptance on a lot by lot basis .
a lot is defined as a single days pour or every num ydnum or nummnum of clsm placed whichever is less .
a minimum of num set of num x numinch num x num mm or num x num inch num x num mm compressive test cylinders will be made for each lot in accordance with astm dnum .
do not apply additional loads until clsm has reached its design strength .
num .
small concrete quantities .
the project manager may accept num cubic yards num mnum or less of concrete without a formal mix design .
submit a batch proportion sheet to the project manager for approval before use .
classes deck overlay and structure concrete are excluded from this exception .
num method of measurement concrete is measured by the cubic yard mnum in accordance with subsection num unless otherwise specified .
class pave concrete is measured for payment in accordance with subsection num .
class pre concrete is measured for payment in accordance with subsection num .
concrete used in precast concrete products is measured for payment in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit concrete cubic yard mnum class pave concrete is paid for in accordance with subsection num .
class pre concrete used in prestressed concrete members is paid for in accordance with subsection num .
concrete used in precast concrete products is paid for in accordance with subsection num .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num hydraulic cement concrete num edition num num section num concrete structures num description this work is constructing concrete structures and portions of prestressed concrete steel timber stone masonry and composite structures .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection bearing devices num compression joint seals num concrete num concrete sealants num expansion joint filler num reinforcing steel and structural steel num water stops num num construction requirements num foundations construct foundations in accordance with section num .
place concrete only after the foundations are inspected and approved .
num falsework construct falsework that supports the concrete work without detrimental deformation or settlement and to the plan lines and grades .
use piling to support falsework not on solid footings .
temporary camber all spans allowing for shrinkage and settlement .
the contract specifies those bridges that require a permanent camber .
provide tattletales or other approved devices at locations to indicate form settlement or deflection .
adjust falsework as required to maintain plan line and grade .
stop the work if detrimental settlement occurs in the falsework that can not be adjusted .
remove and replace all concrete work affected by detrimental settlement at contractor expense .
the contractor is responsible for the adequacy and execution of the falsework plans .
furnish a contractor approved copy of the falsework plans to the project manager upon request .
the contractor approval must be shown on the drawings .
num forms construct forms so their removal does not damage the concrete .
remove all forms and form members not designated to remain in place .
the term exposed surfaces means those concrete surfaces that are above the finished ground line .
use metal or plywood forms for exposed surfaces and countersink all bolt and rivet holes .
ensure the forms are mortartight providing a smooth finished concrete surface meeting the specified shape .
rough lumber tongueandgroove lumber and steelframed wooden panel forms may be used for surfaces not exposed in the finished structure that do not adversely affect the strength or appearance of the finished structure .
use only num type of material in any form or group of forms for exposed concrete surfaces on similar parts of a structure .
use filleted forms for reentrant angles .
chamfer forms inch num mm for all exposed corners and edges with an enclosed angle of less than num .
num concrete structures num edition num design the forms and falsework to withstand the vertical loads and horizontal pressure of the plastic concrete .
include in the design allowances for temporary construction loads .
do not place concrete exceeding the designed form pressure .
use forms for completed structures that are removable without disturbing adjacent forms .
form marks must conform to the general lines of the structure .
column form marks may be horizontal or vertical or both being as symmetrical as practical .
provide form openings that permit ready access for form cleanout inspection placement and compaction of the concrete .
provide cleanout ports at the top surface of the concrete where placing is stopped in narrow forms for walls or columns or where the bottom of the form is inaccessible .
remove all extraneous material within the forms before placing concrete .
treat the forms interior surfaces to prevent mortar adhesion .
water soak wooden forms to close shrinkage cracks .
set and maintain forms to the specified alignment grade and section and leave in place after concrete is placed for the specified time in subsection num .
form defects are cause to stop work until corrected .
fit metal tie rods or anchorages within the forms with cones or other devices that permit the rod and anchorage to be removed to numinch num mm below the surface without damaging the concrete .
use metal tie fittings that leave the smallest possible size cavities .
dry pack cavities with cement mortar to produce a sound smooth even finished surface closely matching that of the adjacent concrete after form removal .
use deck slab forms that permit vertical adjustment of the bottom of the slab form .
num placing concrete a .
general .
transport and place concrete in accordance with subsections num and num respectively .
do not allow concrete to drop from a height exceeding num feet num m unless it is within a conduit .
support bars to maintain their position as shown in the contract .
deposit concrete in small quantities at many points and then work or run it along the forms .
carefully fill each part of the forms depositing the concrete as close as possible to its final position working the coarse aggregates back from the face and forcing the concrete under and around the reinforcing bars .
do not allow concrete to segregate by falling through or over reinforcing steel tie rods or similar items .
deposit concrete around steel shapes and closely spaced reinforcing bars on one side of the steel uniformly working it until the concrete flushes under the steel to the opposite side before any concrete is placed on the opposite side or over the steel .
once the concrete has taken initial set avoid jarring the forms or straining the projecting reinforcement ends .
thoroughly consolidate all concrete except seal concrete during and immediately after depositing using mechanical vibration as follows num .
apply the vibration internally unless otherwise approved or as provided herein .
num .
vibrate the concrete at a minimum num impulses per minute or as recommended by the vibrator manufacturer .
num .
the vibration must visibly affect the concrete mass producing a numinch num mm slump over a minimum numinch num mm radius .
num .
use enough vibrators to compact each batch immediately after its placed .
num edition concrete structures num num num .
vibrate the concrete around the reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into the form corners and angles .
vibrate at the point of deposit in areas of freshly deposited concrete .
slowly insert and remove the vibrators from the concrete .
vibrate to thoroughly consolidate the concrete without causing segregation or forming localized grout areas .
vibrate at uniformly spaced points and no farther apart than twice the radius over which the vibration is visible .
num .
do not apply vibration directly to or through the reinforcement or to nonplastic sections or layers of concrete .
do not use vibrators to transport concrete in the forms .
use plastic or rubber tipped vibrator heads when placing concrete near epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
num .
supplement vibration by spading and tamping to produce smooth surfaces and dense concrete along form surfaces in corners and locations impractical to reach with the vibrators .
these requirements apply to precast piling concrete cribbing and other precast members unless the manufacturers vibration methods are approved .
place and secure all reinforcing dowels and other embedded items as specified .
clean rust scale oil dried mortar deposits or foreign material from all embedded materials before placing the concrete .
continuously place concrete in each section of the work in horizontal layers working continuously if necessary to prevent stoppage planes .
place the concrete in layers to thoroughly consolidate them with the concrete beneath .
place the succeeding layer before the previous layer has reached initial set .
compact each layer to prevent separation planes between the preceding layer and the layer being placed .
the project manager may require an emergency bulkhead if concrete placement in a section is delayed longer than num minutes .
a construction joint is any place where concrete placement has stopped and the concrete has taken initial set .
make construction joints in accordance with subsection num .
inset construction joints where a feather edge might be produced in the succeeding layer .
provide a minimum thickness of num inches num mm in all succeeding layers .
place concrete so all construction joints are across low shear stress regions and out of view to the greatest extent possible .
place deck slab concrete a minimum of num calendar days after placing diaphragm concrete or when standard compressive strength test results verify that the diaphragm concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
b. pumping concrete .
pump concrete in accordance with subsection numa .
c. concrete columns .
place concrete in one continuous operation unless otherwise specified .
allow columns to set at least num hours before placing the caps .
place concrete in the superstructure after the column forms have been stripped and the column is inspected by the project manager .
the superstructure load may be placed on the columns when the column concrete reaches num of the required numday compressive strength determined by testing standard num x numinch num x num mm or num x numinch num x num mm test cylinders .
d. reserved .
e. concrete slab and girder spans .
place slabs and girders having spans less than num feet num m in one continuous operation .
num concrete structures num edition num concrete slabs with girders spanning num feet num m or more may be placed in two operations first placing the girder stems to the bottom of the slab haunches and then placing the slab .
use shear keys made of beveled timber blocks inserted at least num inches num mm in the fresh concrete at the top of each girder stem .
place the blocks to uniformly cover about  of the girder stem top surface .
remove the blocks when the concrete has set enough to retain its shape .
do not place the slab until the girders have been in place for at least num hours .
check all falsework for shrinkage settlement and tighten all wedges to ensure minimum deflection of the stems caused by the slab weight before placing the slab .
place concrete in girder haunches less than num feet num mm high at the same time as the girder stem .
when any haunch or filler has a vertical height of num feet num mm or more place the abutment or columns the haunch and the girder in num successive stages first up to the lower side of the haunch .
second to the lower side of the girder .
third to completion .
f. concrete slipforming .
concrete barrier rails on bridges may be slipformed .
handfinish the traffic face and top of the barrier to remove air holes and other blemishes followed by a light broomed finish .
sections with concrete slumps or bulges causing barrier rail misalignment or inadequate concrete cover for reinforcing steel will be rejected .
num depositing concrete underwater use class general or drilled shaft concrete for seals specified in the contract .
all costs for concrete placed outside of the plan dimensions and any change in the seal mix design for the contractors convenience is at contractor expense .
do not place concrete underwater without project manager approval .
when it is impractical or inadvisable to dewater an excavation before placing concrete place a seal course underwater to seal the cofferdam .
place the entire seal in one continuous operation in accordance with the following use a tremie system pump directly into a tremie hopper or pump directly to the deposit point .
use tremie systems made of rigid watertight steel tube having a minimum diameter of num inches num mm with a hopper at the top .
keep the tremies discharge end submerged in the deposited concrete and the tremie tube full to the hopper bottom at all times during the concrete placement .
when a load is dumped into the hopper raise the tremie to start the flow of concrete until the load discharges to the hopper bottom .
use a tremie support that allows free movement of the discharge end and permits rapid lowering of the tremie to retard or stop the flow .
pump seal concrete in accordance with subsection numa .
have a backup concrete pump or tremie available at the site to ensure uninterrupted placing of the entire foundation seal .
pump concrete into a tremie meeting the placing requirements for tremieplaced concrete .
when concrete is pumped directly the discharge tube must be a rigid pipe extending at least num feet num m above the water level during placement .
the discharge line from the top of the rigid pipe to the concrete pump may be flexible .
prevent water from entering the tube while placing concrete .
fill the tubes without washing the concrete .
num edition concrete structures num num place concrete in a consolidated mass without disturbing it once deposited .
do not place concrete in running water or expose it to the action of water before it has reached final set .
keep water still at the point of deposit .
do not pump from the cofferdam while depositing concrete underwater .
make all formwork retaining concrete underwater practically watertight .
deposit concrete to produce horizontal surfaces .
after the seal concrete has cured and can withstand the hydrostatic pressure dewater the cofferdam and place the remaining concrete in the dry .
prepare the top surface of the foundation seal in accordance with subsection num before joining fresh concrete to the seal concrete .
remove high spots to provide the clearances for reinforcing steel or projection of embedded piling .
num construction joints obtain the project managers approval for construction joint locations .
if the concrete develops initial set due to placement delays the stopping point is considered a construction joint .
place concrete continuously from joint to joint .
make the joints perpendicular to the principal lines of stress and locate them at points of minimum shear .
place a gauge strip at least num inches num mm thick at all horizontal construction joints and at other directed locations inside the forms along all exposed faces to provide a straight line for the joints .
before placing fresh concrete against set concrete draw the forms tightly against the set concrete face and remove all gage strips and key forms .
remove all latence loose and foreign materials from the surface by sandblasting highpressure water cutting or light bushhammering .
keep the surface moist until resuming concrete placement .
apply a thin coat of neat cement to the surface or coat as specified just before resuming concrete placement .
bond the successive courses by keying or doweling as shown in the contract at the top layer of each days work and at other points where work is interrupted .
num joints for bridge approach slabs construct and seal joints between concrete approach slabs and structures or concrete pavement as specified .
use forms for joints that are removable without damaging the concrete .
protect the joint from damage and prevent debris and foreign material from entering the joint before installing the seal .
limit construction equipment and other vehicles operated directly across the joint to rubber tired equipment unless approved joint protection is used .
repair all spalls fractures breaks or voids in the concrete joint surfaces as approved .
before placing the seal clean the joints by abrasive blast or other similar methods followed with highpressure air jets to remove all residue and foreign material .
protect expansion joint filler from the blast .
make joint surfaces surfacedry when placing the seal .
num cold weather concreting perform cold weather concreting in accordance with subsection num .
num curing concrete cure concrete in accordance with subsections num and num .
num removal of forms and falsework do not release loosen or remove forms or falsework without the project managers approval .
this approval does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the safety of work .
num concrete structures num edition num remove all forms blocks and bracing .
remove mortar lips and all irregularities caused by form joints .
the presence of honeycombed areas may cause rejection of the work and upon written notice require removal and rebuilding of the work in whole or part at contractor expense .
after the forms are removed cut back and repair all projecting wires tie bolts and other metal form ties passing through the concrete in accordance with subsection num .
repair honeycombed concrete in all parts of the work and voids and depressions in exposed portions of the work as follows num .
chip back all coarse and broken material to a dense uniform concrete surface with exposed solid coarse aggregate .
num .
cut back feather edges to form faces perpendicular to the surface being patched .
num .
saturate all cavity surfaces with water and apply a thin layer of neat cement .
num .
fill the cavity with a thick mortar mixed in the same proportions as the concrete used in the work and at the same temperature as the surface against which the mortar is placed .
use a blend of hydraulic cement white hydraulic cement and sand proportioned to match the color of the concrete being repaired .
tamp the mortar into place and float the surface using a wooden float before initial set takes place .
cure the patch in accordance with subsection num .
for patching large or deep areas add coarse aggregate to the patching material to provide a dense wellbonded and cured patch .
pull or remove all falsework piling numfoot num mm below the finished ground line or streambed unless otherwise specified .
num concrete finish a. broomed finish .
finish the surface of concrete curbs and sidewalks to the lines and grades in the contract .
work the concrete until the coarse aggregate is forced into the body of the concrete and no coarse aggregate is exposed .
float the surface with a wooden float producing a smooth and uniform surface .
apply a broom finish to curbs or sidewalks .
the texturing broom may be any medium stiff bristled broom .
broom at right angles to the curb face or sidewalk and produce a uniform close spaced texture not exceeding inch num mm deep .
b. bridge decks .
finish deck slabs by the machine method excluding small or irregularly shaped areas where a machine is impractical .
num .
machine method .
use a selfpropelled transverse finishing machine to strike off and finish the surface of deckslab concrete .
furnish the project manager information on the location and method of rail support size of rail members and a description of the machine .
trialrun the finishing machine over the entire deck area to be finished before placing any concrete .
make the trial run with the machine and rails set to the specified grade and section .
attach a spacer to the bottom of the strikeoff inch num mm in thickness less than the concrete cover shown in the contract .
adjust the support rails to compensate for deadload deflections in the bridge girders .
adjust transverse strikeoff support rails to match any changes in the deck section .
make transverse rail adjustments to maintain the specified surface tolerances .
record trial run transverse rail adjustments for use during the deck finishing operations .
make all adjustments to maintain proper grade section concrete cover over slab reinforcement and slab thickness before any concrete is placed .
while placing the concrete make enough strikeoff passes to produce the required profile and section .
num edition concrete structures num num maintain the heading of concrete placement nearly parallel to and not more than num feet num m ahead of the strikeoff .
the concrete carried ahead of the strikeoff must not cause wheel slippage or other unsatisfactory operation .
orient the transverse axis of the finishing machine parallel to centerline of bearing on all prestress and steel girder spans skewed more than num .
make the concrete placement heading parallel to the strikeoff heading to produce equal loads on each girder .
num .
hand finishing .
obtain the project managers approval for hand finishing on deck slabs .
strike off concrete using a template or vibrating screed and finish to a smooth even surface meeting the required profile and section using longitudinal and transverse floating .
power trowels are not allowed .
num .
straightedging .
test the plastic concrete surface for surface smoothness behind the finishing machine with a numfoot num m straightedge .
ensure the straightedge contacts the surface in successive positions parallel to the centerline of roadway across the entire slab width .
make longitudinal advances in maximum numfoot num m increments .
immediately fill depressions with fresh concrete consolidate strike off and finish .
remove high areas with a numfoot num m cutting straightedge and refinish .
correct all other surface defects using a numfoot num m float or combination float and cutting straightedge .
provide footbridges that clear span the fresh concrete for complete finishing texturing curing straightedge testing and surface correction .
continue straightedge testing and surface correction until the entire surface meets the specified surfacesmoothness requirements .
limited hand floating may be used to correct defects left by the finishing machine .
hand floating is not required if the machinefinished surface meets surface smoothness requirements and is free of defects .
num .
bridge deck surface texture .
perform transverse deck grooving prior to allowing traffic on the new deck .
after the project manager has approved the finished deck surface and concrete has cured for the specified cure period saw cut transverse grooves into the finished deck .
use grooving equipment capable of saw cutting  numinch num num mm wide and num numinch num num mm deep at num numinch num num mm centertocenter spacing .
do not overlap grooves during succeeding passes .
terminate grooves numfoot num mm from the face of rail or face of barriers and num inches num mm from the paving notch guard angles or expansion joints .
num .
broom texture .
handfinish the traffic surface of curbs sidewalks and other horizontal surfaces to receive a broom finish in accordance with subsection numa .
num .
surface smoothness .
the finished surface must not vary more than numinch num mm from a numfoot num m straightedge placed parallel to the roadway centerline .
high spots are measured as  the distance between the end of the straightedge and the pavement surface with the straightedge centered on the apex and the opposite end held in contact with the surface .
low spot variations are measured as the distance from the straightedge to the surface with the straightedge centered on the low point .
correct unacceptable surface variations by grinding off high spots and patching or filling low areas .
subsequent surface sealing will not be required where the grooved surface is produced using a diamondfaced sawtype cutter for grinding .
num concrete structures num edition num perform surface sealing as follows for areas ground using conventional star wheeltype cutters .
seal all areas where removal exceeds inch num mm in depth with an approved concretecolored lowviscosity epoxyresin adhesive .
produce a nonskid texture using a steeltine broom or by applying mediumcoarse silica sand to the plastic epoxy surface .
meet the surface smoothness requirements .
num .
protective remedial and corrective work on deck slab concrete .
do not place concrete for deck slabs and stop work when rain appears imminent .
take immediate action to strike off all concrete in place to promote drainage and prevent ponding .
do not perform placing or finishing work that manipulates the concrete during precipitation .
deck slabs areas where precipitation has been incorporated into the concrete may be rejected .
make a maximum num light passes with a straightedge float to remove excess water after the precipitation stops .
protective work is that work necessary to protect unhardened concrete from damage by hail and rain .
this includes covering the concrete with a protective covering when conditions warrant .
remedial work is that work to restore a surface profile and texture on unhardened raindamaged concrete .
concrete damaged by rain to the extent the texture is obliterated and has a sandy appearance may be repaired by removing excess water and restoring it to the specified surface smoothness and texture .
hardened concrete is concrete that is nonplastic and does not allow the vibrator to penetrate under its own weight .
corrective work is work to provide an acceptable profile and texture on hardened raindamaged concrete .
do not place fresh concrete against hardened concrete until a construction joint is placed in accordance with subsection num .
correct areas exceeding the specified surfacesmoothness tolerance and areas where the specified texture can not be produced by grinding and grooving using concrete grinding machines .
use a diamond saw type grooving machine .
grooves may be either longitudinal or transverse .
space grooves at inch num mm centers and be inch num mm wide by  to numinch deep num to num mm .
grooving is not required on areas that measure num feet num m or less in length parallel to centerline of roadway .
do not grind or groove so that concrete cover is reduced over the top reinforcing bars to less than num inches num mm .
remove replace or overlay areas that can not be corrected to the required surface smoothness and texture by grinding and grooving .
submit proposed overlay methods in writing to the project manager for approval before use .
remove all latence and hardened excess concrete from construction joints before placing curbs barriers or other concrete .
furnish all protective remedial and corrective work to provide an approved deck slab at contractor expense .
c. bridge seats and tops of walls .
bring the concrete at bridge seats and tops of walls up to the required grade elevation strike off with a straightedge and float to a smooth uniform texture .
slope the concrete surfaces in areas of bridge bearing assemblies to drain water away from the bearing devices as specified .
num edition concrete structures num num bushhammering is permitted only for leveling the concrete surface under the bearing plate and removing latence and loose and foreign material .
bushhammer to produce full level bearing .
when necessary place shims in accordance with subsection num .
d. ordinary finish .
an ordinary finish is the concrete surface left once the forms are removed and all holes caused by form ties trapped air and all other defects are repaired .
the finished surface must be true and even free from stone pockets depressions or projections beyond the surface .
ordinary finish is produced as follows soak the concrete surface with water and use the patching mortar specified in subsection num working it into the small air holes and other voids in the concrete face with a sponge float or wooden float .
rub off excess mortar after the mortar is partially set using burlap or carpet .
remove uneven mortar surfaces that have set too hard by rubbing the entire surface with a carborundum stone and water .
produce a finished surface that is uniform in texture and color .
rubfinish all surfaces not repairable by the ordinary finish method in accordance with subsection nume .
the ordinary finish may not be required for exposed vertical concrete surfaces listed below if the forming produces a true and uniform surface and minor defects are repaired as specified interior surfaces of box type concrete structures such as culverts stockpasses and minor grade separations or concrete diaphragms for prestress girders or pier shafts abutment walls columns struts crossbeams or other substructure components located where they are not readily subject to public access or view .
in general substructure elements on bridges in undeveloped rural areas and more than num feet num m from the edge of the public road located in or over streams not used extensively for recreation or exclusively over railway property are not considered subject to public access and view .
good forming practice is considered as using materials with a smooth surface free from holes tears dents and gouges using the largest practical pieces to minimize joints arranging joints to be vertically or horizontally symmetrical and using bracing to prevent bulges offsets and other major defects in the concrete surface .
repair major surface defects and finish the substructure unit surface or other structural components to a uniform appearance .
major surface defects are large rock pockets offsets at form joints exceeding inch num mm bulges projections and depressions that deviate from the surface plane by more than inch num mm in any numfoot num m length and all other defects that reduce plan reinforcing bar cover by more than inch num mm .
minor surface defects may be corrected without finishing the surrounding surface .
remove mortar fins even with the surrounding surface .
fill air holes exceeding inch num mm in the longest dimension with mortar and strike off even with the surrounding surface .
patch minor rock pockets tie holes and the like as specified in subsection num .
num concrete structures num edition num e. rubbed finish .
after concrete has hardened saturate the surface with water and rub using a mediumcoarse carborundum stone with a small quantity of mortar on its face .
approved bonding agents may be used .
use mortar consisting of cement and fine sand in the same proportions used in the concrete being rubbed .
when forms are removed while the concrete is green wet the surface and rub it with a wooden float .
if approved the thin mortar described above may be used for rubbing .
continue rubbing until all form marks projections and irregularities are removed all voids filled and a uniform surface is obtained .
keep the paste produced by rubbing moist and allow it to set for at least num days .
smooth the surface by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water .
rub to produce a smooth texture and uniform color over the entire surface .
after the final rubbing is complete and the surface has dried rub the entire surface with burlap to remove loose mortar .
the finished surface can not have unsound patches paste powder or objectionable marks .
f. special tooled finish .
produce special tooled finishes using a bushhammer a pick a crandall or other approved tool .
use air tools unless otherwise directed .
do not begin tooling until the concrete has set for at least num days or longer if necessary to prevent picking the aggregate out of the surface .
produce a finished surface showing broken aggregate in a matrix of mortar each aggregate particle being in slight relief .
num installation of expansion and contraction joints construct expansion and contraction joints in accordance with the contract .
a .
open joints .
construct open joints by inserting and removing a template made of wood metal or other approved material .
remove the template without chipping or breaking the concrete corners .
do not extend reinforcement across an open joint unless specified .
b .
filled joints .
construct poured expansion joints similar to open joints .
use filler material listed on the qpl and in accordance with subsection num .
when premolded expansion joints are specified the thickness of installed filler is specified in the contract .
match the joint filler to the shape and size of the surfaces to be joined and fix it firmly against the existing surface .
do not displace the joint filler while placing concrete .
where more than one piece of filler is used to cover any joint surface place the abutting pieces in close contact and join them together with a layer of asphaltsaturated roofing felt .
use a minimum numpound num kgmnum grade roofing felt having one side covered with hot asphalt .
the filled joints will be inspected immediately after the forms are removed .
neatly cut and remove all concrete or mortar that has sealed across the joint .
fill openings in deck slab joints during construction with an approved tar or asphalt as directed .
place the necessary dowels loadtransfer devices and other devices as specified .
c. steel joints .
fabricate and paint the joints as specified .
ensure that the surface in the finished plane is true and free of warping .
hold joints in the correct position during concrete placement .
use the openings at expansion joints shown in the contract correcting for installation temperature .
maintain the required clearance .
d. water stops .
place water stops as specified .
num placing anchor bolts install anchor bolts and dowel bars by one of the following methods securing in position prior to casting concrete num edition concrete structures num num drilling and grouting or forming holes and grouting .
determine the final bolt and dowel locations making allowance for thermal effects on the superstructure at the time of grouting .
ensure that all anchor bolts for shoe assemblies project above the plane of the substructure concrete to provide full anchor bolt and nut engagement after the final placement of the shoe assemblies .
form holes by inserting treated wood plugs or metal pipe sleeves into the plastic concrete and withdrawing the devices after the concrete has partially set .
form holes at least num inches num mm in diameter to allow for horizontal adjustment .
drill holes at least numinch num mm larger than the diameter of the anchor bolts .
verify diameter and depth before setting the beams .
use an approved nonshrink or epoxy grout and fill holes  full .
force bolts and dowels down using uniform even pressure or light blows with a hammer until the grout rises to the top of each hole and the bolts and dowels are inserted to the correct depth .
remove all excess grout and clean the metal surfaces for painting .
if below freezing temperatures are expected a non shrink or epoxy grout product formulated specifically for use at temperatures below freezing must be submitted for approval prior to grouting .
protect holes against damage from ice by filling with a nonevaporating antifreeze solution .
before grouting remove the antifreeze and thoroughly flush the holes with clean water .
install the anchor bolt nuts as shown in the contract .
tighten the upper nut against the lower nut so neither nut can be turned by hand .
correct all inaccuracies in bolt and dowel locations using approved methods at contractor expense .
num setting shoes and bearing plates set shoes and bearing plates in accordance with subsection num .
num drainage holes and weep holes construct drainage holes and weep holes as specified .
place ports and vents for equalizing hydrostatic pressure where required .
forms for weep holes through concrete may be wood clay pipe pvc pipe concrete drain pipe wooden boxes or metal .
remove wooden forms if used after the concrete is placed .
paint or galvanize exposed metal drain surfaces as specified .
num pipes conduits and ducts install and rigidly brace pipes conduits and ducts encased in concrete before the concrete is placed .
furnish and install numinch num mm length plastic pvc pipe or approved equal in the bottom slab at the low point of each box girder cell to provide drainage for each cell .
extend the pipe inch num mm below the bottom of the slab and flush with the slabs top surface .
num loading of piers and abutments do not place any superstructure load on finished bents piers or abutments until approved .
the minimum time before any superstructure load is placed on the substructure is num days unless otherwise approved .
num silane sealer apply silane sealer after the deck has been cast for at least num days and after transverse deck grooving is completed .
num concrete structures num edition num remove any grease oil or other contaminants on the deck surface by sandblasting the contaminated areas .
sandblast all area of the deck surface where vehicular traffic has been present .
power wash the entire deck surface to remove concrete swarf dirt dust and other debris .
allow the deck to dry until it is visibly dry with no ponding or dark areas indicating moisture in the concrete surface .
temporarily plug any deck drains and take any other precautions as necessary to ensure that the sealer is not allowed to drip off the deck .
apply sealer in accordance with manufacturers recommendations until refusal .
refusal means that additional applications remain on the surface of the concrete and does not soak in .
provide the project manager with the manufacturers recommendations for application and storage .
num bridge deck crack sealing a. submittals .
submit num copies of the following to the project manager for review prior to beginning work num .
a msds for each shipment of the crack sealant components .
num .
if high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm is supplied provide certification from an independent testing laboratory that the materials meet the contract requirements .
num .
the dates of manufacture of the deck sealant materials their lot numbers and date of shelflife expiration for each lot number .
num .
a table showing the likely cure time in minutes for the allowable ambient temperature range in increments of num f num c. num .
a work plan for each structure that includes estimated times for surface preparation and sealant application .
b .
material delivery and storage .
store sufficient quantities of sealant materials at the site to perform the entire application .
store these materials in their original containers and according to the manufacturers direction .
these containers must bear the manufacturers label .
the label must show the manufacture date the batch number the trade name brand and quantity .
store containers of promoters and initiators in a manner that prevents leakage or spillage .
c. surface preparation .
clean all concrete surfaces for bridge deck crack sealant according to the manufacturers recommendations .
remove curing compound laitance grease dirt dust salt oil asphalt coating and other foreign materials .
select the size of shot or sand and travel speed of the equipment to provide a uniformly clean surface with a uniform profile .
sand blast areas that are not cleaned with the shot blast equipment .
remove striping to the maximum extent determined to be practical by the project manager using up to num passes with shot blasting sandblasting or other approved equipment .
d. application .
follow the manufacturers recommendations .
the deck surface must appear dry to a visual inspection at the time of bridge deck crack sealant operations .
the application rates may vary depending on field conditions .
pretreat visible cracks if required .
fill the cracks and keep them full .
continue the pretreating process until refusal of the crack to accept the material .
apply the resin to the deck within num minutes of complete mixing .
redistribute excess material continuously using squeegees or brooms and stop before resin gels .
for hmwm applications provide a manufacturers representative on site for the duration of the work to provide expert assistance on storage mixing application clean num edition concrete structures num num up and disposal of materials .
the manufacturers representative is required to assist the contractor in determining the application rates .
broadcast sand mechanically over the entire treated area of the bridge deck to obtain a visually uniform coverage of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum .
spot sand as necessary to ensure complete coverage .
apply the sand prior to deck sealant cure to ensure adequate bonding .
remove excess sand as required .
e. limitations .
do not use material after the shelf life date .
cover membrane and elastomeric material in deck joints plug deck drain scuppers seal cracks on underside of deck and use other protective measures to protect waterways and bridge components .
replace or repair bridge components if materials or solvents harm their appearance or function at no cost to the department .
the following conditions govern work on each individual portion of a structure unless otherwise approved by the project manager in writing .
num .
do not apply deck sealant materials within num hours after a rain or when more than num probability of rain is forecast within num hours following the application .
num .
conduct the work in a continuous operation with the bridge deck crack sealant application immediately following surface preparation .
num .
apply hmwm treatment only if the deck surface temperature and the air temperatures are between num and num f num and num c and the weather forecast shows air temperatures will remain within that range for at least num hours after the end of the application .
apply epoxy treatment at temperature requirements in accordance with manufacturer recommendations .
do not permit traffic on the treated surface until the sand cover adheres sufficiently so that no tracking will occur .
f. new bridge slab construction .
upon completion of the water cure and prior to transverse grooving and silane treatment treat all visible cracks with crack sealer .
in areas where crack sealer has puddled spread sand on the surface in an amount to ensure adequate skid resistance .
visible cracks are cracks that can be seen unaided from about num feet num m above the deck .
the project manager will determine the locations where crack sealing is required .
num opening to traffic open concrete deck bridges to traffic only with the project managers approval .
do not open concrete bridge decks to traffic when the air temperature during the cure period is num f num c or higher until one of the following is met num .
twentyone days after placing concrete unless standard strength test results indicate more time is required or num .
test results on fieldcured test cylinders indicate that at least num of the required minimum strength has been attained .
two cylinders constitute a test with the test strength being the average of the strengths of the num individual cylinders .
the project manager will determine the opening date when the ambient temperature during the cure period has been lower than num f num c. num acceptance repair or replace all defective work at contractor expense .
remove and replace the entire section at contractor expense when the project manager determines the repair is not adequate .
acceptance of the bridge deck concrete placement and water cure is based on meeting the following requirements num .
proper use of fogging num .
proper water cure and num concrete structures num edition num num .
application of silane sealer .
the project manager will determine if these items meet this specification .
the project manager may apply a num deduct on each separate pour for each item that does not meet specifications .
no incentive will be awarded for pay factors calculated from subsection num if any deductions are applied .
the department may require corrective action for any concrete not in accordance with the contract at contractor expense .
num method of measurement concrete is measured in cubic yards mnum from the plan dimensions .
plan quantities will not be remeasured except as specified in subsection num .
fillets scorings and chamfers num inches num mm or less in the greatest dimension are omitted from the quantity calculations .
no deductions are made for the concrete volume displaced by reinforcing steel structural steel prestressed beams anchor bolts drains weep holes joint fillers conduits or junction boxes .
deductions are made for the concrete volume displaced by steel and concrete piles .
when ordered in writing by the project manager concrete quantities placed outside neat lines are calculated and added for payment .
no measurement is made for forms falsework cofferdams bracing and the like .
crack sealing is measured by the square yard mnum of deck surface area treated .
when required as part of new bridge construction crack sealing will be measured in accordance with subsection num .
fogging water cure and silane sealer are not measured for payment .
transverse deck grooving is measured in square yards mnum for the actual area grooved .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made in accordance with the following a .
the calculated quantities involved in changes ordered in writing by the project manager are added or deducted from the contract quantities .
b .
a recalculation will be made and the corrected quantity included for payment in lieu of the contract quantity when the contract quantity of any complete structure element is in error by num or more .
a complete structure element is the smallest portion of a total structure for which a quantity is included in the estimated plan quantities table shown in the contract .
the party to the contract requesting an adjustment in quantity must present to the other party num copies of the description and location and recalculated quantities of the structure element that has the quantity error .
c. all classes of concrete placed in bridges are subject to a payment reduction based on lot payment factors in accordance with subsection numbnum .
partial payments for structure elements will be made based on the contract quantities as follows num .
num of superstructure concrete when deck forms are complete in place .
num .
num when all types of concrete are placed .
num .
num when curing is complete .
num .
num when all finishing is complete .
num .
num when the structure element area is cleaned up to the project managers satisfaction .
num edition concrete structures num num pay item pay unit bridge deck crack seal square yard mnum concrete cubic yard mnum transverse deck grooving square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num concrete structures num edition num num section num prestressed concrete members num description this work is the furnishing and placing of precast prestressed concrete beams slabs piling and other structural members .
num materials num concrete furnish concrete in accordance with section num .
num reinforcing steel furnish reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num .
obtain the project managers written approval for reinforcing steel substitutions .
state on the fabrication drawings showing reinforcing steel details the following or similar words all dimensions are outtoout .
num steel rods and bolts furnish rods used as dowels and bolts in accordance with subsection num .
num prestress steel furnish high tensile strength steel wire in accordance with subsection num .
furnish the typical loadelongation curves for all shipments of prestress steel to the fabrication plant .
ensure all prestress steel used in the work is free of rust corrosion dirt oil spatter from welding or flame cutting kinks bends nicks broken wires or other defects .
prestress steel is sampled in accordance with mt num .
num enclosures use metallic enclosures excluding aluminum or forms using removable cores or ducts made of rubber or other approved material .
remove cores and ducts before installing the prestress steel .
use enclosures that are mortar tight and maintain their shape when subjected to loading .
use enclosures that are inch num mm larger in internal diameter than the bar cable strand or group of wires being enclosed .
equip cores or ducts with pipes or other connections for grout injection when pressure grouting is specified .
num structural steel furnish structural steel in accordance with subsection num .
num elastomeric bearing devices furnish elastomeric bearing devices in accordance with subsection num .
num fiber reinforced pads for bearing plates furnish fiber reinforced pads in accordance with subsection num .
num deck sealer furnish deck sealer for precast prestressed deck sections which is listed on the qpl and in accordance with subsection num .
num prestressed concrete members num edition num num leveling inserts furnish leveling inserts for precast prestressed deck sections designed for a minimum working tension of num lbs .
num kn and have machine threaded ferrules .
use inch num mm minimum diameter structural connection type leveling inserts .
num construction requirements num fabrication fabricate all prestressed concrete members using a manufacturing plant currently certified by the prestressed concrete institute or the national precast concrete association in the category applicable to the member being fabricated .
the department will make an exemption for new manufacturing plants that are of the same ownership as an existing certified plant provided the new manufacturing plant operates under the same quality assurance and control programs as the certified plants modified to address any production differences and all fabrication is performed under the direct supervision of a quality assurance and control manager provided by an existing prequalified plant .
direct supervision means that the quality assurance and control manager is on site during all fabrication performed in the new fabrication plant and is responsible for the quality assurance and control activities .
furnish a copy of the plants current certification in the applicable category along with the fabrication drawings for the elements to be fabricated .
for new manufacturing plants submit and receive approval of any proposed modifications to the parent plants quality assurance and control program prior to beginning production .
allow num business days from the date submitted for department review and approval .
the fabricator may prestress by pretension or posttensioning the member subject to the contract requirements .
obtain written approval before changing the prestressing details .
num fabrication drawings before casting members submit fabrication drawings and designs calculations to the project manager .
show complete details of the method materials and equipment proposed for use in prestressing .
include in the fabrication drawings the following information num .
an erection layout of the members placed in the structure or structures with each prestress member assigned a production number .
mark each completed member with an assigned number num .
a tentative fabrication schedule num .
the proposed mix design including admixtures num .
the prestress steel manufacturers name and the applicable specifications num .
details of the method and sequence of stressing including the numbered or lettered layout to be followed to stress the member .
show complete details of the proposed method for tensioning the draped strands .
include in the details gauge and elongation readings for initial intermediate and final tensioning as well as the deflection sequence where applicable num .
complete details including anticipated camber tensioning forces initial and final and required concrete strengths transfer and numday num .
a complete detensioning procedure for the castings num .
details of items to be incorporated into the beam such as chairs inserts holddowns etc .
listed by source type size or capacity and supplier num edition prestressed concrete members num num num .
show all items incidental to the beams such as bearing plates rocker assemblies anchor bolts etc .
if supplied by the beam fabricator .
include the specification and grade of all steel items num .
all information and data required for fabrication num .
show the tack welding procedures num .
detail the use of all external weights or holddowns if used .
if weights are not required note it on the fabrication drawings num .
show the finish for all steel members incorporated in the beams .
for galvanized items identify the applicable specification .
for painted items specify paint type manufacturer and recommended dried film thickness for each coat applied in the shop .
also identify surface preparation for each item to be painted .
for paint requirements refer to section num num .
submit welder certifications and welding procedure specifications for all welding done to any member incorporated into the beam .
for welding requirements see subsections num and num and num .
for precast prestressed deck sections a show the location of the leveling inserts and b drawings of the proposed leveling system .
show all changes from the prestressed details in the contract .
submit num copies of shop drawings on num x num or larger sheets and num copies of welding procedures and design calculations on num x num or larger sheets to the project manager .
shop drawings design calculations and welding procedures may be furnished in adobe acrobat reader .pdf format in lieu of the hard copies .
ensure the submittal includes all information required to check the structural accuracy and fabrication procedures for the structure .
structural shop drawings must be designed and stamped by a professional engineer registered and licensed to conduct engineering in the state of montana .
do not begin fabrication until the department approved drawings are received by both the plant and the department inspector .
coordinate the fabrication schedule with the department inspector .
num design of concrete mixtures the prestressed girder concrete must have a minimum ultimate compressive strength of num psi num mpa at transfer of prestress and num psi num mpa at num days .
the actual required strengths are specified in the contract .
furnish a concrete mix design that produces concrete meeting the specified compressive strengths before use .
approved changes to the mix design may be permitted during fabrication .
use a concrete design of between num to num sacks of cement per cubic yard num num kgmnum of concrete .
establish the class pre concrete slump range between num and num inches num and num mm .
the high and low limits of the range may not exceed num inches num mm .
the range may be changed with the engineers approval .
num forms use steel side and bottom forms .
end bulkhead forms may be steel or plywood .
form joints and strand exits through bulkhead forms that are mortar tight .
check the grade and alignment of side forms before casting .
check the beam bed alignment for displacement while placing the concrete .
construct beam bed forms to limit movement to not exceed inch num mm from a straight line in any numfoot num m length of the bed .
use clean forms that are free from warp bulge and other defects .
num prestressed concrete members num edition num do not exceed a maximum offset of numinch num mm where form sections are joined .
treat the form facing with a bond breaker before each casting .
form treating materials that stain or react with concrete are not permitted .
apply form oil or other bond breaker materials without contaminating the prestress strand and reinforcing steel .
clean soiled strand or reinforcing with a noncontaminating solvent .
chamfer all exposed concrete edges excluding the beam top with an enclosed angle of less than num .
use chamfer strips having no irregularities and maintain smooth joints with the chamfer tightly fitted against abutting forms .
fit forms with a grade strip or other positive control to establish the nominal depth of the beam .
use forms that can be removed from the member without damaging the concrete .
identify production form dimensions that vary from the contract beam dimensions on the fabrication drawings .
num placing reinforcing steel place and secure all reinforcing steel as shown in the contract before placing concrete .
fasten all bars at all intersections with adjacent bars .
do not tack weld reinforcing steel if the reinforcing bar is a stresscarrying member .
welding nonstress reinforcing bars may be permitted with the engineers approval .
reinforcing steel welds not shown on the approved tacking detail or fabrication drawings are prohibited .
for convenience additional reinforcing steel may be tied in for securing inserts void ducts etc .
or may be secured by tack welding .
protect the tensioning strand from weld spatter using wet burlap or other protective covering .
replace all strands with weld spatter at contractor expense .
provide the distance between the reinforcing and side forms using approved stays ties or chairs .
do not use precast mortar blocks pebbles pieces of broken stone or brick metal pipe or wooden blocks .
provide clearance between the beam stirrups and the beam bed using metal chair supports with stainless steel or other approved corrosionresistant legs .
use reinforcing steel in the ends of prestressed beams to provide clearance for the paving notch block out void ducts embed plates and anchorages and inserts without interfering with the reinforcement spacing .
reinforcement in the prestressed member will be inspected in place and approved by the inspector before the concrete is placed .
concrete placed before inspection may be rejected .
num prestressing equipment use approved jacking equipment for prestressing .
equip hydraulic jacks with pressure gauges .
have a certified testing laboratory calibrate each jack and gauge combination as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be in at the final jacking force .
have a certified calibration chart for each jack .
other types of jacks may be used with proving rings or other approved devices calibrated by a qualified testing laboratory .
calibrate jacking equipment once each year and after each repair .
recalibration may be required if any jack or gauge gives erratic results or if the difference between the gauge reading and elongations exceed allowable limits .
equip tensioning systems with hydraulic gauges that prevent the gauge pointer from fluctuating until the jacking load is released from the tendon .
the gauge must read loads directly in pounds newtons or have a chart to convert the dial reading into pounds newtons .
ensure the gauge readings are accurate to within num .
num edition prestressed concrete members num num locate the gauges to provide the operator and inspector a clear view of elongation measurements and gauge readings .
use gauge dials graduated in increments not exceeding num pounds num kpa pressure .
the gauge range or load cells must not use the lower num of the manufacturers rated capacity in determining the jacking stress unless calibration data establishes accuracy within the num requirement at the lower range .
ensure the end anchorages and prestressed member stressing blocks can maintain the required tension in all prestressed tendons until the concrete has been placed and reached transfer strength .
equip the end anchorages and stressing blocks to detect deflection while prestressing .
the inspector will check for deflection .
provide the equipment to determine concrete compressive strengths at the location the prestressed members are manufactured .
the test equipment may be mechanical or hydraulic capable of applying and measuring the required load .
error for loads within the loading range of the test equipment may not exceed an error of num .
have a certified calibration diagram covering the entire use range with the equipment at all times .
the indicated load of the testing equipment does not have to be corrected by calculation or by the calibration diagram to obtain values when the values are within the required variation of num .
certify the concrete strength testing equipment every num years after each repair or adjustment of the equipment when a nonportable machine has been moved and whenever accuracy is in question .
num pretensioning hold the prestressing elements in position using jacks when stressing .
keep a record of the jacking force and the elongations .
multiple units may be cast in a continuous line and stressed at one time .
leave a space between the ends of the units to permit cutting of the strands .
furnish strand in coils reelless packs or on reels .
stringing may be performed by pulling single or multiple strands .
pull to gradually relieve strand rotation on coil or reelless packs .
strand with gripped points are not permitted within the lengths to be stressed .
bring all prestress tendons to the uniform initial tension on the approved fabrication drawings .
initial tension is the minimum force required to equalize stresses and eliminate slack in the strand .
submit alternate initial loading proposals for approval .
the initial load may be applied by the jack used for single strand tensioning or by any other approved method that provides a definite uniform load .
regardless of the method used measure the initial load within num pounds num n. compute elongation measurements for initial tensioning but do not use as a measurement of the initial force .
once initial tensioning is complete reference mark the strand as directed .
the mark must provide an accurate measurement of elongation by final tensioning .
measure the induced stress by gauge and check it by elongation load cell or both .
the results must agree within num .
do not permit jacking stress to exceed num of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
measure the strand elongation to within num of the theoretical elongation or inch num mm whichever is smaller .
if a discrepancy between measured elongations and gauge readings exceeds num check and correct the entire operation before proceeding with the work .
all uplift devices holddown devices and strand openings in end bulkheads must have rounded smooth surfaces at all contact points with the strand .
take gauge readings elongation measurements and make calculations for elongation and include allowances for operational losses for the tensioning system used .
these allowances must include losses for strand slippage anchor movement friction strand rotation and other forces acting on the strand .
num prestressed concrete members num edition num if the temperature difference between the strand at the time of tensioning and the concrete at the time of pouring exceeds num f num c correct the computed elongation measurements for the temperature differences .
provide copies of the elongation calculations to fabrication and inspection personnel at the beginning of production to ensure all allowances for the method of tensioning have been considered .
num final tensioning a .
single strand tensioning .
after the initial load is applied and the reference marks are established individually pull the strands to the final load .
tension each strand to the load required by the gauge reading .
the elongation measurement must be within num of the load indicated by the gauge reading .
if the load indicated by gauge reading doesnt agree with the measured elongation within the required tolerance discontinue tensioning and inspect the bed for restrictions that could affect the accuracy of the applied load .
if the measurements agree three more strands may be tensioned .
if elongation measurement and gauge readings are within the required tolerance the remaining strands may be tensioned .
as some variation in the modulus of elasticity and the crosssectional area of a strand does exist the strand tensioning may be accepted if the difference between the load determined by elongation and that indicated by the gauge does not exceed num .
a maximum num of the total number of straight strands for any one line of casting will be accepted on this basis .
if the difference between the elongation load and gauge readings exceed the limits discontinue tensioning and correct the problem .
b .
multiple strand tensioning .
mark each strand once preloaded and seated in the anchorage at both end anchorages to determine elongation and slippage .
the inspector will establish references to verify parallel movement .
measure the stressing force by the gauge system and check it by the elongation measurement .
use num load cells to verify the applied design load and check the uniformity of pull .
place one load cell on each side of the line of pull preferably on the outermost strands of an upper row of straight strands .
if the hydraulic gauge and the load cells agree with the elongation measurements within num the strands are acceptably tensioned .
if the gauge reading is within num but either or both of the load cells exceed that limit retension the strands including pre loading .
locate and place the load cells on the strands nearest to those previously gauged .
if upon retensioning the load cells are within the num tolerance no excess strand slippage has occurred and the movable anchorage has traveled the required distance the tensioning may be accepted .
if the difference between the gauge readings load cell readings and elongation measurements exceed the tolerance limit stop tensioning and correct the problem .
lubricate the jacking ram or rams guide rods and movable anchorage rails to minimize friction and run the ram through its length of travel at least four times before tensioning the strand .
c. tensioning draped strands .
draped pretensioned strands may be tensioned by partial jacking at the stressing block and subsequent depressing or uplifting to the deflected position or by tensioning to the initial and final loads with the tendons held in num edition prestressed concrete members num num the final design position using pins rollers or other devices .
use lowfriction devices at all points of slope change of the draped strand .
when draped strands are partially tensioned in the straight condition and then depressed to the final design position determination of the final load is made as follows num .
before starting the tensioning operation place a load cell at the dead end anchorage on one of the strands to be deflected in each line of beams .
num .
the inspector will select the strand to which the load cell will be placed .
num .
once tensioning is complete the load cell reading must be within num of the final design load .
should the load cell reading exceed the allowable tolerance use additional deflecting jacks to distribute friction and restraint at the deflection points or if necessary revise the entire method for applying the final design load within tolerances .
if the tensioning of draped strands indicates readings within the tolerances the inspector may require load cells for occasional checks .
if tensioning of the draped strands is performed by partial tensioning and uplift or by tensioning in the draped position submit the method for approval before use .
strand splicing using approved devices is permitted .
one splice is allowed on any one strand between anchorages .
splices must not fall within a beam .
for single strand tensioning the number of strands spliced is not restricted .
when multiple strand tensioning is used the number of strands spliced may not exceed num of the total number of strands in the casting line or all the strands must be spliced .
use only one manufacturers strand in any one tensioning operation .
use the same direction of twist of strand wires in all spliced strands .
one wire failure in num wire strands may remain in the casting subject to the following for beams with a .
less than num strands no wire breaks permitted b .
num to num strands num wire break permitted c. num to num strands num wire breaks permitted d. num or more strands num wire breaks permitted should wire breaks exceed these limits or more than one wire break in any individual strand remove and replace that strand or strands .
locate all wire breaks allowed to remain in the casting and securely wrap the broken ends with tie wire to prevent unraveling .
the fabricator may be ordered to check the prestressing steel in a tensioned member for loss of prestress before placing concrete .
the project manager will approve the checking method for loss of prestress .
retension all strands showing a loss of prestress exceeding num of the original computed jacking stress .
except as permitted in subsection num do not weld flamecut or ground welding equipment to the bed or forms after the prestress strand has been tensioned .
num placing concrete a .
general .
batch and mix concrete in accordance with subsection num except as provided below num .
provide master batch sheets to the project manager for review before production .
num .
a timing device that locks the discharge gates of a stationary mixer is not required however the mixer must not be emptied until the materials have been mixed the specified time .
num .
readymix delivery slips are not required unless specifically requested .
num prestressed concrete members num edition num the batching operation and equipment may be inspected at any time .
the work will be stopped for failure to use approved procedures or equipment .
b .
method and manner .
place concrete in accordance with subsection num and the following .
obtain the project managers approval before placing concrete in large members .
concrete may be placed in the member in a single lift if satisfactory results are obtained or in multiple horizontal lifts provided cold joints are not formed .
remove and replace concrete containing cold joints .
when concrete is placed in layers place the first lift to fill the form slightly above the juncture of the bottom flange and the beam web .
compact the concrete immediately after pouring with highfrequency mechanical vibrators operating at a minimum num impulses per minute .
apply vibration internally externally or a combination of both methods to flush the mortar to the surface of the forms .
vibrate succeeding concrete layers to extend into the previously placed layer .
use vibrators to thoroughly consolidate the concrete to a plastic mass without causing segregation .
do not permit vibrator heads to contact reinforcing steel prestressing steel or other embedded items to aid consolidation .
slowly insert and remove internal vibrators from the concrete .
have one additional vibrator available at the site at all times during concrete pours .
c. concreting in adverse weather conditions .
perform concrete work in accordance with subsection num when the ambient air temperature falls below num f num c except that the placement temperature for steamcured class pre concrete must be between num and num f num and num c at placement .
when the ambient temperature before concrete is placed is num f num c or less pre heat forms to a minimum num f num c removing all frost snow and ice from the forms and components to be embedded in the concrete .
do not permit the concrete temperature to exceed num f num c. cover open buckets of concrete with wet burlap mats or other approved coverings when necessary to prevent slump loss or premature drying .
num curing watercure or steamcure prestressed concrete members in accordance with subsection num .
num transfer of prestress prestressed strands may be released when the concrete has num .
reached the minimum compressive strength for transfer of prestress num .
the cure cycle is complete and num .
restrictive forms are removed .
if delays are anticipated maintain the temperature in the curing enclosure at a minimum num f num c until transfer of prestress .
use positive external holddowns or weights to offset the uplifting forces in the member when the holddown strands are released when required .
use a method of harped and straight strands release to hold the lateral eccentricity of prestress to a minimum .
detail the bed release and the strandcutting pattern on the fabrication drawings .
changes to the release procedures shown on the approved drawings are not permitted except by written request and the engineers written approval .
cast cylinders to determine prestressed transfer strengths using mt num and mt num as modified below cast and cure the release cylinders under the exact conditions the prestressed members were cured .
num edition prestressed concrete members num num the concrete sample for each cylinder will be selected at random from different batches .
once the cure cycle is complete test the release cylinders in accordance with aashto t num .
test num cylinders to determine the prestressed transfer strengths for each round of beam castings .
the average strengths of the num cylinders must equal or exceed fr nums where s the standard deviation of the strengths for the num cylinders fr the required concrete transfer strength as specified in the contract test all num cylinders within num minutes .
furnish the number of release cylinders required to perform these tests .
the contractor may cast additional backup test cylinders .
should the release strengths not be reached and all backup cylinders are broken put the casting through at least one additional complete cure cycle .
the project manager may direct other tests to determine release strengths .
test compression specimens using aashto t num .
while testing apply the last  of the load at a rate between num to num psi num num mpa per minute .
the inspector will witness the fabricators casting and testing of release cylinders .
num posttensioning begin tensioning of the prestress reinforcing steel when the concrete cylinders representing the member to be prestressed reach the compressive strength shown on the approved fabrication drawings .
stress the prestress reinforcing steel using jacks to the specified tension with the stress transferred to the end anchorage .
measure the tension and elongation at all times .
make a record of gauge pressures and elongation while post tensioning and submit it for review .
num bonding steel bond posttensioned steel to the concrete unless otherwise specified .
clean all dirt loose rust grease or other deleterious material from all prestress reinforcing steel .
flush all conduits with water and blow them out with compressed air after posttensioning .
remove rubber sheaths used as enclosures then flush and blow out the voids as described above .
once cleaned pressuregrout the conduit or void using a pressure not exceeding num psi num kpa .
continue grouting until a steady flow of grout exits from the pipe outlet .
close the outlet then the inlet with the grout under pressure .
maintain the final grout pressure at between num to num psi num num kpa .
num concrete surface finish perform the concrete finish work immediately after detensioning .
give the exterior surfaces of exterior members and the entire bottom flange of all girders to the juncture with the beam web an ordinary finish as specified in subsection numd .
all other beam surfaces may be left with the surface created by the forms if the surfaces are true even and free of stone pockets depressions or surface projections .
point with mortar and strike off even with the surrounding surface all air holes in the concrete measuring inch num mm or more in any direction .
repair rough uneven and nonuniform concrete surfaces num prestressed concrete members num edition num using power grinders carborundum stones brushhammers or other approved equipment and then apply an ordinary finish .
match the appearance of the surface adjacent to the repair .
apply an ordinary finish to the entire adjoining surface of the member if a match is not possible .
repair rock pockets identified for repair .
chip rock pockets back to sound concrete clean and permit inspection before patching .
rock pockets affecting the members strength will be further evaluated before repair .
notify the inspector of all members having the prestress strand exposed for num inches num mm or more on any one strand or any exposure of multiple strands before repair .
provide an ordinary finish on beam ends not embedded in concrete .
the contractor may use approved epoxy or quicksetting grout products provided the colors blend with the surrounding surface .
before finishing the beam ends cut the strands back a minimum of inch num mm and fill the depressions with an approved epoxy .
when beam ends are to be embedded in concrete the ends may be left rough and strands cut back to extend a maximum numinch num mm beyond the surface of the concrete .
cut the strands in the area of the paving notch flush with the concrete surface .
screed and roughfloat the top surface of prestressed girders to the required depth of the member bringing grout to the surface and covering all aggregate .
clean all projecting reinforcing stirrups of mortar and other foreign materials before starting the cure cycle .
num workmanship and tolerances all tolerances are applied to the theoretical positions and dimensions shown in the contract and approved fabrication drawings .
the tolerances from the plan and theoretical dimensions listed in table num are the maximum acceptable cumulative deviations .
the project manager will verify that the girders are within the allowable tolerances when the girders alignment is not influenced by temporary temperature differences between the girders surfaces .
tolerances in other manufacturing sequences can not accumulate to supersede any individual tolerance .
members having dimensions outside the tolerance limits may be rejected .
num edition prestressed concrete members num num table num tolerances for prestressed concrete members element tolerance length of beam endtoend measured at centerline of beam top or bottom flange inch num mm centerlinetocenterline of end bearing plates inch per num feet num mm per num m but no greater than inch num mm depth of flanges fillets and web inch num mm depth overall  to inch num to num mm width of flanges fillets and web  to inch num to num mm beam ends deviation from square or specified skew horizontal inch num mm vertical inch per foot num mm per num mm of beam height or inch num mm whichever is less side insert centertocenter and center to beam end inch num mm horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to centerline of the member inch per num feet num mm per num m of beam length but not greater than numinch num mm camber differential between adjacent beams measured at release of prestress to be applied only to identical members cast in same line inch per num feet num mm per num m of span to a maximum of numinch num mm stirrup bars specified projection above beam top inch num mm tendon position inch num mm in center of gravity of strand group and individual tendons position of deflection points for deflected strands numinch num mm position of handling devices along centerline of beam numinch num mm centerline of bearing plates to end of beam inch num mm bearing plates deviation from a plane perpendicular to the vertical axis of the beam numinch num mm stirrup bars longitudinal spacing numinch num mm position of posttensioning ducts inch num mm num storage and transportation exercise care during transporting storing hoisting and handling of the precast units to prevent cracking or damage .
transport precast girders and slabs in an upright position with the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the members being approximately the same during transport and storage as when the members are in the final planned position .
lift the beams using the lifting eyes .
during lifts use spreaders between slings to eliminate the horizontal component of the lifting force from being applied to the beam .
a spreader is not required when the angle between the sling and the top of the beam exceeds num .
do not move prestressed members from the casting yard until the concrete has reached the num day strength and the project manager has been notified of the intent to transport the beams .
replace units damaged by improper storing handling or transporting at contractor expense .
num placing place precast prestressed structural members as specified .
place piling in accordance with section num .
num prestressed concrete members num edition num num bearing and anchorage place masonry bearing plates in accordance with subsection num .
place anchor bolts in accordance with subsection num .
num precast prestressed deck sections a .
fabrication control .
schedule fabrication so that camber differences between adjacent deck sections are minimized .
measure camber on each deck section immediately after transfer of prestress forces .
at transfer of prestress the difference in camber between adjacent deck sections of the same design must not exceed inch num mm per num feet num meters of span length or a maximum difference of inch num mm whichever is less .
b .
general .
locate the leveling inserts so that the specified camber corrections are achieved .
center the leveling inserts over the beams web install a minimum of inch num mm below the finished deck surface and cast into the member .
fill all insert holes with a nonshrink epoxy grout in accordance with subsection num .
c. leveling .
make adjustments by use of a leveling beam and jack assembly .
attach the leveling beam to the inserts and jack the deck sections to within inch num mm at the center of the span prior to placement of the weld tie connections and diaphragms .
more than one leveling beam and jack assembly may be necessary to adjust adjacent sections .
if the prescribed tolerance between deck sections can not be attained by the approved leveling system shim the bearings of the deck sections so that the required tolerance is met throughout the span .
d. acceptance .
remove any grease oil or other contaminants on the deck surface by sandblasting .
after sandblasting powerwash the entire deck surface to remove concrete swarf dirt dust and other debris .
allow the deck to dry until it is visibly dry with no ponding or dark areas indicating moisture in the concrete surface .
apply deck sealer by spray until refusal to the cleaned dry deck .
refusal means that additional spray applications remain on the surface of the concrete and do not soak in .
ensure that a minimum of num calendar days have passed from the time the deck is cast to the application of the deck seal .
prevent chloride contamination of the deck during all stages of construction .
num method of measurement precast prestressed concrete members excluding piling are measured by the foot meter for each specified type andor size installed and accepted .
prestress beams are measured by the foot meter from centerline bearing to centerline bearing along the beam centerline .
precast prestressed deck sections are measured by foot meter for each type installed and accepted .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit precast member foot m prestress member foot m prestressed beam type foot m payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num precast concrete products num description this work is the furnishing and installing of reinforced precast concrete bridge members precast curbs barrier rails cattle guard bases guardrail posts and other precast concrete products .
num materials num concrete furnish hydraulic cement concrete in accordance with section num .
num reinforcing steel furnish reinforcing steel in accordance with section num and subsection num .
num structural steel furnish structural steel in accordance with subsection num .
num construction requirements num fabrication drawings prior to casting members submit fabrication drawings and design calculations to the project manager .
include onwith the fabrication drawings the following information num .
an erection layout with each member assigned a production number num .
a tentative fabrication schedule num .
the proposed mix design including admixtures and num .
all other information necessary to fabricate and install the product .
submit num copies of shop drawings on num x num or larger sheets and num copies of welding procedures and design calculations on num x num or larger sheets to the project manager .
shop drawings design calculations and welding procedures may be furnished in adobe acrobat reader .pdf format in lieu of the hard copies .
ensure the submittal includes all information required to check the structural accuracy and fabrication procedures for the structure .
structural shop drawings must be designed and stamped by a professional engineer registered and licensed to conduct engineering in the state of montana .
do not begin fabrication until the department approved drawings are received by both the plant and the department inspector .
coordinate the fabrication schedule with the department inspector .
num design of concrete mixtures submit a proposed mix design with the shop drawings for approval .
the contractor may request to change aggregate size and gradation to use aggregates in an established plant .
submit the request in writing and include sizes and gradation limits for each size aggregate .
furnish evidence of satisfactory performance of concrete produced from the aggregates .
do not make changes in the aggregates without approval .
num sampling handling batching and mixing sample handle batch and mix materials for concrete in accordance with subsection num .
num forms and forming meet the form requirements in subsection num .
num precast concrete products num edition num num placing concrete place concrete in accordance with subsection num .
num curing and testing concrete cure precast concrete products by water curing impervious membrane curing elevated temperature curing or a combination of these methods .
perform water curing and impervious membrane curing in accordance with subsection num .
perform elevatedtemperature steam process curing in accordance with subsection num .
submit procedures for curing by the elevatedtemperature electric coil process or a combination of methods in writing for approval before use .
perform at least num test per num cubic yards num mnum or per each days production if less than num cubic yards num mnum to verify reaching the compressive strength required to discontinue curing .
a test is the average strengths of num cylinders each cast from different batches of concrete used in the days production .
take the num samples from as many different batches as possible if more than num batches are used .
sample and cast cylinders in accordance with mt num .
cure until the compressive strength of the standard num x numinch num x num mm or num x numinch num x num mm cylinders cured under the same conditions as the concrete represented reaches the required strength for the class of concrete or the specified strength .
fieldcure cylinders a maximum num days and test for compressive strength within num hours after removal from the field curing conditions .
perform strength testing in accordance with aashto t num .
furnish the certified laboratory test results or arrange for the tests to be witnessed the department .
test results are acceptable if the average of the num cylinder strengths exceed the strength for the concrete class or the specified strength and no individual cylinder tested has a strength less than num of the specified strength .
continue uninterrupted curing until test results are obtained .
should all cylinders be tested without reaching the specified strength the concrete represented by the cylinders may be rejected .
num coldweather concreting furnish concrete at between num to num f num and num c for placing when the air temperature is less than num f num c. heat the concrete in accordance with subsection numb .
clear form work of snow ice and frost before placing concrete .
protect the concrete from freezing for at least num hours after its placed or until it reaches the strength required to discontinue curing .
after num hours provide freeze protection to develop the required strength .
construct and protect bridge components in accordance with subsection numb .
assume all risk of concrete work during cold weather .
num form removal remove lateral support forms only when it does not damage the concrete .
do not interrupt curing and protection in excess of num minutes for form removal .
num finish on exposed surfaces produce concrete surfaces free from rock pockets depressions or projections .
scattered holes from surface trapped air are not considered defects .
point holes larger than inch num mm in any direction with mortar and strike off even with the surface .
apply an num edition precast concrete products num num ordinary finish to surfaces not smooth and uniform in texture and appearance in accordance with subsection num .
num handling transporting and storage do not remove handle or transport items designed to carry loads from the casting bed before they reach the required strength .
other items may be moved from the casting bed to other curing locations when they have reached the strength to prevent damage .
replace all cracked or broken items at contractor expense .
handle transport and store precast concrete items without damage .
replace or repair all damaged items at contractor expense .
num placement place precast concrete members as specified .
num method of measurement num precast concrete curb precast concrete curb is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num precast concrete barrier rail precast concrete barrier rail is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num plain reinforced precast concrete bridge members plain reinforced precast concrete bridge members are measured in accordance with subsection num .
num precast concrete cattle guard bases precast concrete cattle guard bases are not measured or paid for separately but are included in the payment for cattle guards in accordance with subsection num .
num precast concrete guardrail posts precast concrete guardrail posts are not measured or paid for separately but are included in the payment for metal guardrail in accordance with subsection num .
num other precast concrete products other specified precast concrete products are measured and paid for as specified in the contract .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit precast concrete curb see subsection num precast concrete bridge members see subsection num precast concrete median barrier rail see subsection num payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num precast concrete products num edition num num section num reinforcing steel num description this work is furnishing protecting and placing reinforcing steel and wire fabric .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements epoxycoated reinforcing bars num reinforcing steel num wire and wire mesh num use reinforcement listed on the qpl and in accordance with section num .
num construction requirements num protection of material protect new and existing reinforcing steel from damage .
the project manager will reject damaged material or allow a repair in accordance with astm anum at contractor expense .
handle epoxycoated steel reinforcing with padded or nonmetallic slings and padded straps to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
store reinforcing and supports on wooden blocks .
cover all reinforcing steel from weather exposure using an opaque moisture resistant covering that permits air circulation .
do not permit epoxy coated reinforcing steel to be exposed to sunlight in excess of num calendar days .
num fabrication bend reinforcing bar as specified in the contract .
bend all bars cold .
do not field bend bars partially imbedded in concrete unless otherwise specified .
meet table num bend radii for standard hooks and all other bars other than stirrups and ties .
provide a minimum inside radii of num bar diameters for stirrups and ties .
table num minimum bending radii bar size minimum inside radii num thru num num thru num num bar diameters num thru num num thru num num bar diameters num or num num or num num bar diameters obtain approval for special fabrication or bends exceeding num for nos .
nums and nums reinforcing steel .
ship reinforcing bar in bundles tagged and marked in accordance with the concrete reinforcement steel institute code of standard practice .
submit fabrication drawings when specified or requested .
num placing and fastening place the reinforcing steel as shown in the contract and hold in place during concrete work .
submit a written request for approval to weld reinforcing steel to hold in place or fasten .
include in the request ansiaws procedures to be used .
ensure steel reinforcing is free of loose rust and scale dirt paint oil or other foreign material .
verify the anchor bolt clearances before placing reinforcing steel .
num reinforcing steel num edition num tie bars at all intersections unless bar spacing is less than numfoot num mm in each direction which requires alternate intersections be tied .
provide the minimum cover for reinforcing bars shown in table num .
table num minimum bar embedment bar location embedment top of slab num inches num mm bottom of slab numinch num mm stirrups and ties num inches num mm footing and pier shafts num inches num mm separate forms using stays ties hangers metal chairs blocks or other approved supports .
precast mortar blocks may be used at locations approved by the project manager excluding supports for bridge deck slab reinforcing steel .
use blocks precast from concrete used on the project and water cured for num days before use .
use blocks of the size specified having an embedded wire for fastening to the reinforcing bar .
separate bar layers using precast mortar blocks upper continuous metal chairs or other approved devices .
separate the upper and lower mats of reinforcing steel for deck slabs depending upon the vertical distance between the mats using upper continuous high chair or slab bolsters with runners .
place continuous bar supports at right angles to structure centerline for flat slab structures and parallel to structure centerline for all other deck slabs .
do not use pebbles pieces of broken stone concrete rubble broken brick or building blocks metal pipe or wooden blocks .
use metal chairs and supports contacting epoxycoated bars that are epoxy coated or coated with another inert approved coating .
use plasticcoated tie wires or tie wires coated with another inert coating approved by the project manager to tie the coated bars in place .
space deck slab reinforcing supports a maximum num feet num m. space supports closer if necessary to prevent deflection during placement of concrete .
obtain approval of reinforcing placement before placing concrete .
remove concrete placed before inspection .
flatten rolled reinforcing fabric into sheets before placing .
num splicing furnish all reinforcing steel in the specified lengths .
splice as shown in the contract or as directed .
num reinforcing steel material guaranty and random sampling furnish for each shipment of reinforcing steel delivered to the project duplicate copies of the following num .
shipping invoice showing the weight and price per pound kg of all of the steel in the shipment num .
certified mill test reports showing physical and chemical analysis on each heat of reinforcing steel num .
a statement from the fabricator certifying that the mill tests furnished are representative of the reinforcing steel furnished and that it meets subsection num requirements and num .
for epoxycoated reinforcing bars the coating applicator must furnish with each shipment a certificate of compliance confirming that the coated reinforcing bars were cleaned coated and tested in accordance with astm anum and subsection num .
additionally num edition reinforcing steel num num the certification must include for each bar size the preheat temperatures cure times thickness checks holidays detected and bend test results .
a shipment is the quantity of reinforcing steel in each truckload delivered to the project .
when delivery is by railroad car each num tons num mt or fraction thereof is a shipment .
furnish the samples as requested for testing .
do not place concrete until the steel test results are known .
if a reinforcing steel sample fails num additional samples representing the failed sample will be tested .
if either of the check samples fails the steel in the shipment represented by the failing sample may be rejected or if the project manager determines that the steel is usable a price reduction will be assessed as follows p a x b where a total invoice price of reinforcing steel in the lotnum b num num or num dependent upon departure from specifications the value to be used will be determined by the project manager p price reduction for the lot notes num .
a lot is defined as all the bars of one bar number and pattern of deformation contained in an individual shipment .
the amount of reduction calculated above will be deducted from monies due the contractor on the final estimate .
remove and replace all rejected steel at contractor expense .
furnish invoice statements mill reports and fabrication certificates for replacement steel .
replacement steel is subject to the tests specified above .
no reinforcing steel in a shipment will be final accepted until the test results are known .
the contractor may proceed with the work at its own risk before testing .
num method of measurement the reinforcing steel quantity in the contract is the calculated theoretical weight of the steel in pounds kg measured as shown in the contract or ordered in writing complete in place and accepted .
plan quantities will not be remeasured except as provided for in subsection num .
the weights of standard sizes of reinforcing bars in accordance with aashto m num are computed using table num .
num reinforcing steel num edition num table num weights of standard sizes of reinforcing bars bar size english metric bar diameter inch mm weight lbft kgm no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num nonstandard reinforcing bars or wire fabric when required have the unit weight specified in the contract .
no allowance is made for clips wires separators or other material used for fastening or supporting the reinforcing steel .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit reinforcing steel pound kg reinforcing steel is paid in place for the quantities shown in the contract except as follows num .
the calculated quantities involved in changes ordered in writing by the project manager are added or deducted from the plan quantities .
num .
a recalculation will be made and the corrected quantity will be included for payment in lieu of the plan quantity when the plan quantity of reinforcing steel in any complete structure is in error by num or more .
a complete structure is the smallest portion of a total structure for which a quantity is included in the contract .
the party to the contract requesting an adjustment must present to the other party num copies of the description location and recalculated quantities of the structure having the quantity error .
partial payments for reinforcing steel will be made based on the contract quantity as follows num .
num when the material is accepted placed and tied .
num .
num when covered with concrete .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num steel structures num description this work is the furnishing fabricating painting and erecting of steel structures and the steel structure portions of composite structures .
the department uses num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum to calculate the weight of structural steel .
the weights of rolled shapes and plates up to and including num inches num mm in width are computed based on their nominal weights and dimensions as shown on the shop drawings .
one half of the allowed percentage of overrun in weight as tabulated in astm anum will be added to the nominal weights of plates exceeding num inches num mm in width .
the weight is computed on the basis of rectangular dimensions for all plates and overall lengths for all structural shapes with no deductions for copes slips sheared edges punching borings milling or planing .
when parts can be economically cut in multiples from materials of larger dimension the calculated weight is that of the material from which the parts are cut .
bolts nuts and washer weights are the calculated weight in the aisc manual of steel construction .
weld metal weight is not computed .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements bearing assembly anchor bolts for bridges num bolts and nuts num castings num compression joint seals num elastomeric bearing devices num fiberreinforced pads for bearing plates num galvanized metal num high strength bolts num pins and rollers num structural steel num structural steel tubing num welding electrodes num welded stud shear connectors num num construction requirements for the fabrication of steel structures follow aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num prequalification for steel fabricators use metal fabricators that are prequalified under the aisc quality certification program for the items listed below .
the department will make an exemption for new manufacturing plants that are of the same ownership as an existing certified plant provided the new manufacturing plant operates under the same quality assurance and control programs as the certified plants modified to address any production differences and all fabrication is performed under the direct supervision of a quality assurance and control manager provided by an existing prequalified plant .
direct supervision means that the quality assurance and control manager is on site during all fabrication performed in the new fabrication plant and is responsible for the quality assurance and control activities .
for new manufacturing plants submit and receive approval of any num steel structures num edition num proposed modifications to the parent plants quality assurance and control program prior to beginning production .
allow num business days from the date submitted for department review and approval .
items not listed may be fabricated by noncertified shops .
use metal fabricators having the following aisc quality certification categories num .
use fabricators having advanced bridge certification to fabricate the following a. fracture critical members and attachments .
fabricators must have the fracture critical endorsement f. b .
main members including spliced rolled beams .
c. welded floor beams .
d. diaphragms for horizontally curved girders .
num .
use fabricators having intermediate bridge certification to fabricate the following a. nonspliced rolled beams .
b. nonspliced floor beams .
c. diaphragms for straight girders does not include diaphragms used for concrete beams .
num .
use fabricators having a simple intermediate or advanced bridge certification to fabricate the following a. modular expansion joints .
b .
steel grid decking .
c. overhead sign bridge and cantilever sign structures .
d. lighting poles and anchor bases .
num submittals a .
fabrication drawings .
prior to fabricating members submit fabrication drawings to the project manager .
include the following information num .
an erection layout with each member assigned a production number num .
a tentative fabrication schedule num .
denote any changes from the details in the contract num .
all dimensions geometrical information details and other data required for fabrication .
include camber information blocking diagrams and shop splices num .
denote specification grade finish required toughness testing and required surface preparation for all steel plates shapes pipes tubes bars and all miscellaneous hardware such as shear studs bolts stud bolts threaded rods nuts and washers num .
for galvanized items identify the applicable specification .
for painted items specify paint type manufacturer and recommended dried film thickness for each coat applied in the shop .
also identify surface preparation for each item to be painted .
for paint requirements see sections num and num num .
a list of field bolts and other items furnished by the fabricator num .
appropriate weld sizes symbols requirements for nondestructive testing heat cambering and bending procedures .
provide welding certifications and welding procedure specifications and any supporting documentation for all welding required for fabrication .
for welding requirements see section num and num .
welding procedure specification wps identification is required in the weld symbol tail for all weld symbols shown on the shop drawings .
submit num copies of shop drawings on num x num or larger sheets and num copies of welding procedures and design calculations on num x num or larger sheets to the project manager .
shop drawings design calculations and welding procedures may be furnished in adobe acrobat reader .pdf format in lieu of the hard copies .
ensure the submittal includes all information required to check the structural accuracy and fabrication procedures for the structure .
num edition steel structures num num structural shop drawings must be designed and stamped by a professional engineer registered and licensed to conduct engineering in the state of montana .
do not begin fabrication until the department approved drawings are received by both the plant and the department inspector .
coordinate the fabrication schedule with the department inspector .
b .
certificate of compliance .
furnish a manufacturers certificate of compliance for all bolts nuts washers and load indicator washers .
include certified mill test reports and test reports performed on the finished bolt confirming that all of the materials provided meet the requirements of the applicable aashto or astm specification .
the documentation must include the name and address of the test laboratory the date of testing lot identification and the sample sizes of bolts and nuts used for each test performed for the certification .
submit the following items to the project manager before installation num .
one copy of the certification from the supplier showing that all tests required by the aashto and astm specifications have been performed .
include the date and location of those tests as well as the production lot numbers and the sample sizes used for each test performed with the certification .
num .
one copy of the certification from the supplier showing that the wedge tests and rotational capacity tests have been performed .
also show production lot numbers dates locations and sample sizes of these tests and who performed them .
num .
three bolt nut and washer assemblies from each rotational capacity test lot for verification by the department .
do not install fasteners prior to receiving approval .
num mill and shop inspection num .
inspection of work .
do not begin manufacturing or shop fabrication until the departments inspector has inspected the shop .
num .
facilities for inspection .
furnish facilities for inspecting the material and workmanship in the mill and shop .
allow the inspector free access to the work at all times .
num .
inspectors authority .
the inspector may reject material or work not in accordance with the specifications .
in case of dispute the contractor may appeal the inspectors decision to the project manager .
num .
mill test reports .
furnish the project manager a complete certified mill test report showing chemical analysis and physical tests for each heat of steel for all members .
identify each piece of steel with a mark number on the mill test report .
num .
facilities for testing .
furnish at contractor expense test specimens labor testing machines and tools to make the specimens and tests .
num .
rejections .
material or finished members accepted by the inspector may be rejected if the material is subsequently found defective .
replace or repair rejected material at contractor expense .
num storage and handling of materials mark alloy and highstrength steels as required by the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
mark material required to meet a charpy requirement for identification .
num .
store materials off the ground and keep them clean and dry .
num .
place and store girders upright .
num .
support long members including but not limited to columns chords and girders on blocks spaced to prevent deflection .
num .
store highstrength fastener components in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num steel structures num edition num num .
store the bolts and nuts in the original containers until used .
num .
protect from dirt and moisture .
num .
remove only as many fasteners from protected storage as can be tightened during a work shift and return unused fasteners to protected storage at the end of each work shift .
num quality control prepare and follow a quality control qc plan for ensuring the quality of all work and conformance to specifications .
submit num copy of the qc plan to the project manager for review num calendar days prior to fabrication .
ensure that all nondestructive testing ndt is performed by personnel qualified in conformance with the american society for nondestructive testing asnt recommended practice no .
snttcnuma to minimum testing level ii for the individual methods .
ensure that the qc plan meets the following minimum requirements num .
ndt radiographic inspection .
inspect num of all complete joint penetration cjp groove welds .
num .
ndt ultrasonic inspection .
inspect num of all cjp groove welds on plates thicker than inch num mm .
num .
ndt magnetic particle inspection .
randomly inspect num of all welding for each member throughout the entire structure in accordance with aws dnum bridge welding code .
the project manager reserves the right to select locations for testing .
num .
personnel qualifications .
include the qualifications of the specific individuals that will be performing the qc testing .
num .
quality control manager .
identify the qc manager that will be the primary contact person for all qc communication .
ensure that this person is in charge of all qc work .
provide reports of all qc testing as the testing is completed .
identify in the reports any deviations from specifications standards or the qc plan and a discussion of why the deviation occurred .
at the completion of fabrication and before shipment provide a certification signed by the quality control manager that contains the following statement and supporting information required statement this is to certify that the quality control plan was followed and that the results of the quality control program indicate that the materials and the construction operations controlled by the quality control plan are in conformity with the approved plans and specifications .
exceptions to the plans specifications and quality control plan are described below .
num pilot and driving nuts .
furnish num pilot nuts and num driving nuts for each size of pin unless otherwise specified .
pilot and driving nuts are not required when shoes are assembled at the fabrication plant .
num bolts and bolted connections a .
general .
make bolted connections in accordance with the contract requirements .
num .
furnish bolts that are free of rust .
num .
when galvanized fasteners are specified furnish assemblies manufactured with a visible dye so a visual check verifies the lubricants presence at installation .
use black fasteners oily to the touch at installation .
num .
use beveled washers to provide full bearing to the head or nut where bolts are used on beveled surfaces .
num edition steel structures num num b. definitions .
num .
fastener assembly .
an assembly of fastener components including bolt nut washer and dti when used that are supplied tested and installed as a unit .
a fastener assembly represents one diameter and grade from the same lot .
num .
snugtight .
the condition that exists when all plies in a connection have been pulled into firm contact by the bolts in the joint and bolts have been tightened sufficiently to prevent removal of the nuts without the use of a wrench .
num .
systematic tightening .
the systematic assembly of the joint progressing from the most rigid part of the joint until the connected piles are in firm contact and the subsequent systematic tightening of all bolts in the joint progressing from the most rigid part of the joint in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened bolts .
c. unfinished bolts .
furnish standard unfinished bolts with nuts having a bolt hole diameter numinch num mm larger than the bolt diameter .
use threaded bolts transferring shear that have no more than one thread within the grip of the metal .
furnish bolts that extend through the nuts a maximum inch num mm .
num bolted connections hightensilestrength bolts a .
general .
make bolted connections as recommended by the steel structures technology centers structural bolting handbook bolting handbook .
num .
bolt lengths .
use bolt lengths having the griplength values in table num plus the total thickness of connected material .
the values in table num consider nut one flat washer and bolt point .
adjust the length to the next inch num mm increment up to a numinch num mm bolt and to the next inch num mm increment for bolts over num inches num mm .
increase the bolt length inch num mm if direct tension indicator washers are used .
table num bolt length determination bolt diameter added grip lengthnum english inch inch inch numinch inch numinch inch numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch metric mnum num mm mnum num mm mnum num mm mnum num mm note num .
add to total thickness of connected material .
num steel structures num edition num where beveled washers are used adjust bolt lengths to account for the use of nonstandard or beveled washers .
num .
bolted parts .
ensure bolted surfaces in contact with the bolt head and nut do not have a slope of more than numvnumh to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
ensure bolted parts fit solidly when assembled .
provide a class a finish per aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications for all faying surfaces .
num .
washers .
install fastener assemblies with hardened washers in accordance with the bolting handbook .
b. preinstallation .
submit num of the following bolt methods for use a .
turn of the nut b. calibrated wrench c. direct tension indicator dti or d. tension control bolts twistoff num .
preinstallation verification testing .
perform preinstallation verification procedures in accordance with the bolting handbook .
retest when directed by the project manager .
num .
reuse of bolts previously tightened .
reuse of bolts previously tightened is not permissible except as described in the bolting handbook .
c. production bolting .
tighten bolts in accordance to the pretensioning procedures given in the bolting handbook .
fully erect continuously supported girder sections between expansion joints before production bolt tightening .
tightening is dependent upon consistency of torque and is dependent on condition of the fastener assembly .
verify that the condition of assembly is similar to those used in the preinstallation verification test .
conditions of the assembly and the efficiency of the lubricant can be affected by the following num .
exposure to the elements during storage .
num .
high temperatures during storage .
num .
high temperatures during tightening .
num .
low temperatures during tightening .
num .
additional moisture from snow and rain during tightening .
num .
passing of time between the snugging operation and tightening .
if these condition changes occur repeat the preinstallation verification test on a representative sample of fastener assemblies to be tightened .
lubricate bolts in accordance to the bolting handbook .
relubricating of tension control bolts may only be performed by the manufacturer .
d. metric bolt substitution .
allowable bolt substitutions are shown in table num .
num edition steel structures num num table num bolt substitutions high strength bolt substitution specified bolt astm anumm allowable substitute astm anum mnum inch mnum inch mnum inch mnum numinch standard bolt substitution specified bolt astm fnumm class num allowable substitute astm anum mnum inch mnum numinch mnum inch mnum inch mnum numinch mnum inch mnum inch mnum inch mnum numinch stud bolt substitution specified bolt astm fnumm class num allowable substitute astm anum mnum inch mnum numinch mnum inch mnum inch mnum inch mnum numinch num welded stud shear connectors the type size or diameter and length of stud shear connectors are specified in the contract .
furnish fabrication material and perform welding in accordance with section num .
num field welding do not weld temporary construction supports to beams girders or other main members .
any member with unauthorized field welds tack welds or arc strikes will be rejected .
perform welding in accordance with section num .
num assembling steel field or shop assemble steel parts as follows a .
shop work .
clean all contacting metal surfaces of deleterious materials before assembling bolting or welding .
paint may be applied to contact surfaces after bolting or welding .
num steel structures num edition num shop assemble and adjust to line and camber all bolted trusses continuous plate girders curved steel elements box girders ibeam spans skew portals skew connections rigid frames bents and towers .
drill and ream the field splice holes during assembly .
holes for other field connections may be shop drilled or reamed with the connecting parts assembled or drilled or reamed to metal templates with hardened bushings without assembling .
use an approved alternate procedure where shop space prevents complete shop assembly of continuous span girders or trusses .
the procedure may require adjusting the line and camber of at least two abutting sections of girder for drilling or reaming of field splices if all girder lines for the complete structure are assembled consecutively .
field butt joints for welded girders may be assembled with abutting members adjusted for line and camber and prepared to fit for welding subject to project manager approval .
bridge expansion devices must be initially shop assembled to establish the proper fit between the joint parts .
b .
field work .
assemble the parts as specified in the contract following the matchmarks .
prevent damaging the material while handling .
clean all bearing and member surfaces in permanent contact before assembly .
splices and field connections must have a minimum of  of the holes filled with bolts or erection pins before removing temporary supports or releasing the load from erecting equipment .
splices and connections carrying traffic during erection must have  of the holes pinned or bolted .
do not begin production bolt tightening of the field splice bolts until the complete girder line is aligned and erected matching the full camber line .
use erection pins numinch num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the permanent bolts .
erect truss spans on blocking unless they are erected using the cantilever method to provide truss camber .
leave the blocking in place until the tension cord splices are fully bolted and all other truss connections pinned and bolted .
do not tension bolts in butt joint splices of compression members and in railings until the span is swung .
c. drifting of holes .
only use drift pins during assembly to the extent necessary to bring the parts into position without enlarging or distorting the holes or metal .
do not ream holes during field fitting without approval from the project manager .
d. matchmarking .
matchmark parts assembled in the shop for reaming field connection holes and furnish the project manager a diagram showing the marks .
num marking and shipping paint or mark each member with an erection mark and furnish the project manager an erection diagram detailing the erection marks .
furnish copies of material orders shipping statements and erection diagrams .
show the individual member weights on the statements .
a shipping statement must accompany the material and be marked to clearly identify it with the delivered material and mill test reports .
mark the weight on members weighing num tons num mt or more .
load and unload structural members on trucks or cars without stressing or causing damage .
pack bolts loose nuts or washers of each size separately .
ship pins small parts bolts washers and nuts in boxes crates kegs or barrels with the gross weight of each package not exceeding num pounds num kg .
plainly mark each shipping container listing and describing the contents on the outside of each shipping container .
num edition steel structures num num keep structural material clean and free from damage .
num painting clean and paint all iron and steel surfaces in accordance with section num .
num erection furnish a steel erection plan and specifications that ensures safety prevents overstressing of the steel maintains stability prevents damage to the work or surroundings and achieves the proper final geometry .
furnish a complete erection plan and specifications for erection of the steel and for any falsework necessary including temporary bracing guywires or other required items to the project manager a minimum of num calendar days prior to construction of the superstructure .
the erection plan and specifications must bear the signature and the professional seal of a professional engineer licensed to practice in montana .
num falsework design construct and maintain falsework to support the maximum construction loadings .
check and approve falsework drawings before submitting .
the department has num business days to review and return the falsework drawings .
the contract time will be extended day for day for any delay beyond the numday review period if the departments delay affects the contractors operation as shown on the current work schedule .
num bearing and anchorage place masonry bearing plates in accordance with subsection num .
num placing anchor bolts place anchor bolts in accordance with subsection num .
num straightening bent material straighten bent plates angles or other shapes without damaging the material .
the metal may be heated if approved .
do not exceed num f num c. once heated cool the metal slowly .
all straightened metal will be inspected for defects .
num pin connections furnish the project manager the pilot and driving nuts provided with the steelwork once the work is complete .
the members must take full bearing on the pins .
bring pin nuts up tight and burr the threads at the nut face .
num misfits correct all misfits errors and injuries as a part of the assembly and erection work .
report to the project manager all shop work errors that prevent the assembly and fitting of parts with a minimum use of drift pins reaming slight chipping or cutting .
obtain department approval for the correction method .
corrections must be inspected and approved .
num cleanup remove all falsework excavated or unused materials rubbish and temporary buildings .
restore all public and private property damaged during construction to its original condition .
pull cut off or otherwise remove all falsework piling numfoot num mm below finished the ground line or streambed unless otherwise directed .
perform all work affecting the stream channel in accordance with subsection num before final acceptance .
num steel structures num edition num num rejections an inspectors acceptance of material or finished members does not prevent later rejection if defects are found .
replace or repair rejected material and work at contractor expense .
num method of measurement structural steel is measured by the lump sum .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit structural steel lump sum the weight of structural steel in the contract is an estimate only .
no guarantee is made that the estimated weight is the correct weight to be furnished .
no adjustment in the contract unit price is made if the weight furnished is more or less than the estimated weight .
if changes in the work ordered by the project manager vary the weight of steel to be furnished the lump sum payment is adjusted as follows the value per pound kg of a decrease or increase in the weight of structural steel involved is determined by the following value per pound kilogram contract lump sum bid estimated contract weight the adjusted contract lump sum amount paid is the contract lump sum bid plus or minus the value of steel involved in the change .
should the ordered change materially alter the character of the work and the unit cost compensation for that work is made at an agreed price established before the work is performed .
detail in writing the changes in procedures and the resulting costs for labor equipment and materials to support the agreed price .
partial payments for structural steel will be made based on the lump sum contract unit price as follows num .
num when erected .
num .
num when bolted and spot painted .
num .
num when painted in compliance with the plans and specifications .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num steel bridge railing num description this work is the furnishing and installing of steel bridge railing .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements fiberreinforced pads for rail post base plates num galvanized metal num high tensile strength anchor bolts num steel beam guardrail and wood blocks num structural steel num structural steel tubing num num construction requirements num fabrication drawings furnish fabrication drawings for steel bridge railing in accordance with subsection num .
num fabrication fabricate steel bridge railing in accordance with section num .
num erection construct steel bridge railing as shown in the contract .
adjust the completed railing to compensate for any unevenness in the structure .
ensure all rail posts are vertical .
do not place railing on a span until centering or falsework is removed .
place rail post base plates on fiber reinforced pads sized and positioned to project a minimum inch num mm on all sides of the base plates .
num painting clean and paint steel bridge railing specified to be painted in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement steel bridge railing of the type or types specified is measured by the foot m. measurement is based on the computed horizontal distance between the centerlines of end base plates .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bridge railing foot m partial payments of steel bridge railing will be made based on the total quantity as follows num .
num when erected .
num .
num when bolted and spot painted .
num .
num when painted in compliance with the contract .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num steel bridge railing num edition num num section num drilled shafts num description this work is constructing reinforced concrete shafts cast in cylindrically excavated holes that extend into soil or rock to support the structure and externally applied loads at the locations and to the lines and grades shown in the contract .
num materials num drilled shaft concrete use drilled shaft concrete for all concrete placed between the bottom of the shaft and the top of the casing unless otherwise shown in the contract .
obtain the project managers approval before using a scc mix design .
num permanent drilled shaft casing furnish casing in accordance with the size and thickness requirements specified and casing material that meets the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
furnish fabricate and inspect casing materials in accordance with section num .
num construction requirements num submittals submit num copies of the following information to the project manager a minimum of num calendar days before start of drilling operations .
a. drilled shaft asc and wn outlining num .
bent and shaft construction sequence .
if more than one shaft will be worked on at any time include that information in the submittal .
num .
method of shaft excavation .
num .
method to clean shaft excavation .
num .
temporary and permanent casing installation and removal methods .
include casing top and bottom elevations and diameters .
num .
the effects of hydrostatic pressure differentials that may occur during excavation and shaft construction .
include a description of procedures relating to hydrostatic effects that will be used to ensure that the stability of the excavation is not compromised .
num .
method of concrete placement .
state the planned initial elevation of the bottom of placement pipe .
provide descriptions of methods or devices used to prevent the injection of air or water into the drilled shaft concrete when starting concrete placement and in the event the placement is stopped and restarted .
include descriptions of methods or devices that will be used to control the rate of concrete discharge in order to minimize turbulence that could result in concrete washout or other detrimental effects .
num .
time necessary for complete concrete placement .
b .
name and experience record of contractor and superintendent and drillers to that will perform the drilled shaft work on this project .
include all experience in the last num years .
c. list of proposed drilling equipment to be used including any cranes drills augers bits temporary casings and cleaning tools .
include diameter of augers and cleaning buckets .
d. proposed size and location of all reinforcing steel used to support or maintain the shape of the reinforcing steel cage .
num drilled shafts num edition num num shaft preconstruction meeting schedule a shaft preconstruction meeting with the project manager for a time num to num calendar days prior to drilling .
the minimum required attendees are the superintendent concrete supplier and project manager .
the purpose of the meeting is to review the requirements of this specification discuss the drilled shaft installation plan and to discuss logistical and contingency plans .
num geotechnical logging the department may provide a geotechnical representative onsite during drilling and installation operations to log the excavation .
notify the project manager at least num calendar days prior to start of drilled shaft excavation so that the project manager may schedule the onsite representative .
num shaft excavation use excavation methods that provide contact with firm undisturbed soil or rock with the sides and bottom of the shaft concrete when the temporary casing is removed .
do not excavate holes larger than the outside diameter of permanent casings .
num shaft locations alignment and tolerances drill all shafts to the bottom elevations specified or as directed by the project manager .
construct the shaft so the vertical centerline axis of the finished shaft is within num inches num mm of the plan location at the top of the shaft .
drill all shafts to within num of vertical the entire depth of the shaft excavation .
num sloughing and caving use tools and tool withdrawal rates that will not cause suction effects that result in soil intrusion or instability of the excavation .
use construction methods that will ensure no sloughing or caving of the shaft side walls .
in the event any sloughing or caving does occur remove all sloughed material .
ensure that concrete completely fills the shaft .
if caving occurs during placement of drilled shaft concrete immediately stop the flow of concrete and undertake corrective measures to completely remove the sloughed materials from the shaft .
if necessary to facilitate material removal remove the concrete and reinforcing steel already placed in the shaft .
num permanent casing a. furnish and install permanent casing when specified in the contract .
permanent casing remains in place and is included in the design of the drilled shaft .
the permanent casing diameter may be oversized up to num inches num mm if necessary to facilitate temporary casing installation .
b .
if field welding submit num copies of the weld procedures to the project manager for approval num calendar days prior to welding .
c. provide corrosion protection for all permanent casing .
galvanize the permanent casing to aashto m num and astm anum specifications or paint .
if painting meet the following requirements num .
furnish paint in accordance with subsection numbnum .
num .
prepare the casing surface following the paint manufacturers recommendations .
num .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for paint application .
apply paint to the casing before installation starting num inches num mm below ground surface continuing to the top of exposed steel .
num .
apply the first two paint coats to produce a minimum num mil num mm dry film thickness .
provide num copies of the painters certification that the paint was applied following the manufacturers recommendations and the paint coat thickness on the casing .
num edition drilled shafts num num num .
repair paint damage caused by transport handling and welding following the paint manufacturers recommendations before applying the finish coat .
for the finish coat use the same paint or paint compatible with the first num coats .
provide a finish coat with a minimum num mil num m dry film thickness .
provide the finish coat paint that meets federal specification numb pigment code num concrete gray .
num temporary casing do not use slurry construction methods as an alternative to or in conjunction with temporary casing unless specified in the contract .
use temporary casing to facilitate shaft construction and prevent sloughing and caving of the shaft sidewalls .
place temporary casing to a minimum elevation as shown in the contract .
place the temporary casing deeper if necessary to prevent material from entering the shaft excavation .
use casing with an outside diameter no less than the specified diameter of the shaft .
limit the excavation in advance of the casing tip to no more than num feet num m unless synthetic slurry is being used .
during casing extraction maintain a sufficient level of fluid in the casing to counteract external hydrostatic pressures but no less than num feet num m of positive head .
maintain an adequate level of concrete within the casing to ensure that fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward and discharged at the ground surface without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
temporary casings that have become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be removed are considered to be a defect in the drilled shaft .
correct defective shafts using approved methods at no cost to the department .
corrective action may consist of but is not limited to the following num .
removing the drilled shaft concrete and extending the drilled shaft deeper to compensate for the loss of frictional capacity to the cased zone .
num .
providing straddle drilled shafts to compensate for capacity loss .
num .
providing a replacement drilled shaft .
num obstructions an obstruction is defined as a specific object including but not limited to boulders logs and manmade objects encountered during the shaft excavation which prevents the advance of the shaft excavation .
if an obstruction is encountered promptly notify the project manager .
submit num copies of a proposed obstruction removal method to the project manager for approval within num business days of encountering the obstruction .
num cleaning remove all loose or disturbed material from the bottom of the shaft excavation immediately prior to placing reinforcing steel and concrete .
after cleaning no more than numinch num mm of loose or disturbed material permitted in the bottom of the shaft .
maintain a sufficient level of fluid to counteract external hydrostatic pressures but no less than num feet num m of positive head .
num installation of crosshole sonic logging csl tubes install the csl access tubes evenly spaced around the reinforcing cage and inside of all hoops and spiral reinforcing steel as shown in the contract .
use numinch num mm nominal diameter schedule num pvc csl access tubes .
provide an end plug at the lower end of the pipe and make all joints watertight .
ensure tubes extend to the shaft bottom .
in the event that csl access tubes are not installed to the shaft bottom the department may require coring of the shaft to verify shaft integrity at contractors expense .
fill the csl access tubes with a num mixture of potable water and biodegradable antifreeze prior to or immediately after placing concrete in the drilled shaft .
temporarily cap the top of the tubes to prevent debris or concrete from entering the tubes .
clean any spilled antifreeze from the reinforcing steel and csl tubes .
num drilled shafts num edition num num reinforcing steel tie bars at all intersections .
after inspection and approval of the drilled shaft excavation by the project manager place the reinforcing steel cage into the shaft as one unit .
support the steel cage from the top so that racking and distortion are prevented .
remove internal stiffeners as necessary as the steel cage is placed in the excavation to prevent interference with the placement of concrete .
use noncorrosive rollertype spacers or other noncorrosive devices as approved by the project manager along the steel cage length and around the steel cage perimeter to align and maintain clearance from reinforcing cage to edge of casing during concrete placement .
begin placing the drilled shaft concrete immediately after the project manager has inspected and approved the location and alignment of the cage within the drilled shaft .
remove the steel cage and reinspect the excavation if the concrete placement is not started within num hours of placing the steel cage in position .
num concrete placement record complete the departments drilled shaft concrete placement log .
accurately record all data required on the form as the concrete is placed .
after the drilled shaft concrete has been placed and before the end of the day furnish the completed form to the project manager .
the department will provide copies to the contractor upon request .
num drilled shaft concrete place concrete in the drilled shaft as specified for either dry excavations or wet excavations .
a .
dry excavations .
place concrete by gravity tremie tube or pumping .
concrete may free fall into the shaft if the concrete can be directed so that it does not strike the reinforcing steel the excavation wall or any other obstruction during the fall .
b .
wet excavations .
num .
place all drilled shaft concrete by tremie tube pumping or other approved method to avoid separation and segregation of the concrete mix components .
num .
separate the first concrete placed from the fluid in the excavation using a plug in the tube or other approved device .
num .
begin concrete placement in a manner that minimizes mixing of the concrete with the water and material in the shaft .
num .
maintain a minimum num feet num m of tremie pipe embedment and continuously place drilled shaft concrete to ensure upward displacement of all contaminated concrete .
if at any time during the placement it is necessary to temporarily stop or the tremie pipe orifice is removed from the concrete stop and restart concrete placement in a manner that ensures that air water or other undesirable material is not allowed to be mixed into the concrete or incorporated into the drilled shaft .
concrete that is discharged above the rising concrete level in the shaft is considered undesirable material .
num .
once concrete has reached the top of the drilled shaft remove and dispose of the top layer of concrete and any concrete contaminated with mud or fluid from the drilled shaft .
remove sufficient concrete to fully expose sound homogeneous and uncontaminated concrete in the shaft .
num shaft testing and acceptance a. crosshole sonic logging .
the project manager may use csl to check the structural soundness of any completed drilled shaft .
the csl testing will be performed when the concrete has cured sufficiently to give consistent test readings .
schedule construction activities to allow twelve calendar days from the time concrete is placed in the shaft until the shaft is tested .
provide a stable numvolt ac or a numvolt dc electrical supply if requested .
when the csl testing access tubes are no longer needed for testing as num edition drilled shafts num num determined by the project manager cut off the tubes flush with the top surface of the drilled shaft and remove the antifreeze solution to a depth of num inches num mm from the top of the tubes .
permanently cap the csl access tubes to provide a watertight seal that does not interfere with the subsequent construction operations .
the project manager will accept or reject the shaft based on the csl testing or a subsequent drilled core sample .
for any drilled shaft determined by csl testing to be of uncertain quality drill core samples with a minimum diameter of num inches num mm at locations and to depths specified by the project manager .
use a core drilling method that provides complete core recovery and minimizes abrasion and erosion of the core .
grout all core holes when directed by the project manager .
b. corrective action .
if the csl or subsequent coring identifies any defect in the shaft that compromises the capacity of the shaft repair the shaft by a method approved by the project manager .
submit a repair plan no later than num calendar days after notification .
include num copies of calculations and working drawings stamped by a professional engineer licensed in montana to the project manager .
furnish all materials and work necessary to correct shaft defects at contractor expense .
prior to constructing other shafts submit num copies of a written proposal to the project manager that describes changes in construction methods or materials designed to avoid defects in subsequent drilled shafts .
num method of measurement num drilled shaft drilled shaft will be measured by the linear foot m of shaft between the actual bottom elevation of the drilled shaft and the top of shaft elevation shown on the contract .
num drilled shaft concrete drilled shaft concrete will be measured by the cubic yard mnum of concrete placed calculated from the planned cross sectional area times the as built length of the drilled shaft .
num reinforcing steel drilled shaft reinforcing steel will be measured by the pound kg in accordance with subsection num .
num drilled shaft casing permanent drilled shaft casing will be measured by the linear foot m of permanent casing installed as shown in the contract or as directed by the project manager in writing .
num temporary casing when the contract contains the pay item temporary drilled shaft casing temporary drilled shaft casing will be measured by the linear foot m of temporary casing measured from the higher of the ground or water surface elevation down to the bottom elevation of the installed temporary casing .
num csl tubes and testing include all costs associated with furnishing and installing csl access tubes and any required extensions and providing a power source in the drilled shaft pay item .
no measurement or payment will be made for construction delays resulting from the initial csl drilled shaft testing .
the department will extend the contract time by num day for each day over num calendar days required to complete the csl drilled shaft testing .
the department will pay the costs for the initial csl drilled shaft testing .
pay for all costs associated with coring engineering design cost required to correct the defect and any construction delay costs if a defect is found based on the csl drilled shaft testing or coring .
pay the costs of csl drilled shaft retesting of the repaired num drilled shafts num edition num drilled shafts .
if no defect is found in the drilled shaft based on the coring the department will pay all costs of coring and any delays necessitated by the coring .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit drilled shaft linear foot m reinforcing steel pound kg drilled shaft casing linear foot m drilled shaft concrete cubic yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
temporary casings remain the property of the contractor .
if the contract contains the pay item temporary drilled shaft casing all costs associated with temporary casing including but not limited to procurement fabrication transportation installation and removal are included in the pay item temporary drilled shaft casing .
if the contract does not contain the pay item drilled shaft temporary casing no measurement or payment will be made .
include all costs associated with temporary casing including but not limited to fabrication providing transporting installation and removal in the drilled shaft pay item .
payment for obstruction removal will be made on a force account basis .
num section num piling num description this work consists of furnishing and placing piling .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements hydraulic cement concrete num steel pipe piles num structural steel piles num num inspection of steel pile steel pile may be inspected at the rolling mill and will be inspected at the project .
furnish copies of the mill test reports showing the chemical and physical test results for each steel pile heat number included in the shipment .
provide steel pile with a maximum camber or sweep of num inches per foot num mmm of pile length .
store and handle steel piles to prevent damage .
bent deformed or kinked piles will be rejected .
num furnish pile furnish pile quantities shown in the contract .
the specified lengths are those required below cutoff .
adjust lengths for the difference between the cut off length and the pile position in the driving equipment and as necessary to meet the requirements of subsection num .
increase pile lengths numfoot num mm for steel pile .
remove and dispose of excess pile length after the pile is driven .
num metal pile end protection furnish prefabricated cast steel driving point or cutting shoe conforming to aashto m num requirements .
furnish cast steel driving point for hpile .
furnish cast steel insideflanged open end cutting shoe or num insideflanged conical driving point for pipe pile as specified .
weld driving point or cutting shoe to steel pile in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum or dnum as applicable .
use welders certified by the department or a certified welding inspector .
num splicing piles when directed by the project manager splice piles driven to plan grade that do not obtain the required driving resistance and continue driving until the required bearing resistance is obtained .
weld steel pile in accordance with aws dnum requirements .
use numfoot numm minimum spacing for steel pile splice welds .
when steel piles are driven less than num feet num m below the cutoff elevation specified use num splice to obtain the required cutoff elevation .
num holes in piling pile segments with num drilled hole having a diameter of inch num mm or less in any cross section may be incorporated into the finished structure .
pile with more than num hole in a cross section flame cut holes or a hole greater than inch num mm must be cut off to remove the holes.this requirement does not apply to holes drilled for attaching dynamic testing equipment holes shown in the contract or holes within num inches num mm of the cutoff elevation .
num piling num edition num num construction requirements num equipment for driving pile a .
pile hammers .
drive piles with impact hammers that include air steam diesel or hydraulic hammers .
for air or steam hammers provide equipment that maintains the volume as specified by the manufacturer of the hammer as the pile is driven .
provide equipment with accurate pressure gauges that are easily read from ground level .
ensure that the striking parts of the hammer are at least  the weight of the helmet and the pile being driven or num lbs .
num kg whichever is greater .
provide openend singleacting diesel hammers with rings or other indicators on the ram that permit visual determination of the hammer stroke as the pile is driven .
submit a copy of the hammer manufacturers chart that equates the stroke and blows per minute for the hammer being used .
provide closedend doubleacting hammers with an accurate bounce chamber pressure gauge that is easily read from ground level .
submit a copy of a chart calibrated to the actual hammer performance that equates the bounce chamber pressure to the equivalent energy or stroke of the hammer .
provide equipment for hydraulic hammers that are sized to maintain the manufacturers specified volume and pressure during driving .
provide equipment with accurate pressure gauges that are easily read from ground level .
delays and additional costs resulting from load tests or other extra work required to verify approval of the vibratory hammer or driving aids is at contractor expense .
if a vibratory hammer is used redrive each pile with an impact hammer having the energy to verify the required bearing resistance during driving as required in subsection num .
b .
pile driving aids and accessories .
num .
followers .
do not use followers .
num .
helmet .
provide metal helmets for pile to be driven by impact drivers .
helmets must fit around the pile top align axially with the hammer and pile distribute the hammer energy to the total pile head cross section and have leads to guide them .
num .
hammer cushion .
when driving pile with an impact hammer use a cushion to prevent damage to the pile and hammer .
use a cushion recommended and approved by the hammer manufacturer .
use a striker plate recommended by the hammer manufacturer on the hammer cushion to provide uniform compression of the cushion material .
num .
leads .
support the piles in line and position during driving .
use pile hammer leads that permit free movement of the hammer maintain hammer and pile alignment and provide concentric impact for each blow .
num .
jets .
do not use water jets .
num .
caps .
follow the pile manufacturers recommendations regarding caps driving heads mandrels or other required devices .
c. pile predrilling .
when specified in the contract use the prescribed drilling methods discussed in this specification .
do not impair the bearing resistance of previously installed pile or the safety of adjacent structures .
if drilling reduces the bearing resistance of previously placed pile restore the disturbed pile to conditions in accordance with this specification by redriving after drilling operations in the area have been completed .
num .
pile prebore .
when pile prebore is specified use an auger wetrotary drill or other approved method .
drill prebore holes to the specified diameter and depth .
drive the pile in the prebore hole starting from the bottom of the hole with an impact hammer num edition piling num num evaluated in accordance with subsection num .
continue driving the pile to the required bearing resistance and the depth specified .
after driving fill the annular void around the pile with dry fine concrete aggregate in accordance with subsection num and table num .
num .
pile drill and socket .
at each pile location drill pilot holes a maximum of numinch num mm in diameter less than the outside diameter of the round pile and a maximum of num inches num mm less than the outside diagonal cross sectional measurement of square or hpile to the elevation specified .
drive the pile into the predrilled pilot hole to the bottom of the hole with an impact hammer evaluated in accordance with subsection num .
continue driving the pile below the bottom of the drilled hole to the design tip elevation specified in the contract or deeper if directed by the project manager .
num evaluation of pile driving equipment the department will evaluate piledriving equipment provided by the contractor .
furnish equipment with the capability to drive the project pile to the design pile tip elevation and required bearing resistance during driving without damage to the pile .
provide pile driving equipment that produces the following results from the wave equation analysis num to num blows per numfoot num m at the required bearing resistance and maximum compressive driving stress less than num of the minimum pile material yield strength .
the department will base hammer evaluations on a wave equation analysis .
submit the pile driving equipment information on form csb num_num_num .
the project manager will notify the contractor of results of the pile driving equipment evaluation within num calendar days after receipt of the pile and driving equipment data form .
if the departments wave equation analysis indicates that pile damage may occur or that the proposed pile driving equipment can not drive the pile to the specified required bearing resistance and design tip elevation resubmit a plan that modifies the equipment or the method to ensure the ability to drive pile to the specified required bearing resistance and design tip elevation without pile damage .
the project manager will notify the contractor of results of the revised pile driving submission within num calendar days after receipt of the re submittal .
do not vary from the evaluated driving system without prior written approval .
the department will consider proposed changes to the pile driving equipment or method only after submittal of revised information for a new wave equation analysis .
the project manager will notify the contractor of evaluation results of the pile driving system changes within num calendar days after receipt of the submittal .
delays and additional costs associated with developing submitting and obtaining evaluation results for pile driving proposals and resulting changes in the pile driving equipment and work methods are at contractors expense .
num pile bearing resistance a .
driven pile bearing resistance .
drive the pile to the design tip elevation shown on the contract or deeper if necessary and to the required bearing resistance during driving shown in the contract .
the project manager will use the wave equation analyses to determine the required bearing resistance and the service pile driving criteria .
the department will determine ultimate pile capacity based on a wave equation analysis .
drive piles with the pile driving equipment evaluated in accordance with subsection num to the depths necessary to obtain the required bearing resistance .
do not use other methods to aid pile penetration unless specified or approved after a revised driving resistance is established from the wave equation analysis .
unless otherwise specified adequate pile penetration consists of reaching num piling num edition num the specified wave equation resistance criteria within numfoot num m of the pile tip elevation .
drive pile not achieving the specified resistance within these limits to penetrations established by the project manager .
b .
compression load tests .
num .
static load tests .
if specified perform compression load tests to meet the requirements of astm dnum using the quick load test method .
load the test pile to the required bearing resistance shown in the contract .
provide testing equipment and measuring systems in accordance with astm dnum except the loading system must be capable of applying num of the required bearing resistance .
provide a load cell and spherical bearing plate .
submit detailed plans for the proposed loading system prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of montana for approval .
the load system must gradually and incrementally place the load on the test pile without vibration .
if the static load test method includes tension reaction anchor pile provide anchor pile of the same type and size as the service pile .
drive the anchor pile in a permanent pile location unless the project manager approves another location .
determine top elevation of the test and anchor pile immediately after driving and again just before load testing to check for heave .
redrive all pile that heaved in excess of inch num mm or jack the pile to the original elevation before testing .
wait num hours between driving the anchor pile or the load test pile and performing the load test .
define the failure load for a tested pile as the axial compressive load that produces a settlement of the pile head equal to a .
for piles num feet num mm or less in diameter or width sf  num numb english sf  num numb metric b .
for piles greater than num feet num mm in diameter or width sf  b num english and metric where sf settlement at failure in inches mm b pile diameter or diagonal width in inches mm  elastic deformation of total pile length in inches mm if the project manager determines that the pile has failed before achieving the required bearing resistance perform additional load tests .
the department will measure and pay for each additional load test .
when load testing is complete remove all test or anchor pile not part of the finished structure or cut them off at least numfoot num mm below the bottom of the footing or below the finished ground elevation if the pile fall outside the footing area .
num .
dynamic load tests .
if specified perform dynamic load tests in accordance with astm dnum on pile designated for dynamic load tests .
use a pile specialty consultant with at least num years experience in dynamic load testing and analysis to perform the dynamic load test case pile wave analysis program capwap and the wave equation analysis .
use a geotechnical engineer licensed as a professional engineer in montana who has achieved at least advanced level on the foundation qa examination for providers of pda testing services to perform the capwap analysis .
use a technician with a basic level classification on the foundation qa examination num edition piling num num for providers of pda testing services operation to operate the pile driving analyzer .
provide the specialty consultant on site during the dynamic load tests .
submit the specialty consultants resume for approval .
furnish digital data acquisition system equipment with a display screen and printer .
with dynamic testing equipment attached drive the pile in one continuous operation to the design tip elevation or deeper if directed by the project manager .
the project manager may lower the required tip elevation based on the bearing resistance measurements at the time of driving or redriving .
reduce the driving energy to the pile to maintain pile stresses below the values specified in subsection numanum using additional cushions or reduction of the hammers output energy .
if eccentric driving is indicated immediately realign the driving system .
provide a printed summary of the dynamic load test results and recommendations for service pile driving criteria blow count and stroke and pile tip elevation .
the project manager will determine the service pile driving criteria and minimum pile tip elevations based on the dynamic load test results .
perform a redrive of the test pile when required by the project manager .
after initial driving wait the minimum time specified then redrive each dynamic load test pile with the instruments attached .
apply at least num resistance blows to warm the hammer before redriving .
do not warm the hammer using the dynamic load test pile .
redrive the dynamic load test pile for a maximum penetration of num inches num mm or a maximum of num blows whichever occurs first .
verify the assumption used in the initial wave equation analysis submitted in subsection numanum using capwap .
analyze one blow from the original driving and one blow from the redriving for each pile tested .
perform additional wave equation analysis with adjustments based on the capwap results .
provide a graph showing blow count versus bearing resistance .
for openended diesel hammers provide a blow count versus stroke graph for the bearing resistance .
provide the driving stresses transferred energy and pile bearing resistance as a function of depth for each dynamic load test .
submit a written report with numerical and graphical results of the dynamic load testing capwap analysis and wave equation analysis .
c. vibratory hammer .
base the bearing resistance of pile driven with vibratory hammers on the driving resistance recorded during impact driving after the vibratory equipment has been removed .
splice vibrated pile not reaching the bearing resistance at the design tip elevation at the contractors expense then drive with an impact hammer until the required bearing resistance is achieved as indicated by the requirements of subsection num .
num pile driving location and alignment drive piles so the pile head at cutoff elevation is horizontally within num inches num mm of the plan location for bent caps supported by piles and within num inches num mm of plan location for piles capped below final grade .
ensure no pile is within num inches num mm of a cap edge .
the allowable alignment tolerance from a plumb line is inch per yard num mm per meter of pile length .
the project manager may suspend driving if the either the pile location or alignment is not maintained as the pile is driven .
submit a written plan for correcting piles that do not meet the alignment or location tolerances .
num piling num edition num do not laterally pull on misaligned pile .
do not splice a properly aligned section on a misaligned pile .
num service pile do not initiate driving of the service piles until all test piles and analysis are complete unless authorized by the project manager .
drive the pile to the design tip elevation shown in the contract or deeper if necessary to achieve the required bearing resistance during driving .
if specified establish pile tip elevation and bearing resistance by compression load testing or dynamic load testing .
furnish the service pile lengths specified in the contract .
adjust pile lengths for the difference between cutoff length and the pile position in the driving equipment .
the project manager will observe the pile driving and calculate the predicted bearing resistance as it is being driven .
when a redrive of the service pile is required redrive the pile not less than num hours or more than num hours after initial driving and do not drive the pile below cut off elevation .
if the project manager determines pile stresses during driving are damaging the pile the department may require other installation methods or equipment to obtain pile penetration .
correct or replace improperly driven damaged or defective pile at contractors expense .
temporary welded plates for aligning field splices or hoisting may be used with the project managers approval .
remove temporary plates and grind welds smooth .
num cutting off steel pile or steel pipe pile cut steel pile heads square and furnish a driving cap before driving the pile .
after driving piles to the required bearing resistance and receiving approval from the project manager cut piles off at the specified elevation .
num steel pipe pile securely cover driven pipe piling to prevent openhole hazards .
remove water in steel pipe piles before placing concrete or place the concrete using a tremie when water is present in the pile .
provide lighting to illuminate the full pile length when requested to aid inspection of the pile before placing concrete .
fill steel pipe piles to an elevation no less than num feet num mm below the cut off elevation with class general hydraulic cement concrete a minimum of num hours prior to pouring the cap .
do not place concrete in pipe piles until all piles for the bent have been driven .
num painting steel pile or steel pipe pile paint steel pile having a portion of the pile exposed to the atmosphere in accordance with the following requirements .
a .
paint .
furnish paint in accordance with subsection numbnum .
b .
surface preparation .
prepare the pile surface to the paint manufacturers recommendations .
c. painting .
before driving apply two coats of paint to the pile starting a minimum of num feet num mm below finish ground surface or finish channel bottom to the top of exposed steel .
apply the first two paint coats to produce a minimum num mils num mm dry film thickness .
field repair paint damage caused by transport splicing and handling following the paint manufacturers recommendations before applying the finish coat .
when piles are in the final location in the structure apply the finish coat paint .
provide a finish coat with a minimum num mils num mm dry film thickness on all surfaces exposed num edition piling num num to the air at time of paint application .
the project manager will select the finish coat paint color from one of the following table num finish coat paint color color federal specification numb pigment code montana brown num montana blue num montana green num concrete gray num num method of measurement num load tests static and dynamic load tests and test pile redrives completed and accepted are measured by the unit .
include all materials tools the first num hours of standby time for items dedicated solely to this work and equipment required to perform each test or test pile redrive in the unit bid price for the item .
furnishing driving splices redriving of service piles and pile end protection are measured for payment as outlined in other subsections .
do not include these costs in the static and dynamic load tests .
num furnish pile furnish pile is measured by the foot m based on the plan quantity .
num drive pile drive pile is measured by the foot m of pile driven into the ground .
drive pile is measured by the foot m of pile driven through pile drill and socket pilot holes .
pile driven through prebore holes is not measured for payment .
num pile predrilling pile prebore and pile drill and socket pilot holes are measured by the foot m drilled below the existing or finished ground elevation to the bottom of the hole .
num pile splice when the pile tip extends more than numfoot num mm below the plan estimated pile tip elevation splices required to obtain specified cutoff elevation are measured for payment .
pile splices are measured by the number of pile splices performed in the field and approved by the project manager .
splices made for contractor convenience to facilitate driving operations or to produce pile sections in accordance with specified design lengths are not measured for payment .
num pile driving point and cutting shoe pile driving point and cutting shoe are measured by the unit for the quantity specified in the contract .
num filler concrete filler concrete is not measured for payment .
num painting steel pile and steel pipe pile painting steel pile and steel pipe pile is not measured for payment .
num piling num edition num num basis of payment the department will not pay for furnishing or driving falsework pile pile driven out of place and not accepted defective pile or pile damaged in handling or driving forming holes lengths of pile cut off according to subsection num or welding temporary plates removing the plates and grinding the welds smooth .
include payment for the costs associated with painting steel pile and steel pipe piles and filler concrete in the contract unit price per foot m of drive pile .
pile furnished based on the plan quantities but not incorporated in the finished structure is paid for at the contract unit price per foot m of furnish pile and becomes the property of the contractor .
pile furnished and incorporated in the finished structure in addition to plan quantity is paid for by lump sum agreed price or in accordance with subsection num .
payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit drive pile foot m dynamic load test each furnish pile foot m pile conical driving point each pile cutting shoe each pile drill and socket foot m pile driving point each pile prebore foot m pile splice force account redrive test pile each redrive of service pile force account static load test each partial payments for drive pile will be made based on the total quantity as follows num .
num when the piles are driven to final penetration .
num .
num when the piles are cut off and painted as specified .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num bridge deck milling num description this work involves milling of deck concrete using hydrodemolition or mechanical scarification .
num reserved num construction requirements num submittals at least num weeks before beginning construction submit to the project manager for approval a written plan detailing the methods materials equipment and personnel to be used .
if hydrodemolition is used include in the submittal how wastewater will be managed for each hydrodemolition site and controlling the wastewater from the time it leaves the hydro milling machinery until its final disposal .
do not begin concrete removal until receiving approval .
ensure adequate capacity to handle the amount of wastewater generated .
num equipment a. hydrodemolition .
use a selfpropelled hydrodemolition machine with highpressure water jets capable of removing concrete to the removal depth shown in the contract .
use equipment of sufficient capacity and size to remove rust and concrete from the reinforcing steel .
the equipment must have means to control the removal depth to within a tolerance of inch num mm above or below the plan depth .
the equipment must have controls adequate to vary the water pressure traverse and progression of the nozzle oscillation or rotation of the nozzle head and the distance between the nozzle and the concrete surface .
provide accurate working pressure gauges at pumps and at the hydrodemolition unit .
b. scarification .
use selfpropelled mechanical scarifying equipment capable of removing inch num mm depth minimum across the cutting path in one pass .
num procedures a. hydrodemolition .
mechanical scarification equipment may be used in conjunction with hydrodemolition to remove the portion of the deck above the top mat of reinforcement .
if the milling equipment snags reinforcing steel adjust the depth of removal to prevent further snagging .
remove the remaining concrete to the specified depth using hydrodemolition .
before beginning hydrodemolition configure the hydrodemolition unit by adjusting water pressure nozzle size and angle nozzle travel speed and unit travel speed to remove sound concrete to the plan depth .
record all the settings and provide them to the project manager .
during hydrodemolition verify the removal depth every num feet num m along the length of the deck and along the width of the hydrodemolition path .
record the settings at each of these points and provide them to the project manager .
remove any remaining unsound concrete .
do not operate the hammers at an angle greater than num from the deck .
use only potable water for hydrodemolition .
do not use stream or lake water .
plug all deck drains .
install dams of clean washed aggregate hay bales sand bags or other materials as needed to strain and to direct the flow of runoff .
provide and use settlement basins if necessary to produce visibly clear water before disposal .
do not allow wastewater or wastecement slurry to run across active travel lanes .
obtain necessary permits before beginning the work and comply with applicable water quality regulations num bridge deck milling num edition num when disposing of the wastewater .
protect all adjacent areas and the traveling public from flying debris during removal operations .
b .
mechanical scarification .
scarify the deck to the depth indicated in the contract .
if the equipment snags reinforcing steel stop work immediately and notify the project manager .
remove concrete in areas designated for milling that the mechanical scarification equipment can not reach with chipping hammers no larger than a nominal num pound num kg class or other equipment as approved by the project manager .
thoroughly clean the deck of all aggregate paste residue oil and any other substance that may interfere with the repair or overlay concrete .
keep heavy loads off of reinforcing steel left unsupported by concrete due to concrete removal .
num method of measurement bridge deck milling is measured by the square yard of deck surface removed .
no measurement will be made for mechanical scarification used in conjunction with hydromilling .
include costs associated with mechanical scarification used in conjunction with hydromilling in the unit price bid for bridge deck milling .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted work is made under the following pay item pay unit bridge deck milling square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num bridge deck repair num description this work involves class a and b deck repair as specified in the contract or identified by the project manager .
a .
class a repair .
areas of removal and replacement of existing unsound deck concrete no deeper than the top of the bottom mat of reinforcing steel .
b .
class b repair .
areas of removal and replacement of existing unsound concrete full depth through the slab .
num materials use class structure or deck concrete for class a and b repair unless otherwise approved .
obtain the project managers approval before using rapidsetting concrete or polymeric concrete .
num construction requirements num submittals submit for review a minimum of num calendar days before placement the following num .
any proposed rapid set or polymeric concrete product data sheets .
num .
description of deck preparation measures that will be used to promote a competent bond between existing and new concrete .
num equipment provide equipment in accordance with the following requirements num .
powerdriven hand tools for removal of concrete with the following limitations a jackhammers of a nominal num pound num kg class or smaller .
b operate jackhammers or other mechanical chipping tools at an angle of num or less from the deck surface .
c to remove concrete from beneath a reinforcing bar in a class a repair use chipping hammers in a nominal num pound num kg class or smaller .
num .
hand tools such as hammers and chisels for removing final particles of unsound concrete and to achieve final required depth .
num location and inspection of repair areas .
num .
complete milling operations if included in the contract prior to locating class a or b repair areas num .
use compressed air to dry the deck and to blow it clean of debris .
the project manager will then locate nominal areas of class a and class b deck repair .
num .
notify the project manager if areas differ significantly from the nominal areas .
num .
if the project manager determines that an area of class a repair or bridge deck milling has exposed more than minimal amounts of the bottom mat of reinforcing steel the project manager may require class b repair in that area .
do not perform class b repair without prior approval .
num concrete removal num .
for unmilled surfaces first saw cut inch num mm deep around all class a and b repair area edges .
num .
remove all delaminated cracked disintegrated loose or otherwise unsound concrete using mechanical equipment .
finish the removal with lightweight hand tools .
if the bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel breaks remove concrete around the num bridge deck repair num edition num circumference of the bar at least numinch num mm .
prevent cutting stretching or other damage to exposed reinforcing steel .
num .
if the project manager finds an excessive amount of unsound concrete while performing a final check on a removal area rework that entire area .
num .
the project manager may approve the use of highpressure waterblast equipment for concrete removal .
the project manager will suspend the use of such equipment at any time if the process produces unsatisfactory results .
num reinforcing steel if an existing reinforcing bar has less than numinch num mm clearance from the new finished concrete surface remove concrete from under the bar then press it down and fasten it in place to provide numinch num mm clearance .
remove concrete as necessary to provide a clearance of numinch num mm around the circumference of the bar .
replace any reinforcement bar that is corroded cut or damaged to the point that it has lost num or more of its effective crosssectional area .
replace such bars with new ones of the same size .
the project manager will determine splice locations where bars need cutting and splicing .
repair epoxy coating that is damaged on reinforcing bars during concrete removal operations .
prior to placing new concrete remove all rust dirt laitance oil or other foreign materials from reinforcement surfaces .
num placing and finishing concrete class a and b repair a .
repair .
num .
prepare the surface as necessary in order to ensure a competent bond between the existing and repair concrete .
num .
use forms for new concrete in class b repair areas .
do not attach forms to existing reinforcing bars unless approved by the project manager .
num .
repair concrete may be placed concurrently with an overlay if approved by the project manager .
provide a description of the proposed sequence and equipment to be used to place and consolidate the repair concrete ahead of the screed .
num .
if repair concrete is not placed concurrently with an overlay finish and cure the repair concrete as follows a .
if the repair concrete will not be the final grade provide roughened surfaces to a full amplitude of numinch num mm .
b .
if the repair concrete will be the final grade provide broom finish .
c. cover the repair concrete with a single layer of clean wet burlap immediately after completion of surface finishing .
d. place a minimum num mil polyethylene film over the burlap .
e. for rapidsetting and polymeric concretes cure according to manufacturers recommendations .
for other concrete maintain the wet cure for a minimum of num hours .
b .
acceptance .
num .
surface smoothness will be checked per subsection numbnum .
correct areas identified by the project manager .
correct variations that prevent drainage from any part of the bridge deck .
num .
a dragchain survey will be conducted to determine the soundness of bond between the repair and the deck placing particular emphasis on areas of visible cracking .
remove and replace areas that have debonded .
the project manager may core the repair to determine depth of cracking .
when directed by the project manager seal cracks in repair concrete with a bridge deck crack sealant listed on the qpl .
apply the product in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
in cases of num edition bridge deck repair num num excessive cracking the project manager may require removal and replacement of part of or all of a repair .
num .
all corrective actions including crack sealing are at contractor expense .
num method of measurement class a bridge deck repair and class b bridge deck repair are measured by the square yard of deck surface and includes the repair concrete .
areas of concrete removed by milling operations even if deeper than plan are not measured for payment in accordance with class a bridge deck repair .
areas of concrete removed by milling operations which then require additional class a or b repair as determined by the project manager are measured for payment .
when an area of class a bridge deck repair is upgraded to class b bridge deck repair the area will be measured as class b bridge deck repair .
replacement of reinforcing bars will be measured and paid for in accordance with subsection num .
replace any reinforcing bars damaged by contractor operations at contractor expense .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit class a bridge deck repair square yard mnum class b bridge deck repair square yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num bridge deck repair num edition num num section num modified concrete overlay num description this work consists of placing a bridge deck overlay of either a latex modified concrete or silica fume modified concrete .
select a single type of modified concrete overlay and use it for all locations shown in the contract .
num materials num cement furnish cement in accordance with subsection num .
use only one brand of cement in a given overlay .
do not use type iii cement .
num aggregate num .
use aggregate in accordance with subsection num .
num .
furnish inch coarse concrete aggregate .
num .
use aggregate in a saturated surface dry ssd condition at the time of mixing concrete .
num .
test the moisture content using mt num document the results for both total moisture content and for surface moisture content and provide them to the project manager .
num latex admixture use a latex admixture containing a polymer of num num styrene and num num butadiene with the polymer comprising between num num of the total emulsion .
the emulsion must have a sodium alkyl sulfate stabilizer acting as an anionic surfactant polymer average particle size between num and num angstroms a weight of num to num lbgal at num f mass of num num kgl at num c and a ph between num and num .
protect the latex admixture from temperatures below num f num c and above num f num c at all times .
provide a thermometer capable of storing minimum and maximum temperatures and place it with any admixture stored on site .
replace admixture subjected to temperatures outside the range above at contractor expense to the department .
num construction requirements num submittals submit the following items to the project manager for approval at least num business days before concrete placement num .
the method and materials used to contain collect and dispose of all debris generated by the cleaning and surface preparation process .
num .
details of the screed rail support system including details of anchoring the rails and providing rail continuity and of other equipment used to apply the overlay .
num .
the methods that will be used to prepare the surface to ensure bonding of the overlay to the existing deck concrete .
num preplacement conference hold a preplacement conference with a technical representative from the modified concrete supplier and the project manager at least num calendar days before the planned concrete placement .
present the mix design and methods of accomplishing all phases of the concrete overlay work .
num modified concrete overlay num edition num num surface preparation prepare the surface to ensure bonding between the surface and the overlay .
blow standing water out of depressions holes or areas of concrete removal with oil filtered compressed air .
protect the prepared surface from contamination using plastic sheeting or other means .
deck preparation work may be performed in areas adjacent to newly placed overlay concrete .
if this work begins less than num hours after overlay placement perform the work with the following restrictions num .
wait a minimum of num day after placing the concrete to begin the adjacent surface preparation .
num .
minimize the disturbance of burlap and plastic sheeting and maintain uncured concrete in a wet condition at all times .
restore disturbed burlap and plastic sheeting as soon as possible .
num .
use no power tools heavier than num pound chipping hammers .
num .
operate air compressors on the deck only directly over piers or bents .
num .
prior to placement and completed cure of new concrete allow no loads other than approved construction equipment on any part of the deck that has undergone surface preparation .
num mobile mixing equipment use mobile mixing equipment for batching class overlaylm concrete .
do not use mobile mixing equipment to batch class overlaysf concrete unless approved by the project manager .
demonstrate that mobile mixing equipment meets the following requirements num .
mixing equipment .
use selfcontained mobile continuousmixing equipment in accordance with the following requirements a .
a capacity to mix a batch of at least num cubic yards num mnum .
the machine capacity must allow finishing operations to proceed at a steady pace with final finishing completed before formation of the plastic surface film .
b .
a positive means of controlling cement content entering the mix complete with a recording meter visible at all times and a continuous printout of the accurately measured quantity .
c. positive control of the water and the latex emulsion if applicable flow into the mixing chamber .
positive means to adjust the water flow for variations in aggregate moisture and a flow meter indicating the water quantity .
the project manager will approve each mobile mixer used on the project based on a demonstration of its ability to produce concrete in accordance with the contract .
calibrate each mobile mixer in the presence of the project manager using the following tests .
record all test results and required calculations and provide the project manager with a copy of those data .
inform the project manager what moisture content percentage the fine and coarse aggregates will have on entering the mix .
dry or wet the stockpiles to within num of this percentage at the beginning of each workday .
take moisture readings on the stockpiles before calibrating the mixer trucks and before each days placement of latex modified concrete .
record the readings and give the information to the project manager .
perform yield slump and air content tests on concrete from each mixer in the project managers presence .
num .
cement meter .
obtain the operating speed in revolutions per minute and the approximate number of counts required on the cement meter to deliver one num pound num kg bag of cement from the truck manufacturers mix setting chart .
place at least num bags num edition modified concrete overlay num num of cement in the cement bin .
place the mixer on a level surface and provide an electrical ground .
adjust the engine throttle to obtain the specified revolutions per minute rpm .
discharge cement until the belt has made num complete revolution .
stop the belt and reset the cement meter to zero .
discharge approximately num bag of cement into a container while timing the discharge with a stopwatch .
record the number of counts on the cement meter and determine the mass of cement discharged on the field calibration form included in this specification .
repeat the process of discharging num bag at a time for a total of num runs .
reset the cement meter to zero each time .
at the end of the num runs total the number of cement counts the mass of cement discharged and the times of each of the runs in seconds .
perform the following calculations a .
mass of cement per cement meter count .
divide the total mass of cement discharged in the num runs by the total number of counts on the meter for the num runs .
b .
counts per bag of cement .
divide num pounds num kg by the mass of cement per cement meter count .
c. cement discharge rate .
divide the total mass of cement for the num runs by the total of the times for each of the num discharges .
d. discharge time for num bag .
divide num pounds num kg by the cement discharge rate .
num .
latex throttling valve .
clear the latex strainer of any obstructions .
adjust the latex throttling valve to deliver num gallons num l of latex or num pounds num kg for each bag or num pounds num kg of cement using the calculation results from subsection num where necessary .
with the unit operating at the specified rpm discharge latex into a container for the discharge time for num bag calculated above and determine the weight of the latex discharged .
adjust the valve until the machine discharges num lbs .
num kg in the discharge time for num bag .
verify the accuracy of this setting by repeating the latex discharge num more times .
num .
water flow meter .
set the water flow meter to flow at the rate of num gallons num l per minute .
collect and weigh the water discharged during num minute with the equipment operating at the specified rpm to verify the discharge rate .
repeat the process with the flow meter adjusted to num gallons num l per minute .
num .
aggregate bin gates .
set the gate openings to provide aggregate at a rate matching the specified concrete mix proportions .
num concrete placement place concrete in accordance with section num .
install necessary bulkheads to the required grade and profile before placing any concrete .
alternatively overpour the end of the overlay by a minimum of num inches num mm .
saw cut and remove the overpour from the rest of the overlay .
dispose of materials that dry out set or show evidence of loss of cement paste .
stop overlay placement on discovering those conditions and do the surface preparation again .
strike off the modified concrete at a level inch num mm above final grade .
complete hand finishing and texturing within num feet num m of the finishing machine .
float and vibrate the concrete as needed to provide a tight finished surface .
vibrate concrete more than num inches num mm thick internally in addition to the vibration of the surface screed .
after finishing the concrete check for surface irregularities with a num foot num m straight edge .
correct surface areas that vary more than inch num mm in that distance .
num modified concrete overlay num edition num num curing cure the overlay per subsection num .
num phased construction if the overlay is placed in phases apply a bridge deck crack sealant to the phase line joints after the overlay has cured .
furnish a bridge deck crack sealant in accordance with subsection num .
num acceptance num .
cast at least num latex modified concrete cylinder for each days overlay placement .
cure the cylinders with their matching deck segments .
break the cylinders at the end of the dry curing process to demonstrate the strength the overlay concrete has attained .
num .
correct areas identified by the project manager .
correct variations that prevent drainage from any part of the bridge deck .
do not start the process of saw cutting the transverse deck grooves until the project manager has approved all of the finished repair work .
num .
a dragchain survey will be conducted to determine the soundness of bond between the repair and the deck placing particular emphasis on areas of visible cracking .
remove and replace areas that have debonded .
the project manager may core the repair to determine depth of cracking .
when directed by the project manager seal cracks in repair concrete with a bridge deck crack sealant listed on the qpl .
apply the product in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
in cases of excessive cracking the project manager may require removal and replacement of part of or all of a repair .
all corrective actions required for acceptance are at contractor expense .
num method of measurement bridge deck overlay is measured by the cubic yard mnum of modified concrete overlay placed .
include the cost of trial batches in the unit cost of modified concrete overlay .
transverse deck grooving is measured by the square yard mnum in accordance with subsection num .
bridge deck crack sealant applied to phase line joints is not measured for payment .
include all costs associated with bridge deck crack sealant applied to phase line joints in the modified concrete overlay item .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted work is made under the following pay item pay unit modified concrete overlay cubic yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num structure tolerances num description this work is meeting the specified tolerances for the listed structure elements .
num reserved num construction requirements meet the tolerances shown in table num .
in case of conflicting tolerances the tighter tolerance controls .
increase precision as necessary to meet other contract requirements .
table num structure tolerances item tolerance type tolerance substructure drilled shafts horizontal location num inches num mm top elevation numinch num mm num inches num mm diameter num inches num mm inch num mm deviation from plumb num substructure walls footings columns horizontal location numinch num mm elevation exposed concealed  inch num mm num inch num mm dimensions inch .
num mm  inch num mm deviation from plumb num substructure piling horizontal location bent caps supported by piles piles capped below final grade numinch num mm numinch num mm edge cover numinch num mm minimum vertical cutoff elevation numinch num mm deviation from plumb or batter num elastomeric bearings horizontal location inch num mm thickness num inch num mm length width num inch num mm bearing plates shoes masonry embedded horizontal location inch num mm thickness numinch num mm length width inch num mm bevel slope num radians deviation from plane numinch num mm beam seats deviation from plane numinch num mm slope for cast in place deck superstructures num slope for deck beam superstructures num elevation num inch num mm anchor bolts refer to subsection num num structure tolerances num edition num item tolerance type tolerance superstructure dimensions numinch num mm inch num mm deck form elevation inch num mm inch num mm deck thickness inch num mm inch num mm deck smoothness parallel to roadway centerline numinch num mm per num feet num m strip seal joint opening width inch num mm prestressed concrete beams refer to subsection num steel beams refer to subsection num non prestressed steel reinforcementnum cover inch num mm location spacing numinch num mm drilled shaft top of cage elevation numinch num mm numinch num mm longitudinal location of bends in bars and ends of bars numinch num mm embedded length of bars no .
num through num no .
num through num bar sizes numinch num mm no .
num through num no .
num through num bar sizes numinch num mm length of bar laps no .
num through num no .
num through num bar sizes numinch num mm no .
num through num no .
num through num bar sizes laps not permitted concrete barrier railnum tangents longitudinal straight edge deviation inch num mm per num feet num m curves longitudinal deviation from the ideal curve inch num mm per num feet num m notes num .
the project manager may approve requests for exceptions as necessary to avoid interference with anchor bolts or other conflicts .
num .
curved concrete barrier may be constructed of tangent segments each having a maximum length of num feet num m. in the event an item does not meet a specified tolerance the project manager may approve an exception if it is determined that there will be no detrimental effect to the structure .
if the project manager determines that a nonconforming item may be detrimental to the structure submit a written plan for approval that details corrective action .
num method of measurement meeting the listed tolerances is not measured for payment .
num edition structure tolerances num num num basis of payment meeting listed tolerances is incidental to the work .
include all costs associated with meeting the listed tolerances in the bid item that includes the structure item listed .
num structure tolerances num edition num num section num bearing devices num description this work is the furnishing and placing of bearing devices .
num materials furnish material in accordance with the following subsection requirements a. elastomeric devices num .
elastomeric bearing devices num num .
steel laminates num num .
polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe num num .
stainless steel sheets num b .
fiber reinforced pads num c. steel bearing plates num num construction requirements num general submit shop drawings as directed by the contract .
do not fabricate bearings prior to receiving approved drawings .
a .
packaging .
package and protect the bearings from damage and prevent contamination of the contact surfaces of the sliding elements during handling transporting and storage .
replace any bearing damaged by handling transporting or storage at no cost to the state .
b .
installation of elastomeric devices .
place bearings on a level surface .
correct any misalignment of the support to form a level surface .
the instantaneous temperatures of the sole plates must not exceed num f num c when field welding the sole plate to the steel girder or base plates embedded in concrete beams .
replace any bearing damaged during installation at contractor expense .
num bearing and anchorage place masonry bearing plates on bearing areas that meet the contract requirements .
install bearing plates level to provide full bearing on the masonry .
place masonry bearing plates on fiber reinforced pads in accordance with subsection num that project a minimum inch num mm on all sides of the bearing plate .
finish the bearing area to a level plane .
the surface must not vary by more than numinch num mm from a straightedge placed in any direction across the area .
extend the bearing area at least numinch num mm beyond the bearing contact area .
the finished elevation of the bearing surface must not vary by more than inch num mm from the specified beamseat elevation unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
a .
steel structures .
make allowances for bottom chord elongation due to dead load when setting shoes or bearing plates for steel truss spans .
install bridge rocker shoes to be vertical under full dead load at num f num c. raise spans and make adjustments if the rockers are not correctly positioned with the final dead load on spans .
b .
steel shims .
use steel shims when necessary to bring the masonry plates up to grade .
use shims of the same size as the masonry plate and a minimum inch num mm thick .
num ptfe bearings furnish ptfe bearings composed of pure unreinforced polytetrafluoroethylene fluorocarbon resin sheets bonded to the elastomeric pads .
weld stainless steel sheets to the sole plates as num bearing devices num edition num shown in the contract .
use only new materials for the manufacture of the bearings with no reclaimed material incorporated into a finished bearing .
the dimensions of the finished bearings must meet the tolerances as specified in section num .
unless otherwise approved by the project manager furnish bearing assemblies including the sole plates as a complete unit from one manufacturing source .
polish stainless steel in contact with the ptfe surface to a mirror bright finish as specified in astm anum finish no .
num .
edge weld the stainless steel sheets to the sole plates using enuml or enuml electrodes as specified in asw anum and section num sized for the stainless steel sheet .
any portion of the weld that extends above the surface of the finish of the stainless steel sheet must be ground to the surface of the sheet .
repair any imperfections in the finish of the stainless steel sheet caused by welding or grinding prior to shipment .
vulcanize bond steel backing plates and masonry plates if any to the elastomeric pad .
num method of measurement elastomeric devices are measured by each device required for num beam seat .
fiber reinforced pads are not measured for payment .
steel bearing plates are included in the cost of concrete beams but are measured in accordance with subsection num if steel girders are supplied .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit elastomeric bearing devices each elastomeric bearing devicesptfe each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num water service lines num description this work is constructing polyethylene steel and copper water service lines inch through numinch num mm through num mm nominal diameter .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements copper pipe num polyethylene pipe num seamless steel pipe num num construction requirements install water service lines make all connections and pressure test the system in accordance with the montana public works standard specifications and the contract .
meet the requirements of section num for trench excavation foundation preparation and backfilling .
num method of measurement water service lines are measured by the foot m. excavation is measured by the cubic yard mnum in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit excavation cubic yard mnum water service line foot m payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num water service lines num edition num num section num remove and relay pipe culvert num description this work is removing pipe culverts from the specified locations salvaging and storing disposing of or cleaning and relaying the removed pipe .
num materials replacement pipe for existing pipe not reusable is specified in the contract .
num construction requirements num culvert removal remove pipe culverts without damaging the pipe .
replace pipe that is damaged by removal with equal lengths of pipe at contractor expense .
the replacement pipe must be the same type and diameter and in equal or better condition than the removed pipe before it was damaged .
store removed pipe at the specified locations .
backfill pipe removal locations within the new roadway template section in accordance with subsections num and num .
num relaying culverts clean out pipe to be relaid of dirt rubbish and other materials and relay in accordance with section num .
num restoration and maintenance of existing pavement restore and maintain existing pavement structures disturbed during the removal or relaying of pipe culverts in accordance with subsection num .
num method of measurement num remove pipe culverts pipe culvert removal is measured by the foot m of pipe removed .
excavation required to remove pipe culverts is not measured for payment .
num relay pipe culverts pipe culvert removal is measured by the foot m of pipe removed .
excavation required to remove pipe culverts is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit relay pipe culvert foot m remove pipe culvert foot m payment for all costs associated with excavation required for removing or relaying pipe culverts is included in the contract unit price per foot m of remove or relay pipe culvert .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num remove and relay pipe culvert num edition num num section num culverts storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses and underpasses num description this work is furnishing and installing culverts storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses underpasses further referred to as pipe .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe pipe arches steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches num concrete pressure pipe num corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num corrugated steel pipe for underdrains num culvert sealers num ductile iron and steel water pipe num high density polyethylene pipe num pvc sewer and drain pipe num pvc water pipe num polyethylene corrugated drainage pipe or tubing num precoated galvanized steel culverts and underdrains num reinforced concrete pipe num seamless steel pipe num slotted corrugated steel pipe num steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches num materials will be acceptance inspected at the manufacturing source .
aluminized fets may only be used in conjunction with aluminum pipe or poly coated pipe .
num construction requirements num general the locations and pipe lengths shown in the contract are an estimate only and may be revised .
order pipe using only the project manager furnished list of sizes and lengths .
repair or replace pipe damaged during delivery storage or placing at contractor expense .
when the contract allows optional types of pipe material for culverts at specific locations any of the material types shown in the contract may be used for that installation .
provide the project manager in writing at the preconstruction conference a list of proposed materials for use at each location optional material is allowed .
the type and quantity of material for bidding is listed in the contract in columns under the heading basic bid items .
the information in these columns is what would be required to complete the planned installation using the basic bid pipe which is steel when it is an option .
if steel is not an option concrete pipe is the basic bid pipe .
include terminal sections and connection hardware where required .
each pipe size is paid for at the contract unit price and is full compensation for the pipe regardless of the pipe optioned by the contractor .
only work shown in the basic bid items columns in the contract is paid for at a given installation and the quantities are based on num culverts storm drains sanitary sewers num edition stockpasses and underpasses num measurements for the basic pipe .
additional work that is required due to field conditions and not associated with the selected pipe is measured and paid for on quantity changes that would result if the basic bid pipe had been installed .
all pay items required for installation are measured and paid for based on the basic bid pipe in the contract .
pay items not required for installation of the selected pipe will not be measured and paid for .
strut pipe arches if specified in the contract .
num excavation and foundation preparation excavate and prepare the pipe foundation as specified in section num .
place bedding material in accordance with section num and the detailed drawings .
num installation a. prefabricated nonmetal pipe .
lay nonmetal pipe on the foundation in standard lengths starting at the outlet end with the groove or bell ends upgrade .
recess the bell ends into the foundation .
join the pipe ends to form a positive tightfitting joint by applying uniform pressure along the entire circumferential ends of the sections .
place pipe using methods that prevent pipe damage .
replace pipe damaged during placing at contractor expense .
make the joints watertight for round concrete pipe used for irrigation storm drainage or sanitary sewage or other purposes subject to continuous flow sealing them with rubber gaskets in accordance with subsection num .
use flexible plastic joint seal compound for concrete arch pipe joints that meet subsection num requirements .
the culvert joints for normally dry installations may be sealed with rubbertype gaskets or an approved jointsealing compound except where open joints are specified .
construct angles turns and branch connections using prefabricated sections or construct as shown in the detailed drawings .
construct pipe dead ends and branches using closed ends or stoppers of equal strength to the pipe wall cemented to the pipe .
flared end terminal sections used with concrete pipe may be precast standard sections or cast in place as shown in the detailed drawings .
cap one end of concrete pipe tee sections that connect to median inlets when specified .
use a prefabricated cap or construct a cap of reinforced concrete and connect to the tee section forming a watertight joint with a strength equal to the pipe wall strength .
keep all trenches dry when placing pipe and until the joint filler has cured .
b. prefabricated corrugated metal pipe .
place the pipe on the foundation with each section approximately numinch num mm apart .
follow the pipe manufacturers instructions for connecting joints .
connect the sections with bolted coupling bands shaped to fit the formed pipe .
tap the coupling bands with mallets as the bolts are tightened .
the difference in diameter of abutting pipe ends to be coupled must not exceed inch num mm .
do not damage the pipe coating .
culverts for siphons are designated as csp siphon or csp irrigation .
construct field joints following the manufacturers instructions for the type of pipe and coupling bands or devices used .
construct the field joints for corrugated metal pipe to maintain the pipe alignment and prevent the fill material from infiltrating the joints .
provide circumferential and longitudinal strength using the structural joint performance criteria of division num section num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
ensure the field joints for siphon and irrigation pipe installations are watertight and meet subsection num requirements .
correct all installations not meeting any of these requirements at contractor expense .
num edition culverts storm drains sanitary sewers num stockpasses and underpasses num conduct all required watertightness tests on siphon and irrigation pipe installations using mt num or an approved procedure .
cap one end of steel and aluminum pipe tee sections that connect to median inlets .
use a metal cap of equal thickness to the pipe wall and attach it to the tee section forming a watertight joint of equal strength to the pipe wall strength .
field coat aluminum or type ii aluminized pipe to be in contact with fresh concrete with an asphalt mastic in accordance with aashto m num over the full surface to be in contact .
the asphalt containers label must provide the following information num .
name of product num .
specification num .
lot number num .
date of manufacture num .
quantity of mastic in container and num .
manufacturers name and address .
separate aluminum pipe coupled to dissimilar metals by either a bituminouscoated coupling polyvinyl sheeting painted with rubberbase paints or use aluminized steel .
c. structural plate types .
follow the manufacturers field erection recommendations and the contract requirements .
do not start work until the project manager and contractor have the manufacturers specifications and instructions at the work site .
do not place backfill until all plates in a ring are complete and all bolts in the structure are tightened to the manufacturers specifications .
compact backfill using handoperated compaction equipment within num feet num m of the pipe neat lines .
tighten all bolts in the assembly to the pipe manufacturers torque specifications .
longspan structure requirements are specified in the contract .
match the existing pipe section extensions for existing steel structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts and stockpasses .
remove beveled ends on existing pipe install the new pipe sections and reinstall or replace the beveled ends as specified .
pipe end treatment and slopes are detailed in the contract .
replace damaged structural plates at contractor expense .
d. ductile iron pipe .
lay pipe to the specified line and grade installing all appurtenances as specified .
uniformly support the pipe throughout its length except at joints .
make depressions in the foundation for bells couplings or other connectors at joints .
bring the pipe to grade by working the material along the barrel of the pipe leaving the joints unsupported .
flare grind file or machine the pipe cut ends to make the connections .
prevent foreign material from entering the pipe during the work .
do not deflect pipe beyond the manufacturers allowable tolerances .
inspect fittings for cracks blowholes chips and coating damage before installation .
replace defective fittings .
lower fittings into the trenches without damaging the inside lining or outside coating .
install concrete thrust blocks against undisturbed soil .
make pipe joint connections following the manufacturers recommendations .
e. storm drain manhole and trunkline connections .
num .
concrete pipe to manhole and trunkline connections .
install the pipe entering the manhole wall so the pipe end is flush with the inside wall of the manhole as shown in the detailed drawings .
grout the connection using a commercial nonshrink grout .
num culverts storm drains sanitary sewers num edition stockpasses and underpasses num num .
stub connections to trunklines .
place the stub pipe with the pipe end projecting a maximum num inches num mm into the trunkline .
contour the projecting end to match the trunklines inside wall .
grout the connection using a commercial nonshrink grout .
f. embankment protectors .
construct embankment protectors as shown in the detailed drawings .
include the flared end section the numinch num mm cmp the reducer and the bends in the total length of embankment protector .
num backfilling a .
general .
use backfill material free of sticks sod frozen soil or other deleterious matter .
do not permit stones rocks chunks of broken concrete or other material larger than num inches num mm within the top num feet num mm of the top of water and sanitary sewer lines and within numfoot num mm of the pipe top for all other installations .
replace the top num feet num mm of backfill for excavations in existing roadway sections inkind .
place backfill material in maximum numinch num mm layers loose thickness and compact .
firmly tamp the backfill under the pipe haunches .
extend the backfill material placed above the excavation limits or the ground line beyond each side of the pipe equal to twice the pipe diameter or num feet num m whichever is less .
compact backfill equally on each side of the pipe to at least numfoot num mm above the pipe top .
use equipment and methods for backfilling and compacting that do not distort misalign or damage the pipe .
replace pipe that is distorted misaligned or damaged at contractor expense .
do not allow heavy equipment to pass over any pipe until at least num feet num m or onehalf pipe diameter of backfill whichever is greater is placed and compacted over the pipe .
b .
rock embankment .
install pipes placed in blasted or fractured rock embankments as follows envelope the exposed pipe surface above the level of the bedding trench with graded bedding material .
extend the envelope to  the nominal pipe diameter or num feet num mm whichever is greater .
completely surround the pipe with graded bedding material when a bedded trench is not specified .
use graded bedding material in accordance with subsection num placed and compacted in accordance with subsection numa .
num restoration and maintenance of existing pavement restore the existing pavement excavated for pipe installation using material equal to or better than the in place pavement .
restoration includes replacing and compacting excavated aggregate base with materials equal to those in the existing roadway and placing new bituminous surfacing equal to the existing but not less than num feet num mm in thickness .
place and compact the replacement bituminous surfacing to match the adjacent pavement providing a smooth riding surface including the joints .
maintain the restored pavement areas in good condition until the new pavement is placed .
num method of measurement num pipe pipe is measured by the foot m in place from endtoend of the installed structure along the bottom or pipe invert .
gasket material specified coatings coupling bands bolts bands fittings tees risers end sections joint testing restoring disturbed pavement flared ends beveled num edition culverts storm drains sanitary sewers num stockpasses and underpasses num skewed and similar shapes or special designs riser pipe lengths riser tee sections and field cast concrete bends and connections are not measured separately but are included in the pipe lengths measured .
storm drain and sanitary sewer are measured by the foot m from manhole center to manhole center .
excess pipe installed and not ordered by the project manager is not measured for payment .
num excavation excavation is not measured for payment .
num bedding and foundation material bedding material is measured by the cubic yard mnum in place for pipes greater than numinch num m diameter and for all sizes of storm drain trunklines .
include the cost of bedding material for pipes numinch num m diameter or less in the cost of the pipe .
num embankment protectors embankment protectors are measured by the foot m of installed pipe and include all necessary hardware .
num granular bedding material for storm drains granular bedding material is measured by the cubic yard mnum in place for storm drain trunklines and laterals .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bedding and foundation cubic yard mnum embankment protector foot m granular bedding cubic yard mnum pipe type and size foot m payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete those items of work in accordance with the contract .
payment for all costs associated with excavation foundation preparation and backfilling is included in the unit price bid per foot m of pipe .
no additional payment will be made for clsm used as bedding material .
num culverts storm drains sanitary sewers num edition stockpasses and underpasses num num section num manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets num description this work is constructing manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets .
num materials num general furnish materials and precast structures in accordance with the contract requirements .
num concrete furnish class general concrete or equivalent in accordance with section num except that precast concrete manhole riser sections must have a minimum numpsi num mpa numday compressive strength .
num reinforcing steel furnish reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num .
num construction requirements num general construct and install the structures as specified in the contract .
num excavation the project manager will establish the lines and grades for structure excavation .
compact foundations in accordance with subsection num to provide full bearing for the structures .
num backfill uniformly place backfill around structures in maximum numinch num mm deep loose layers and compact in accordance with subsection num .
maintain the established structure lines and grades while backfilling .
num method of measurement manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets are measured by the unit for each specified type complete in place .
slotted drain as shown in the detailed drawings is measured by the foot m and includes the end cap and the elbow connection to the inlet .
excavation and backfill are not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit manhole manhole and inlet and inlet each slotted drain foot m payment for all costs associated with excavation and backfill required for manholes manhole and inlets inlets and slotted drains is included in the contract unit price of each respective drainage item .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num manholes combination manholes num edition and inlets and inlets num num section num guardrail and concrete barrier rail num description this work is the furnishing installing removing resetting replacing and revising metal beam guardrail cable guardrail box beam guardrail and concrete barrier rail .
num materials furnish metal beam guardrail cable guardrail box beam guardrail and concrete barrier rail materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements box beam guardrail detailed drawings concrete barrier rail num guardrail reflectors num and detailed drawings steel beam guardrail and fittings num steel guardrail post num wood guardrail posts and blocks num wire rope and connecting hardware num furnish all new materials .
do not use refurbished material unless specified in the contract documents .
num construction requirements num general install guardrail and concrete barrier rail meeting the requirements of detailed drawings and the contract .
install all guardrail terminal sections and impact attenuators according to the manufacturers instructions .
when requested by the project manager submit num copies of the installation instructions at least num calendar days prior to the installation .
submit a completed form csbnum_num prior to installing guardrail items .
at the project managers request provide documentation that each item or system of guardrail installation meets nchrp num or mash requirements .
the project manager will establish the line and grade for the terminal sections .
establish the line and grade between the terminal sections .
correct all vertical and horizontal misalignment to the specified line and grade at contractor expense .
optional terminal sections must be installed within num hours from the time the rail is exposed when conditions prevent completion in one working day .
approved temporary end treatments must be installed to protect blunt ends ends of barriers fixed objects or other obstacles within the clear zone if left for more than num hours .
temporary end treatments are not measured for payment .
place at contractor expense object markers at maximum numfoot num m spacing to delineate partial installation areas when work on those installations is not active .
excavate the postholes and drive the posts using methods and equipment that do not damage the adjacent pavement .
stop post driving that heaves the adjacent pavement more than inch in num feet num mm in num m measured using a numfoot num m straightedge parallel to the pavement .
level and repair all damaged surfaces around the installed posts .
use only steel or wood guardrail posts for new metal beam guardrail runs unless wood posts are specified .
where the contract specifies extending an existing guardrail run the contractor may use either the existing post type or other approved post types in the extension .
use the post type specified for terminal sections .
num guardrail and concrete num edition barrier rail num when wood posts and blocks are damaged cut or bored after treatment treat the injuries in accordance with subsection num .
num installing posts if the posthole is excavated compact the posthole bottom insert the post and backfill and compact around the post in numinch num mm loose layers ensuring the material is at optimum moisture before placing and compacting the next layer .
maintain the post line and grade .
always drive steel posts .
wood posts may be placed by excavating and backfilling or by driving .
replace all posts damaged by post driving .
maintain the post alignment as the posts are driven .
fill the area between the surrounding ground and the post by backfilling and tamping .
re compact the loose material around the post and level the area as directed .
remove replace or reinstall misaligned loose or damaged posts at contractor expense .
when driving wood posts pilot holes approximately num inches num mm in diameter may be used when necessary .
num metal beam guardrail erection install metal beam guardrail including the terminal sections and bridge approach sections as shown in the detailed drawings and in accordance with the contract .
splice the metal rail sections with the lap in the direction of traffic .
locate all rail splices at the posts .
construct splices laps and terminal connectors as shown in the detailed drawings and in accordance with the contract .
splice the terminal connectors for attaching the rail sections to the bridge ends by lapping as shown in the detailed drawings .
tighten the bolts through the splices and mounting bolts snug tight .
ensure the bolts project at least inch num mm beyond the nut .
place the bolt heads on the traffic side of the guardrail .
drilling or cutting in the field is only allowed for special connections and sampling .
do not use cutting torches to cut guardrail or make bolt holes .
obtain project manager approval prior to drilling bolt holes or cutting guardrail for special connections .
paint holes slots or cut ends in metal guardrail caused during installation with an approved galvanizing paint .
spot paint all bruised broken scaled or damaged spelter coating on metal parts following the paint manufacturers recommendations after the guardrail is installed .
num stiffened guardrail sections construct stiffened guardrail sections as shown in the detailed drawings .
num box beam guardrail construct box beam guardrail and bridge approach sections as shown in the detailed drawings .
num cable guardrail furnish and install cable guardrail and terminal sections in accordance with the detailed drawings and the contract .
install the posts plumb without damaging the post and its protective coating .
for terminal sections set the end posts backfill and machine compact the backfill material in numinch num mm lifts .
install reflectors in accordance with section num on every other post in the guardrail run excluding posts in the terminal sections that curve away from the driving lanes .
num concrete barrier rail install concrete barrier rail in accordance with the detailed drawings and the contract .
num edition guardrail and concrete num barrier rail num num reserved num raise guardrail unbolt the wbeam and block from the guardrail post raise and rebolt through the upper hole of the guardrail post .
num remove guardrail remove and salvage the existing guardrail from the specified locations in accordance with section num .
replace all guardrail damaged during removal at contractor expense .
dispose of removed materials not designated to be salvaged .
load all salvaged guardrail materials from the project transport and unload it at the specified location or as directed .
backfill and compact the postholes left from post removal using clean material or crushed base or top surfacing to the base of the adjacent bituminous surfacing .
apply a light asphalt spray to the hole sides and bottom and backfill with asphalt surfacing .
compact the plant mix surfacing as specified .
do not cut off and leave existing posts in place .
num revise guardrail elements revise the guardrail elements as specified .
the items include but are not limited to wbeam sections bridge approach sections and terminal sections .
num nested wbeam guardrail sections construct nested guardrail as shown in the detailed drawings .
num reset guardrail items reset existing guardrail items to the specified locations in the contract .
meet all the requirements of this section and the detailed drawings .
remove the rail elements or cable and completely remove the post .
backfill and compact the posthole bottom reinstall the posts and compact the backfill around the post in accordance with subsection num and replace the rail elements or cable to the specified height .
replace all guardrail materials damaged during the work at contractor expense .
correct all horizontal and vertical alignment in the guardrail to the specified line and grade .
num optional terminal sections supply the optional terminal sections as listed in the contract meeting the requirements for the specified item .
the items include but are not limited to metal guardrail terminal sections and box beam terminal sections .
when new terminal sections tie into existing rail it may be necessary to raise the existing rail to match the new terminal section height .
transition a minimum of num feet num m. num guardrail end terminal section widening furnish and place embankment material or gravel to widen the roadway to accommodate guardrail extensions or new optional terminal sections as shown in the and detailed drawings .
this work may also include the removal of sanding material and shaping of the existing soils to achieve positive drainage .
compact widening to a minimum of num of maximum density with no optimum moisture requirement .
num method of measurement num metal guardrail metal guardrail excluding terminal sections is measured by the foot meter from centerto center of the end posts of each section .
num guardrail and concrete num edition barrier rail num num optional terminal sections optional terminal sections are measured by the unit as shown in the detailed drawings unless otherwise specified for each type specified .
when transitions are needed to tie into existing rail the labor and equipment necessary to perform this work is not measured for payment and is to be included in the price for optional terminal sections .
num bridge approach sections bridge approach sections including tapered curbs are measured by the unit for each type specified as shown in the detailed drawings .
num stiffened guardrail sections stiffened guardrail sections are measured by the foot m from centertocenter of the end posts of each stiffened section as shown in the detailed drawings .
num box beam guardrail box beam guardrail is measured by the foot m excluding the terminal sections as shown on the detailed drawings .
num reserved num cable guardrail cable guardrail is measured by the foot m excluding the terminal sections as shown on the detailed drawings .
num cable guardrail terminal sections cable guardrail terminal sections are measured by the unit as shown on the detailed drawings .
num concrete barrier rail concrete barrier rail is measured by each numfoot num m section .
connections to the existing barriers are included in the cost of the rail .
measurement does not include those portions of barrier constructed as an integral part of sign foundations .
num impact attenuators impact attenuators are measured by the unit as specified in the contract .
num reserved num concrete barrier rail transition concrete barrier rail transitions are measured by each numfoot num m section .
num concrete barrier rail terminal section concrete barrier rail terminal sections are measured by each numfoot num m section .
num raise guardrail raise guardrail including terminal sections is measured by the foot m from centerto center of the end posts of each section .
num remove guardrail remove guardrail is measured by the foot m from centertocenter of end posts of each section removed .
material and equipment necessary for backfill and compaction of post holes is not measured for payment and is to be included in the price for remove guardrail .
num remove concrete barrier rail remove concrete barrier rail is measured by each numfoot num m section .
num edition guardrail and concrete num barrier rail num num revise guardrail elements revise guardrail elements is measured by each element revised as specified in the contract .
num nested wbeam guardrail sections nested guardrail is measured by the foot m as shown in the detailed drawings .
num reset guardrail items reset guardrail items are measured by the unit as specified in the contract .
material and equipment necessary for backfill and compaction of post holes is not measured for payment and is to be included in the price for reset guardrail .
num guardrail end terminal section widening optional terminal section widening is paid by each end section completed .
include the cost of topsoil seeding and fertilizer used in the widened areas in the unit bid price for optional terminal section widening .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following .
pay item pay unit box beam guardrail foot m bridge approach section each cable guardrail foot m cable guardrail terminal section each concrete barrier rail each concrete barrier rail terminal section each concrete barrier rail transition each guardrail end terminal section widening each impact attenuators each metal guardrail foot m nested guardrail sections foot m optional terminal section each raise guardrail foot m remove concrete barrier rail each remove guardrail foot m reset guardrail foot m reset guardrail items unit stiffened guardrail sections foot m revise guardrail elements is paid for in accordance with the appropriate section .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num guardrail and concrete num edition barrier rail num num section num fences num description this work is constructing removing and resetting barbed wire combination barbed and woven wire chain link fences and gates .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements chain link fence num hydraulic cement concrete num wire fence num fence material acceptance test samples will be taken from the materials delivered to the project .
num snow fence furnish all timbers lumber and hardware as specified .
num .
lumber used must meet the western wood products association requirements or equivalent grading rules .
grade lumber with a nominal thickness of num inches num mm as structural light framing num grading or better .
grade lumber with a nominal thickness of num inch num mm as boards num common or better .
all lumber must meet astm dnum .
num .
all treated material must meet the requirements of subsection num or the special provisions .
num construction requirements num general construct fencing before any other work is performed on all parcels of land .
this requirement may be waived where the contractor has obtained a landowner written waiver .
the waiver must state a completion date agreed to by the landowner and the contractor for completing the fence work .
maintain all existing fence enclosures .
close contractor fence openings using new permanent fence or use temporary fence cattle guards or watchman where new permanent fence can not be constructed the same day .
temporary fence may be used in place of new permanent fence if approved .
num fence preparation fence preparation consists of removal of vegetative and ground surface obstacles prior to actual fence installation .
for fence preparation clear only those portions of brush shrubs and vegetation interfering with the fence installation .
cut off trim or mow interfering vegetation without exposing bare soil in or adjacent to streams stream banks natural drainages or wetlands .
dispose of the resulting debris slash branches etc .
in accordance with subsection num .
avoid or minimize injury or damage to remaining vegetation .
do not grub excavate grade or disturb the soil surface unless in direct conflict with fence wire .
soil disturbance associated with fence preparation both inside and outside the construction limits may not be included in the swppp permit .
if disturbance of soil is unavoidable revise and update the swppp and install appropriate erosion and sediment control features i.e .
bmps as required .
prior to fence installation seed all exposed soil in accordance with the contract requirements .
the seeding dates specified in the contract do not apply to this seeding .
prior to commencing work that alters or disturbs the bed or banks of any stream or its tributaries obtain authorization from fwp commonly referred to as the spa num .
num fences num edition num prior to conducting any work that results in the placement or discharge of soils into waters of the united states including wetlands obtain a coe section num authorization .
prior to conducting any work in state waters including wetlands that causes an increase in turbidity obtain a num authorization from the deq .
use equipment that minimizes disturbance to soil and vegetation i.e .
low pressure rubber tired equipment wide tracked lowweight tractors etc .
in fence preparation areas for setting fence posts and installing fencing material .
if it is necessary to operate equipment in wetlands place and operate the equipment on mats or utilize other measures as necessary to avoid or minimize soil and vegetation disturbance .
when installing fence posts and fencing utilize measures including hand work to avoid or minimize soil and vegetation disturbance in streams and natural drainages and on or adjacent to stream banks .
num constructing chain link fence construct chain link fence as specified in the contract and in accordance with the following requirements a .
posts .
set posts vertically spaced at maximum numfoot num m centers measured parallel to the ground surface .
set posts for num num and numfoot num num and num m fence in concrete .
set end corner and pull posts for num and numfoot num and num m fence and line posts connected by bracing to end corner or pull posts in concrete .
drive or set in concrete line posts on num and numfoot num and num m fence as specified .
use the footing dimensions and post embedment depths shown in the detailed drawings .
crown concrete footings to shed water .
do not damage posts while driving them .
backfill and compact the voids around posts .
set line posts placed in solid rock without soil overburden at least num inches num mm deep .
when in solid rock set end corner gate and pull posts at least num inches num mm deep .
excavate or drill holes to a minimum width or diameter numinch num mm greater than the largest dimension of the post being set .
cut posts to the required length before installing .
the contractor may use an even post length set deeper into the solid rock at contractor expense .
for metal posts placed in bored rock holes or consolidated soils set the post plumb and fill the holes with cement grout that meets the requirements of subsection num .
work the grout into the holes to eliminate voids .
concrete footings are not required where posts are set in bored holes .
place posts set in solid rock covered by soil or loose rock to the specified depths or to the minimum solid rock depths specified above whichever is less .
when solid rock is encountered before reaching the specified depth construct concrete footings from the solid rock to the top of the ground on num num and numfoot num num and num m fence and on end corner and pull posts for num and numfoot num and num m fence .
grout around that part of the post that is in solid rock .
check that all posts are solid once they are driven backfilled or concrete is placed .
b .
top rail or cable .
pass the top rails through the line post tops providing a continuous brace from endtoend of each fence section .
join top rail sections using sleevetype couplings .
fasten the top rails to the terminal posts using pressed steel fittings .
replace the top rails with a inch num mm diameter galvanized steel cable when fences are placed within num feet num m from the edge of the nearest driving lane .
c. fence fabric .
place chain link fabric for num and numfoot num and num m fence on tangents on the post face away from the highway .
on num num and numfoot num num and num m fence num edition fences num num place the fabric as directed .
on curves place the fabric for all fence heights on the outside face of the posts on curves .
place the chain link fabric on a straight grade between posts leveling high points on the ground .
obtain the project managers approval to fill in depressions along the fence line .
stretch taut and securely fasten the fabric to the posts .
stretching by motor vehicle is prohibited .
use stretcher bars and fabric bands spaced at numfoot intervals num mm to fasten to end gate corner and pull posts .
cut the fabric and attach each span independently at all pull and corner posts .
fasten fabric to line posts at numinch num mm intervals with tie wire metal bands or other approved fasteners .
fasten the top edge of the fabric to the top rail or cable with tie wires spaced at numinch num mm intervals .
join rolls of wire fabric by weaving a single strand into the ends of the rolls forming a continuous mesh .
when a winged cattle guard is located in a chain link fence extend the wire fabric beyond the post supporting the wing and securely fasten it to the wing .
d. tension wire .
attach a tension wire to the bottom of the chain link fabric using ring fasteners at numinch num mm maximum intervals and secure at the terminal posts or pull posts using brace bands .
e. gates .
fasten chain link fabric to the gate frame end bars using stretcher bars and fabric bands and to the top and bottom of gate frame bars using tie wires for the chain link fence or by other approved standard methods .
clean welded connections on steel gate frames with burned spelter coating by wire brushing to remove all traces of the welding flux and loose or cracked spelter .
paint the cleaned areas with two coats of zinc oxidezinc dust paint mixed in a weight ratio of one part zinc oxide to four parts zinc dust .
provide the dropbar locking device for double metal gates with a num x numinch square num x num mm deep class general concrete footing crowned at the top .
provide a minimum numinch num mm hole in the footing to receive the locking bar .
f. panels .
install panels as shown in the detailed drawings .
double panels at fence corners and angle points consist of one corner post two line posts two braces two truss rods two top rails concrete and other fixtures .
single panels at gates and fence ends consist of one gate or end post one line post one brace one truss rod one top rail concrete and associated fixtures .
num constructing barbed and woven wire fence construct barbed smooth and woven wire fences meeting the contract requirements and the following a .
posts and braces .
excavate post holes footing excavations and anchors as shown in the detailed drawings .
wood posts may be driven .
repair or replace all damaged posts at contractor expense .
treat cut or trimmed areas on posts and braces with num applications of a copper naphthenate solution containing a minimum of num copper metal or with chromated copper arsenate cca in accordance with awpa mnum .
securely nail braces to terminal and brace posts .
metal posts not specified to be set in concrete may be driven .
place and grout metal posts placed in rock as specified .
backfill and compact post hole material in numinch num mm loose lifts .
num fences num edition num dampen holes before placing concrete .
ensure the concrete has set before placing and stretching the fence wire or attaching gates to the posts and braces .
b .
placing wire .
after the posts braces and footings are set place the woven wire andor barbed wire stretch it tightly and fasten to the posts .
apply tension following the wire manufacturers recommendations with a mechanical or other approved wire stretcher .
do not use motor vehicles to stretch fence .
diagonally drive ushaped staples across the wood grain so both points enter different grains .
where wire uplift occurs drive staples with the points slightly upward .
on level ground and over knolls drive staples slightly downward .
staple the wire tightly at corner end and pull posts .
the staples on line posts must allow wire movement without damaging the wire .
place deadman as shown in the detailed drawings at grade depressions alignment angles and other places where stresses might pull posts from the ground or out of alignment .
install one metal line post in each numfoot num m wood post fence run and in smaller runs between gate post ends for lightening protection .
construct gates as shown in the detailed drawings and in accordance with subsection num .
c. fence panels .
install panels as shown in detailed drawings .
num temporary fence erect temporary fence to keep livestock and traffic out of the work area .
temporary fence may remain in place only during the work or until the fence is directed to be removed .
use type fnumm as temporary fence for livestock enclosures .
construct all temporary fence from metal posts and materials in accordance with section num .
use the minimum number of braces panels deadmen and other accessories for constructing temporary fence .
undamaged material used in the temporary fence that meets specifications may be used in the permanent fence .
material not used in permanent fencing remains the contractors property .
remove temporary fence at contractor expense .
num remove and reset fence when removing and resetting a fence furnish all required materials over and above the usable salvaged fence that are new materials in accordance with section num .
required new materials are listed in the contract .
use to the extent practical materials of the same type and quality as those of the old fence that meet of section num requirements .
replace rotten damaged or broken posts and rusty unusable wire with new material .
do not use any galvanized materials with abraded or broken coating .
furnish all additional fence wire required for depressions .
carefully handle and stockpile at designated locations all removed fence determined to be salvageable .
num method of measurement num new fence new fence is measured by the foot m. the measurements are made on the fence line along the top wire or rail or along a line parallel thereto from end post to end post including wing fences to structures .
gates cattle guards or other openings are measured separately .
double sections of fence erected across depressions are measured for payment .
all other temporary closures are included in the measurement of temporary fence .
temporary fence materials ordered by the contractor but not used in the work will not be measured or paid for .
temporary fence removal is not measured separately .
num edition fences num num num remove and reset fence remove and reset fence is measured by the foot m. measurement of reset fence in place is made in accordance with subsection num .
new posts and wire required to reset the removed fence is measured as follows num .
wood and metal posts are measured by the unit num .
barbed wire is measured by the foot m and num .
woven wire is measured by the foot m. the post and wire quantity specified in the contract is an estimate only .
the actual quantity required to complete the work will be paid for at the contract unit price .
panels required for remove and reset fence are not measured for payment .
num gates gates are measured by the foot m from center to center of adjacent fence posts .
num fence panels single and double fence panels are measured by the unit .
where rw monuments are set the construction of the corner gap as shown in the detailed drawings is not measured for payment .
include the cost of this construction in the adjacent panels .
num deadman deadman are measured by the unit .
anchors are not measured for payment .
num dozer operation dozer operation is measured by the hour in accordance with subsection num .
when dozer operation is not a bid item it is incidental to and included in other fencing items .
num remove fence a .
replaced with new fence .
when the removed fence is being replaced with new fence the existing fence removal is not measured for payment .
b .
without new fence .
remove fence is measured by the foot m in place before removal along the top wire or on a line parallel thereto exclusive of gates cattle guards and other openings .
c. postholes .
backfill and compact the postholes left from post removal using clean material or crushed base .
do not cut off and leave existing posts in place .
num fence preparation fence preparation is not measured for payment but is incidental to the fencing items .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit deadman each dozer operation hour see subsection num fence panels each gates foot m new fence foot m new wood or metal posts each remove and reset fence foot m remove fence foot m when the removed fence is being replaced with new fence the cost of removing existing fence is included in the contract unit price per foot m of new fence .
fence preparation is not paid for but is included in the contract unit price of the fencing items .
num fences num edition num payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num concrete sidewalks num description this work is the construction of concrete sidewalks and the installation of detectable warning devices dwds at the locations shown in the contract .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements hydraulic cement concrete num joint materials num reinforcing steel num use dwds type num for new sidewalk construction .
dwds type num are cast directly into sidewalk .
use dwds type num for retrofits on existing sidewalks where new concrete is not being placed .
dwds type num are surface applied on the sidewalk .
meet all of the departments requirements on the qpl for dwds type num and for dwds type num .
use dwds that are a brick red color .
num construction requirements construct concrete sidewalks as specified in the contract and as follows .
num subgrade and forms excavate shape and compact the foundation to the specified width and grade .
place and compact aggregate base to the specified thickness .
use forms and form in accordance with section num and subsection num .
num concrete furnish and place concrete in accordance with section num .
place reinforcing steel as specified .
dampen the foundation and forms immediately before placing concrete .
do not place concrete on a frozen foundation course or subgrade .
construct sidewalks in accordance with subsections num and num .
num detectable warning devices install dwds so they extend the full width of the ramp and the edge of the dome panel is located no more than num inches num mm from the back of curb .
if the dwd used is embedded in concrete install so the top of the panel is flush with the adjacent concrete and the domes will protrude above the adjacent surface .
if dwds require cutting locate nonfactory edges on the exterior side of dwd installation .
num method of measurement concrete sidewalk is measured by the square yard mnum including wheelchair ramps and concrete under detectable warning devices .
dwds are measured by the square yard mnum .
a .
contracts with sidewalk work not in conjunction with roadway reconstruction .
reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker excavation or embankment crushed gravel base and disposal of material associated with the work are not measured for payment .
b .
all other contracts .
reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker disposal of material and crushed gravel base are not measured for payment .
excavation or embankment associated with the work is measured by the cubic yard mnum .
num concrete sidewalks num edition num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit dwd type num square yard mnum dwd type num square yard mnum sidewalkconcrete square yard mnum a .
contracts with sidewalk work not in conjunction with roadway reconstruction .
the cost of reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker excavation or embankment crushed gravel base and disposal of material associated with the work are included in the contract unit price of sidewalk .
b .
all other contracts .
the cost of reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker crushed gravel base and disposal of material associated with the work are included in the contract unit price of sidewalk .
excavation or embankment associated with the work is paid for in accordance with the specified type of earthwork .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num curbs and gutters num description this work is constructing curbs integral curb and gutter median curbs and furnishing and installing precast concrete curbs .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements airentrained class general concrete num bituminous mixtures num joint materials num reinforcing steel num pavement markings num num construction requirements num general construct curbs and integral curb and gutter having uniform surfaces and true lines .
remove and replace curb sections that prevent drainage or proper joining of subsequent work at contractor expense .
material may be placed adjacent to curbs and curbs and gutters num hours after the curbs or curbs and gutters are placed as long as no damage is caused .
correct all damages at contractors expense .
num foundation and forms excavate prepare and compact castinplace curb and curb and gutter foundations in accordance with subsection num .
use full depth metal or straightgrained finished lumber forms free of warp or irregularities and having the strength to resist springing or deviation from alignment and grade .
securely stake and brace forms with headers and clamps .
clean and oil form surfaces in contact with concrete before placing the concrete .
num castinplace curb and gutter moisten the foundations and forms immediately before placing concrete .
place and consolidate the concrete in uniform layers not exceeding numinch num mm loose depth .
do not place concrete on a frozen foundation course or subgrade .
construct concrete curb in accordance with subsections num and num .
once the concrete has its initial set remove the forms and repair honeycombed and rough surfaces using num mortar .
use wooden floats to remove form marks or other irregularities .
apply a brush finish to the final surface using an approved brush before the concrete sets .
finish all concrete edges including those at expansion joints to the required radii .
water cure concrete or use a curing compound in accordance with subsection num .
water cure keeping the concrete wet for num calendar days after finishing .
num slipformed concrete curb and gutter concrete curb and gutter may be constructed using a curb forming or slipform machine .
num precast concrete curbs furnish precast curb in accordance with section num .
num curbs and gutters num edition num num bituminous curbs clean surfaces receiving bituminous curb and prime with ssnum emulsified asphalt diluted num with water .
apply approximately num gallons per square yard num lmnum .
use the project surfacing bitumen mixed with water in a mixer of at least num cubic feet num mnum capacity that meets section num requirements .
the asphalt quantity in the bituminous curb mixture will be established by the project manager and will be at least num more than that used in the surfacing mixture .
feed the bituminous mixture to the extrusion or curb machine at a temperature that prevents sloughing or tearing of the material or surface .
pressurize the mixture through an orifice or plate .
the machine must heat and compact the curb as it is produced .
compact all material not placed and compacted by the curb machine using mechanical tampers .
if other than num penetration asphalt cement is used apply a fog coat of ssnum emulsified asphalt diluted num with water to the finished curb at approximately num gallons per square yard num lmnum .
num painting curbs paint curbs island curbs and median curbs in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement curb integral curb and gutter and median concrete curb are measured by the foot m along the face of the curb at the flow line .
paint and painting is measured by the gallon l in accordance with subsection num .
a .
contracts with curb integral curb and gutter median curb and precast concrete curb work not in conjunction with roadway reconstruction .
reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker excavation or embankment crushed gravel base emulsified asphalt backfill andor necessary plant mix surfacing and disposal of material associated with the work are not measured for payment .
b .
all other contracts .
reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker disposal of material and emulsified asphalt are not measured for payment .
excavation or embankment associated with the work is measured by the cubic yard mnum .
num basis of payment payment for completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit curb foot m integral curb and gutter foot m median concrete curb foot m curb paint gallon l a .
contracts with curb integral curb and gutter median curb and precast concrete curb work not in conjunction with roadway reconstruction .
the cost of reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker curing compound excavation or embankment crushed gravel base emulsified asphalt backfill andor necessary plant mix surfacing and disposal of material associated with the work are included in the contract unit price of curb and gutter .
b .
all other contracts .
the cost of reinforcing steel expansion joint material bond breaker curing compound emulsified asphalt and disposal of material associated with the work are included in the contract unit price of curb and gutter .
excavation or embankment associated with the work is paid for in accordance with the specified type of earthwork .
num edition curbs and gutters num num payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num curbs and gutters num edition num num section num roadside revegetation num description this work is reestablishing vegetative cover on specified areas with salvaged topsoil in accordance with subsection num or furnished topsoil seeding planting fertilizing mulching composting soil retention blankets and sodding .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements compost num fertilizer num mulch num reclamation seed num sod num rolled erosion control products num topsoil num water num num construction requirements num furnished topsoil when topsoil is a bid item furnish topsoil and notify the project manager of the proposed topsoil sources as soon as possible after the contract award .
topsoil from proposed sources may be used only after sample tests show the material is acceptable .
complete topsoil areas to the lines grades and elevations specified .
do not place topsoil until the designated areas are prepared and all construction work in the area is completed .
scarify or rip slopes to be top soiled .
break up ordinary sod and soil containing grass roots into maximum numinch num mm clumps .
remove and dispose of at contractor expense all clods rocks large roots litter and other foreign material exceeding num inches num mm in its greatest dimension from the topsoil before placing it on the roadway and before final acceptance .
break up the topsoil to an average num inches num mm deep .
num seeding fertilizing and mulching these requirements apply to establishing vegetation on areas disturbed by the work .
landscaping interchange areas rest areas urban areas and other areas are specified elsewhere in the contract .
a .
general .
work the areas to be seeded to the specified line and grade before seeding and fertilizing .
seed all disturbed areas .
permanent seeding of the finished slopes may require multiple seeding .
fertilizing mulching composting permanent erosion control blanket placement and seeding are specified in the contract .
after all condition seedbed surface seeding and fertilizing work is complete remove and dispose of any oversize material that protrudes num inches num mm or more above the conditioned seedbed surface .
b. seeding season .
the seeding season is october numst through may numth .
obtain the project managers approval to seed outside this period .
c. condition seedbed surface .
condition the seedbed surface area by killing growing weeds removing or mowing old weedy growth tilling disking harrowing or scarifying compacted areas and compacting unstable areas .
num roadside revegetation num edition num condition all seeding areas unless otherwise directed .
the project manager may exclude wet soft or rocky areas from conditioning .
cultivating tilling harrowing disking and similar work may if approved be performed any time after the contract is awarded .
break up tight or compacted soils into numinch num mm or smaller pieces .
remove or repair discs harrows cultipackers and similar equipment not in good operating condition .
operate disking harrowing and soil tilling equipment at right angles to the natural slopes .
prepare soil using equipment that produces a roughtextured surface ready for seeding and mulching .
operate equipment normal to the natural slopes .
the final surface must be num to num inches num to num mm below the tops of curbs catch basins and other structures .
rescarify areas to be broadcast seeded within num hours before seeding .
d. seed distribution .
num .
general .
apply seed within num hours of the final seedbed conditioning .
do not broadcast seed or hydraulic seed when weather conditions prevent uniform seed distribution .
do not cover seed with more than inch num mm of soil .
the seed application rate is specified in the contract .
num .
drill seeding .
drill seed area num and area num using equipment that regulates the seed application rate and planting depth .
acceptable drills are custom seeders furrow drills disc drills or other approved drills .
if seedsowing equipment does not have press wheels compact the seed using a cultipacker once the ground has been drilled .
maintain uniform seed distribution in the drill hopper during the work .
operate all seeding related equipment at right angles to the slope .
regulate planting depth with depth bands or coulters .
use a drill box partitioned by dividers a maximum num inches num mm apart .
seed rows a maximum num inches num mm apart and at right angles to the slope .
num .
broadcast seeding .
hand seeding or mechanical seeding of area num is preferred for all areas where drill seeding is not possible or practical .
these areas include narrow medians or areas too small to effectively operate drill seeding equipment .
num .
hydraulic seeding .
hydraulic seeding is permissible for area num only if broadcast seeding is not possible due to steep slopes or unstable footing .
do not use hydraulic seeding without the project managers prior approval .
perform hydraulic seeding in two operations a .
apply the seed with num pound num kg of wood or recycled paper mulch per num gallons num l of water and b .
apply the remaining mulch andor compost along with fertilizer if specified .
see subsection numfnum .
e. application of fertilizer .
when broadcasting seed apply the fertilizer separately .
when drill seeding do not apply seed and fertilizer in a single mixture .
the fertilizer must be applied separately either broadcast before seed application or surface banded during seeding .
f. mulching .
num .
general .
use the mulch type specified in the contract .
apply mulch to seeded areas within num hours after seeding without disturbing the seedbed surface .
numedition roadside revegetation num num do not apply mulch to ground having free surface water or if wind prevents uniform distribution .
num .
application of vegetative mulch .
uniformly apply vegetative mulch with a mulch spreader at the specified rate once seeding and fertilizing are completed .
secure all vegetative mulch to the slopes with a nonasphalt based tackifier containing either plant derived hydrocolloid or polymeric materials .
add the tackifier to the fertilizermulch slurry when wood cellulose or recycled paper fibers are used as an overspray onto the strawhay mulch .
tuck vegetative mulch on slopes numhnumv or flatter into the seedbed .
use a mulch tiller for tucking .
operate the equipment perpendicular to the slope .
use mulch tillers having round notched blades approximately inch num mm thick by num inches num mm in diameter spaced num inches num mm apart that force the vegetative mulch at least num inches num mm into the soil .
equip tillers with disc scrapers .
if temporary erosion controls are needed straw tucking followed by permanent seeding within the seeding season are acceptable measures .
num .
applying fabricated mulch or netting .
place fabricated mulch or netting on the specified or directed areas securing it to the ground using wire staples wood pegs or other approved devices .
apply the mulch or netting over the seeded areas .
num .
applying wood cellulose fiber or recycled paper mulch .
apply wood cellulose fiber or recycled paper mulch and fertilizer in one operation with a hydraulic distributor using water as the vehicle .
equip the distributor with a continuous agitator keeping the fertilizer and mulch uniformly suspended throughout the distribution cycle .
adjust the pump pressure to maintain a continuous slurry stream .
size the slurry distribution lines to prevent plugging .
equip the discharge line with hydraulic spray nozzles to uniformly distribute the slurry to the seedbed .
start mulching at the top of the slope and work downward .
use extension hoses to reach the slope extremities .
num .
finishing .
remulch areas where mulch is weather damaged .
repair seedbed and seeding damage caused by displaced mulch material and re seed the areas before remulching .
seedbed repair reseeding and remulching required due to the contractors negligence is at contractor expense .
g. composting .
use the compost type specified in the contract .
apply the compost at the rate method and sequence specified in the contract .
num sodding a .
season .
perform sodding during the normal seeding season or as specified .
b .
source of materials .
notify the project manager of the sod sources at least num days before sod cutting begins .
cut and deliver only approved sod to the project .
c. surface preparation .
prepare the surfaces to be sodded to the required cross section grade and contour .
make the surface smooth and uniform free of stones roots lumps weeds and other foreign material .
undercut the prepared surface below the adjacent areas so the top of the new sod is flush with adjacent seedbed or turfed areas and numinch num mm below sidewalk and curb tops .
break the surface up to a fine granular texture at least num inches num mm deep before placing sod .
fertilize the surface to be sodded a maximum num hours before placing sod .
use inorganic fertilizer having minimum active ingredients of num pounds of nitrogen and num pounds of pnumonum per acre num kg of nitrogen and num kg of pnumonum per hectare .
num roadside revegetation num edition num d. cutting and handling sod .
machinecut sod in uniform rectangular sections .
cut sod to a depth that retains intact the grasses live dense root system and prevents tearing or breaking of the sod .
load unload and place sod to prevent tearing or breaking of the sod .
e. placing sod .
lay sod within num hours of cutting .
protect sod from dry or cold weather until placed .
place and fit sod as close as possible staggering the joints between horizontal rows .
lay the sod strips horizontally on slopes starting at the slope bottom and work upwards .
on slopes steeper than numhnumv anchor the sod with fasteners spaced a maximum num feet num mm apart and driven flush with the sod surface .
in waterways lay the strips parallel to the flow staggered and fitted snug and even with the strips already placed .
fill gaps between sod strips with sod pieces cut to the gap size and shape .
at slope bottoms extend the sod edges at least num inches num mm into the ground or ditch bottom .
turn all other sod area edges into the ground and cover with topsoil compact and smooth to blend with the adjacent finished grades .
roller compact the sod with a roller immediately after placement .
provide a smooth even surface free from bumps and depressions .
thoroughly water the sod and reroll to ensure good soil contact .
f. sod maintenance .
water new sodded areas until the sod is firmly rooted .
maintain the new sod until it is well rooted and replace all dead dying and damaged sod as directed at contractor expense .
num erosion control blanket prepare fertilize and seed the erosion control blanket areas before placing the blanket .
handle and place it following the manufacturers recommendations .
if recommendations are not provided install as follows num .
in ditches unroll the blanket downstream and lap num inches num mm over the adjoining blanket .
bury the ends and edges to prevent water and wind undercutting .
num .
on slopes the blanket may be unrolled horizontally or vertically to the slope then lapped num inches num mm over the adjoining blanket and stapled as above .
lap the blanket in the direction of flow .
num method of measurement num topsoil topsoil is measured by the cubic yard mnum of loose material level with the haul vehicle box at the point of use on the project .
strike or level loads when directed .
all costs for obtaining and furnishing topsoil are incidental and are not measured separately for payment .
include these costs in the unit bid price for topsoil .
num seeding seeding is measured by the acre ha parallel to the ground surface .
num fertilizing fertilizing is measured by the acre ha parallel to the ground surface .
num condition seedbed surface condition seedbed surface is measured by the acre ha parallel to the ground surface .
removal of oversized material from the conditioned seedbed surface is not measured separately for payment .
numedition roadside revegetation num num num mulch a. vegetative mulch and wood cellulose fiber mulch .
vegetative mulch and wood cellulose fiber mulch is measured by the acre ha parallel to the ground surface .
b .
fabricated mulch and netting .
fabricated mulch and netting is measured by the square yard mnum in place .
c. bituminous mulch .
bituminous mulch is measured by the gallon l for the gallons l applied at the specified rate .
num sodding sodding is measured by the square yard mnum in place parallel to the ground surface .
resodded areas damaged from causes not the fault of the contractor are measured for payment .
num soil retention blanket soil retention blanket is measured by the square yard mnum in place .
num composting composting is measured by the acre ha .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit compost acre ha condition seedbed surface acre ha fabricated mulch and netting acre ha fertilizing acre ha mulch acre ha seeding acre ha sodding square yard mnum soil retention blanket square yard mnum topsoil cubic yard mnum include the cost of removing oversized material from the conditioned seedbed surface in the cost of topsoil salvaging and placing or topsoil furnished whichever is applicable .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num roadside revegetation num edition num num section num cattle guards num description this work is furnishing and installing cattle guards or removing and resetting cattle guards .
num materials num concrete furnish airentrained hydraulic cement concrete in accordance with section num for poured inplace base concrete and precast bases .
num steel furnish reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num .
furnish lowalloy weldable steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num num mpa or astm anum grade num num mpa requirements for crossbars .
furnish other steel in accordance with section num .
num paint furnish paint in accordance with the following subsection requirements aluminum epoxy two coats numbnum aluminum paint finish coat numbnum shop prime coat numbnum num cattle guards furnish standard prefabricated cattle guards in accordance with the following requirements hsnum aashto m num live loading the detailed drawings and subsections num and num .
submit all fabrication drawings for review before fabrication and footing elevations are set .
num construction requirments num excavation excavate cattle guard foundations to the specified depth allowing space for formwork .
complete and compact earth fills in accordance with section num before excavating for the cattle guard foundation .
num placing concrete bases construct pouredinplace concrete bases in accordance with section num and the detailed drawings .
furnish precast concrete bases in accordance with section num and the detailed drawings .
construct stringer bearing surfaces to provide full bearing under each stringer .
bushhammer uneven surfaces to provide even bearing .
num placing cattle guards fasten the metal structure to the base as specified .
attach the metal wings to the cattle guard and to the fence as shown in the detailed drawings .
all welding must meet the requirements of subsection num and section num .
backfill and clean up around the completed structure .
num cattle guards num edition num num painting apply one shop coat of primer to all metal parts .
apply a prime coat and a finish coat in the shop or in the field .
perform all painting in accordance with section num .
repaint damaged painted surfaces at contractor expense .
num resetting cattle guards dismantle and reset existing cattle guards at the locations specified in the contract .
num method of measurement new and reset cattle guards are measured by the unit including the concrete bases excavation and backfill .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit new cattle guard each reset cattle guard each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num structure finishes num description this work is the surface preparation painting coating and finishing requirements of steel components .
num materials furnish material in accordance with section num .
provide coatings from a single manufacturer if multiple products or coats are required .
submit documentation such as catalogue cuts or product brochures for all claimed product compatibilities .
coat powder coated items with a zincrich prime coat and a triglycidyl isocyanurate tgic polyester powder top coat .
use paint materials suitable for the environment in which they will be exposed .
either the contract or the project manager will specify the final coat color .
num paint coating systems a .
new structural systems .
furnish the products necessary for a three coat system consisting of inorganic zinc primer a midcoat of high build epoxy and a topcoat of urethane .
b. bridge and pedestrian rails .
furnish a three coat system or a tgic powder coat system .
c. pipe piling and casings .
furnish a twocomponent selfpriming epoxy .
d. cattle guards .
furnish a paint system composed of a prime coat and aluminum finish coat or aluminum epoxy paint .
e. existing structural steel .
if existing steel is to be painted the contract requirements will specify whether to fully remove the existing paint or to apply additional paint over an existing coating .
num .
full removal of existing paint .
apply a three coat system num .
overcoat .
provide a product that can be applied over the existing coating without causing the existing paint to debond .
f. miscellaneous items .
furnish one of the following twocomponent aluminum epoxy paint twocomponent selfpriming epoxy zinc phosphate alkyd leafing aluminum paint a three coat system or tgic powder coating .
g. other paint systems .
other paint systems will be considered if they are recommended for the purpose intended .
num construction requirements prevent environmental pollution including stream and air pollution caused by paint paint spray paint chips dust or other harmful materials in accordance with all federal state and local regulations and requirements .
num submittals submit the following to the project manager for review a .
paint products .
submit a written description of the complete coating system to the project manager for review at least num business days before use .
include in the written submittal the manufacturers product information including but not limited to paint characteristics surface preparation film thickness recommendation safety data repair procedures and application recommendations .
bring conflicts between the coating system submittal and the specifications to the project managers attention for resolution .
num structure finishes num edition num submittals for paints to be applied over existing paint are to be based on successful test applications to the surface being painted .
b .
pollution controls .
submit a work plan that meets osha and epa regulations .
num .
environmental .
design a containment system in accordance with the society for protective coatings sspc guide num class num num or num guide for containing debris generated during paint removal requirements except that permeable wall materials can not be used .
the containment system may be located on or off the project site .
submit shop drawings and design calculations for containment systems attached to the structure .
include design calculations that address all load conditions on the structure resulting from the containment system including debris .
specify ventilation and negative pressure equipment capacity layout and related calculations num .
worker protection .
meet the osha lead standards of title num cfr num .
describe medical surveillance exposure monitoring respiratory protection personal hygiene employee training and employee access to records hazards communication and a compliance program to reduce lead exposure to within the permissible exposure limits .
exposure monitoring must meet the national institute of occupational safety and health method num .
num .
disposal .
submit a work plan detailing how paint scrapings and wastewater will be collected and disposed of .
num .
staging and scaffolding .
submit for approval planned use of an existing structure for attachments of scaffolding or staging or any equipment on the bridge that weighs num tons num mt or more .
num surface preparation prepare a test area to define the level of surface preparation needed .
this area is to be approved by the project manager .
if the paint manufacturer recommends a higher degree of surface preparation use the manufacturers recommendations .
handclean the steel bridge bearing components containing ptfe stainless steel and neoprene pads to prevent surface damage .
remove fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges by grinding and reclean the area as specified before coating .
remove blast residue from steel surfaces with clean brushes compressed air free of oils or commercial grade vacuum equipped with a brushtype cleaning tool or by double blowing .
guard angles pier nose angles deck expansion joints and other small structural steel elements may be prepared for painting using wire brushed scrapers chisels or sand blasting as approved .
after cleaning keep steel dry and dust free and prime within num hours after cleaning .
a .
new structural steel .
brushoff blast cleaning to sspc spnum requirements all new steel that is not to be painted .
solvent wash to sspc spnum requirements then commercial blast to sspc spnum requirements all new steel that is to be painted except as noted .
solvent wash to sspc spnum requirements then blast to sspc spnum near white all new steel that is to be painted with the three coat system .
the surface profile for all new steel being painted is to be between num and num mils or as specified by the paint manufacturer .
b .
steel pipe piling and casings .
solvent wash to sspc spnum then commercial blast to sspc spnum all portions of steel pipe piling that are to be painted .
c. existing structural steel no paint present .
remove all loose material including soil concrete and loose rust in accordance with sspcspnum hand tool cleaning or sspc spnum power tool cleaning prior to solvent cleaning per sspcspnum .
brushoff blast clean to sspcspnum surfaces that are too large for the above methods .
clean to sspcspnum requirements .
num edition structure finishes num num d. existing structural steel overcoat existing paint .
clean areas of loose paint as described in subsection numc .
roughen degloss and clean existing paint surface as recommended by the paint manufacturer .
e. existing structural steel full paint removal .
clean to sspcspnum and sspcspnum .
f. surface cleanliness and profile .
clean and establish a surface profile on the steel as if it were new structural steel .
g. galvanized surfaces .
treat galvanized surfaces with phosphoric acid solutions of the zinc phosphate of phosphate chromate types formulated for this use .
dry the treated surface for num minutes and rinse with water .
begin painting dry surface within num hours .
num painting protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon or under the structure the superstructure and substructure against damage or disfigurement by splatters splashes smirches or over spray of paint material .
clean all surfaces with paint damage at the contractors expense .
a .
general .
unless otherwise approved by the project manager painting season for structural steel metal posts or poles and bridge rail is from may numst to october numst .
apply paint only to dry clean surfaces .
do not paint when weather conditions would cause unsatisfactory results .
allow each coat of paint to dry before applying succeeding coats .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for drying time unless field conditions require longer drying time .
the project manager may stop painting operations at any time if current or impending weather conditions could cause unsatisfactory coating performance .
provide inspectors ready and safe access to work at all times .
the project manager will suspend work for unsafe or inadequate access to work .
ensure all fabrication inspections are complete prior to painting .
thin paint only as recommended by the manufacturer .
b .
paint representative .
furnish the services of a painting technical representative from the paint manufacturer at the beginning of paint application to notify the project manager that surface preparation is adequate and to provide technical assistance to the contractor in application methods that may be unique to the particular product used .
keep this technical representative oncall as required during operations .
do not apply paint until surface preparation has been approved by the project manager .
do not apply additional or subsequent coats of paint without the project managers approval .
c. application .
if using the three coat system apply three coats of paint to all new steel work .
unless noted otherwise apply a minimum of two coats of paint for all other paints listed in subsection num .
paint in a neat and workmanlike manner .
apply paint in full coats by brush or spray completely covering all surfaces .
apply paint by brush or spray following the paint manufacturers recommendations to produce a uniform coat to the metal or previous paint coat .
if using brush painting thoroughly coat surface irregularities and brush out and smooth to produce an even paint film thickness .
use spray pressure tanks with an agitator to thoroughly stir the paint .
if surfaces are inaccessible to paint brushes paint with sprayers or daubers made for that purpose .
keep materials painted under cover in damp or cool weather until the paint has dried or weather permits removal of cover .
num .
shop paint .
apply a shop coat to all metal surfaces unless otherwise specified .
do not paint surfaces in contact with other metal surfaces or concrete except as noted in num structure finishes num edition num subsection numa .
this includes faying surfaces and contact surfaces of nuts bolts and washers for bolted connections .
apply shop coat immediately after fabrication shop inspection and shop cleaning are complete and the work is accepted .
do not load materials for shipment until paint is dry .
do not apply field coats in the fabrication shop except by written approval of the project manager .
use erection marks for field identification of members on painted surface .
use paint for marking that is compatible with the shop coat and the first field coat .
cover erection marks fabricators name and other identification with subsequent coats .
num .
spot painting .
field clean masonry and sole plates bottom of expansion devices and all parts of steel inaccessible for painting after erection as noted above .
spot coat and apply all field coats before erection .
paint on site and allow drying thoroughly before assembling .
handle painted material carefully to prevent damage .
repair and repaint damaged surfaces at no cost to the state .
apply the spot coat after erection and field cleaning is approved by the project manager to the edges of plates rolled shapes and to the heads of bolts and nuts and areas where the shop coat has been damaged .
where the shop coat is damaged the project manager may require a substantially complete reconditioning or replacement of the shop coat .
this painting is considered spot painting and is done at no cost to the department .
reseal small cracks and cavities not sealed by the first field coat with a zinc paste before the second field coat is applied .
mix paint as recommended by the paint manufacturer while in original containers .
mix or agitate paint in containers throughout application period .
when mixing twocomponent paint systems mix each component first and then mix together .
the project manager may allow hand mixing when each coat of paint is num gallons num l or less .
minimum dry film thicknesses dft are shown in table num unless in conflict with the manufacturer recommendations .
table num minimum dry film thickness paint system minimum dry film thickness three coat system primer num mils above peaks of surface profile second coat num mils finish coat num mils epoxy paint for pipe piles and casings first num coats with total dft of num mils final coat num mils epoxy mastics for misc .
structural steel num mils per coat for new steel or existing coatings num mils per coat for lightly rusted surfaces .
twocomponent epoxies num mils per coat num mils over light rust calcium sulfonate alkyd num mils per coat zinc phosphate alkyd num mils for primer coat num mil for finished coat aluminum epoxy paint num mils per coat num edition structure finishes num num num weather conditions apply paint using manufacturers recommendations for temperature air substrate and paint material and relative humidity or as follows whichever is more restrictive .
do not apply paint when ambient temperature is at or expected to drop below num f num c within num hours .
do not apply paint when rain snow or condensation is expected within num hours after application at the location where paint is applied .
do not apply paint when the relative humidity is greater than num or when temperature and humidity cause condensation on the surface to be painted .
do not apply paint to metal with surface temperatures over num f num c or when the surface temperature causes the paint to blister or produce a porous paint film .
neither weather conditions nor department acceptance of paint materials negate your responsibility for satisfactory application of paint .
if the painting is unsatisfactory remove paint thoroughly clean the surfaces and repaint at no cost to the department .
the painting is unsatisfactory if rusting occurs the paint coat lifts blisters wrinkles the paint has excessive runs or sags the paint shows evidence of application under unfavorable conditions the workmanship is poor impure or unauthorized paint has been used or for other reasons determined by the project manager .
num steel components a .
metal bridge rail .
apply the spot coat and all required field coats to the following contact areas before erection rail to post contact surface expansion sleeves and rail post base plates .
apply required field coats to the rest of the rail after erection fitup and final adjustment of the rail to line and grade .
b .
steel pipe piles and casings .
paint piles and casings as described in subsections num and num .
c. existing structural steel .
apply and undercoat of paint prior to the other field coats to all exposed edges of plates and rolled shapes the heads of rivets bolts and nuts and all surfaces where bare metal is exposed .
num method of measurement structure finish is not measured separately but is incidental to the items being finished .
num basis of payment structure finish is not paid for separately but is included in the cost of the item finished and includes all materials and resources necessary to complete the work .
num structure finishes num edition num num section num riprap and slope and bank protection num description this work is the construction of protective rock stones gravel or concrete coverings as specified .
riprap is a cover of stone or fragmented rock with or without grout placed along embankment slopes stream banks culvert inlets and outlets foundations bridge berms dikes and other specified locations .
bank protection is a cover of rock or coarse gravel placed on the side slopes of structure channels and other specified locations .
concrete slope protection is a cover of hydraulic cement concrete placed on slopes at structure ends .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements bank protection num bedding material num hydraulic cement concrete num handlaid random and grouted riprap num sandgravel cushion num num construction requirements num riprap a .
general .
place the riprap at the locations specified in the contract .
key the riprap ends into the embankment slopes at least num feet num mm from the outer face of the riprap for the full height of the riprap .
b. handlaid riprap .
bed the stones at right angles to the slope with the larger stones used in the lower courses .
lay the stones in close contact with staggered vertical joints and placed so each stone rests on the embankment slope instead of the underlying stones .
fill the spaces between the stones with smaller stones or rock securely placed .
finish the work to present an even tight plane varying no more than num inches num mm from the general contour of the revetment .
provide a minimum riprap thickness of num inches num mm measured perpendicular to the slope or as specified .
c. random riprap .
place the stones on the slopes to form the specified cross section .
uniformly distribute the smaller stones throughout the work .
manipulate the stones by hand or machine to provide a uniform surface and stable mass .
provide the riprap thickness specified in the contract .
place the riprap around pipe openings without damaging the pipe .
repair damaged pipe at contractor expense .
d. grouted riprap .
provide a minimum riprap thickness of num inches num mm measured perpendicular to the slope or as specified .
place one or more layers of bedding material before placing the riprap as specified .
place each bedding layer on the prepared surface to the specified thickness in one operation without segregating the layer .
finish the top layer to produce an even surface free from mounds or ridges .
do not intermix the materials of each layer .
num riprap and slope num edition and bank protection num fill the voids between stones with spalls or small stones so all stones are wedged or keyed .
prevent earth and sand from filling the spaces between the stones .
finish the final surface to provide an even tight surface with the plane not varying more than num inches num mm from the general contour .
wet the riprap surface and fill the crevices and openings with at least num inches num mm of mortar .
immediately sweep the surface with a stiff broom .
grouting may begin when the ambient temperature is at least num f num c and rising and must stop when the ambient temperature is num f num c and falling .
keep finished grout work moist for num days .
num bank protection bank protection may be handplaced or machine placed and leveled .
construct the finished bank protection to be stable with no voids larger than the smallest stone used in the work .
use rock spalls or gravel to fill the voids .
not more than num of the total bank protection volume may be earth sand or rock material smaller than numinch num mm for filling voids .
bed the bank protection as shown in the contract .
num concrete slope protection trench shape compact and trim the slopes as specified before starting concrete work .
excess excavated material may be used elsewhere in the work or disposed of by the contractor .
construct the concrete slope protection as specified or directed .
num concrete drainage chute construct concrete drainage chutes as shown in the detailed drawings .
num method of measurement num riprap a. handlaid and random riprap .
handlaid and random riprap is measured by the cubic yard mnum complete in place .
the volume measured for payment is that bounded by the staked length and height and the plan thickness .
excavation is incidental to the riprap and not measured for payment .
b. grouted riprap .
grouted riprap is measured by the square yard mnum on the face of the revetment .
excavation is incidental to the riprap and not measured for payment .
bedding material is measured by the cubic yard mnum .
num bank protection bank protection is measured by the cubic yard mnum complete in place .
the volume measured for payment is that bounded by the staked length and height and the plan thickness .
excavation and bedding material are not measured for payment .
num concrete slope protection concrete slope protection is measured by the square yard mnum .
measurement is made parallel to the surface of the exposed surface area including the surfaces of curbs and head walls .
excavation is incidental to the item and not measured for payment .
sandgravel cushion is measured by the cubic yard mnum compacted in place .
num concrete drainage chute concrete drainage chutes are measured by the cubic yard mnum and include the excavation concrete placement and bank protection at the chute ends .
num edition num riprap and slope and bank protection num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit bank protection cubic yard mnum bedding material cubic yard mnum concrete drainage chute cubic yard mnum concrete slope protection square yard mnum grouted riprap square yard mnum handlaid and random riprap cubic yard mnum sandgravel cushion cubic yard mnum payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num riprap and slope num edition and bank protection num num section num retaining walls num description this work is constructing concrete and metal bintype retaining walls .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section and subsection requirements backfill for metal bintype retaining walls num hydraulic cement concrete num metal bintype retaining walls num reinforcing steel num num construction requirements num foundations excavate and prepare foundations for concrete retaining walls in accordance with subsection num .
construct metal bintype retaining wall foundations to the established lines and grades and compact in accordance with subsection num .
the project manager will inspect and approve all foundations before subsequent work .
num concrete retaining walls construct concrete retaining walls as specified in the contract .
perform concrete work in accordance with section num .
remove all deleterious material from the footings before placing concrete .
prepare the footing surface in accordance with subsection num .
make vertical construction joints in accordance with subsection num .
num bintype retaining walls assemble the wall parts following the wall manufacturers recommendations .
if approved the wall height and depth may be varied but can not exceed the maximum dimension shown .
two or more retaining wall designs may be used in the same wall using standard split columns to make the step back connection .
num backfill a .
concrete structures .
furnish the backfill material specified in the contract .
place backfill as specified in subsection numb .
b .
metal bintype retaining walls .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for placing and compacting backfill material .
if no recommendations are made bring the backfill up equally inside and outside the bins as follows for backfill material outside the bins use roadway excavation and place it as specified in subsection numb .
furnish backfill material for inside the bins in accordance with subsection num .
place the backfill in numinch num mm maximum compacted lifts completely filling in all corrugations .
compact backfill as specified in subsection num .
hollow sounding corrugations in the bin wall face detected by the inspector is cause to remove replace and recompact the backfill at contractor expense .
num retaining walls num edition num num method of measurement num concrete concrete is measured by the cubic yard mnum in accordance with subsection num .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel is measured by the pound kg in accordance with subsection num .
num metal retaining walls metal bintype retaining walls are measured by the nominal square foot mnum of facial area of wall .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made as follows pay item pay unit concrete cubic yard mnum metal retaining wall square foot mnum reinforcing steel pound kg payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num irrigation facilities and headwalls num description the work is constructing irrigation facilities and headwalls .
num materials furnish material in accordance with the following section requirements concrete class general num num construction requirements construct irrigation facilities and headwalls in accordance with the following excavate in accordance with the applicable section num .
construct and install concrete structures in accordance with section num .
place reinforcing steel as shown in the contract .
moisten all surfaces where concrete is to be placed before the concrete is placed .
num method of measurement concrete is measured in accordance with subsection num .
reinforcing steel and excavation are incidental to concrete and not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit concrete see subsection num payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all necessary resources to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num irrigation facilities num edition and headwalls num num section num conduits and pull boxes num description this work is furnishing and installing plastic and steel electrical conduit including fittings junction boxes pull boxes and accessories .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements conduit num pull boxes num num construction requirements num general install conduit and pull boxes in accordance with the nec .
conduit lengths in the contract are estimated and may require changes approved by the project manager to avoid underground obstructions .
refer to subsection num regarding locating of underground utilities before excavation .
provide the specified conduit type and size or substitute a larger size conduit at contractor expense .
do not change conduit size within any conduit run .
use minimum numinch num mm diameter conduit between pull boxes and adjacent standard bases .
have conduit enter the foundation at least num inches num mm below the top .
conduit stubs on structures are specified in the contract .
place and securely hold in position conduit ends anchor bolts and other fittings set in concrete until the concrete sets .
lay conduit a minimum of num inches num mm below the curb grade in sidewalk areas and not less than num inches num mm below the finished grade in all other areas .
install conduits under railroad tracks to railroad company requirements .
notify the department and the railroad company at least num hours before starting work on railroad property .
terminate conduit in standard or pedestal foundations at least num inches num mm above the foundation top .
keep conduit within foundations at least num inches num mm from the foundation face .
extend conduit terminating in standards or pedestals above the foundation and slope it towards the handhole opening .
terminate conduit entering concrete pull boxes num inches num mm inside the box wall at least num inches num mm above the bottom and slope it to aid cable pulling .
locate conduit entrances in pull box bottoms near the end walls leaving most of the box clear .
install conduit outlets in the box from the direction of the run .
seal conduit leading into socket walls lights or fixtures below the pull box grade using a watertight sealing compound .
install a pull wire in all unused conduits over num feet num m long .
double at least num feet num mm of pull wire back into the conduit at each termination point for runs over num feet num m double numfoot num mm back for shorter runs .
install a conduit expansion joint detailed in the contract where the conduit crosses a fixed or structure expansion joint .
equip each expansion fitting with a grounding strap jumper .
thoroughly clean contact areas before clamping grounding straps .
secure all conduit bonds lighting bracket anchor bolts and bridge rail anchor bolts to form a continuous mechanical and electrical system .
when not included as part of a new foundation furnish install and pay for all work and materials such as grounding straps and bare awg no .
num wire necessary to make a continuous grounded system as part of the unit price for conduit .
num conduits and pull boxes num edition num clean out existing underground conduit incorporated into new conduit with compressed air and mandrel for size if required .
install pull boxes and conduits as specified with the pull box covers flush with the concrete facing or as directed .
compact backfill material for conduit trenches constructed outside of the roadbed sections to the density of the adjacent material .
restore existing surfaces disturbed by conduit or pull box installations to the original type and condition .
push or bore conduit under existing roadways .
install conduit that is to be under new surfacing prior to new surfacing being put in place .
keep jacking and drilling pits at least num feet num mm away from the roadway surface edge .
do not undermine the roadway surface or soften subgrade when using water .
open cutting across the existing roadway will be allowed only after num unsuccessful attempts at conduit installation using either a fluid assisted directional boring system with a minimum push and pull back force of num lbf num kn or a directional rod pusher with a minimum push and pull back force of num lbf num kn .
the project manager may approve cutting small test holes in the roadway surface to locate obstructions .
when approved by the project manager trench across paved roadways without disturbing or injuring the paved surface on both sides of the trench .
cut asphalt pavements leaving a straight cut face .
excavate install conduit and backfill with approved material .
fill the top numfoot num mm of the trench with compacted plant mix or as directed .
replace all damaged pavement .
fill open cuts across roadways with clsm in accordance with the contract .
furnish and place clsm as an alternative to compacted soil to the lines and grades shown in the contract .
submit num copies of a mix design to the project manager for approval num calendar days before start of production .
provide clsm in accordance with section num .
payment for all costs associated with furnishing and placing clsm is included as part of the conduit bid item .
num plastic conduit excavate trenches for plastic conduit a minimum num inches num mm deep .
tamp the trench bottom and bed with num inches num mm of sand before laying the conduit .
once the conduit is placed place and compact sand or soil free of rocks or hard lumps num inches num mm above the pipe .
complete the backfill using material passing a minus numinch num mm screen .
join conduit using a solventwelded slipfitter coupling to provide a watertight joint .
separate plastic parallel and perpendicular conduit runs from each other with at least num inches num mm of sand or soil cushion .
cap open ends of conduit to prevent moisture dirt or rocks from entering the conduit .
for plastic conduit runs num feet num m or longer leave one end disconnected or insert an o ring expansion coupling near one end of the run .
num steel conduit install rigid conduit in accordance with the nec article num .
make field cuts square and true so that the ends join full circumference .
ream the conduit ends to remove burrs and rough edges .
slip joints or running threads are not permitted for coupling conduit .
use an approved threaded union coupling when a standard coupling can not be used .
coat any new threads on conduit with a cold galvanizing compound before making couplings .
num edition conduits and pull boxes num num tighten couplings until the conduit ends are brought together making a good electrical connection throughout the entire conduit run .
paint damaged conduit coating with a cold galvanizing compound .
thread and cap conduit with standard pipe caps until the wiring is placed .
install insulated grounding bushings when caps are removed .
connect new steel conduit directly to stubs of existing steel conduit protruding from existing foundations and at nearest coupling points .
new threaded joints may be approved by the project manager if the above requirements are met .
do not use plastic conduit in the system .
make conduit field bends having a minimum radius of six times the inside diameter of the conduit .
factory conduit bends must not crimp or flatten the conduit and use the longest practical radius .
num pull boxes and manholes construct and install pull boxes and manholes as specified .
the contractor may install additional pull boxes to aid the work at the contractors expense .
install pull boxes and manholes with covers level with curbs sidewalks and surrounding ground .
bed the box bottoms in concrete or crushed rock as specified .
when replacing or adjusting an existing pull box adjust conduit stub heights accordingly .
when installing pull boxes in sidewalk install so water runs away from the pull box lip .
when installing pull boxes in open ground encase pull box in a class general concrete pad extending num inches num mm horizontally away from the pull box in all directions and at least num inches num mm deep .
prevent damage to any existing pull box to be reused on this project .
any pull box damaged by the contractor is to be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the department .
this item includes all excavation gravel base the concrete pad around the pull box placement of the pull box electrical bonding of conduits backfill and repair of the surface and surrounding area .
num method of measurement num lump sum basis when a conduit system or portion thereof is specified in the contract on a lump sum basis the system is measured by the lump sum .
num conduit conduit is measured by the foot m. num pull boxes and manholes pull boxes and manholes are measured by the unit .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit conduit foot m conduit system lump sum manhole each pull box each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num conduits and pull boxes num edition num num section num traffic signals and lighting num description this work is installing or modifying of traffic signals lighting and other electrical systems .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following section requirements hydraulic cement concrete num lighting and signal materials num num construction requirements num general consult with the project manager and affected utility companies about the work prior to commencement of work .
obtain daily safety circuit clearance from the servicing utility before starting work on existing series street lighting circuits .
pull cutout plugs and place worker signs at cutout boxes before work is started .
use rosin core solder in all electrical soldered connections .
pick up departmentfurnished material and equipment from the traffic engineering section num prospect avenue helena montana and transport to the project as part of the contract unit price .
provide the traffic signal engineer at least num business days advance notice before arriving to take delivery .
the datetime arranged for equipment pickup will be mutually agreed to and be as close as possible to the contractors request .
repair or replace all existing improvements and equipment disturbed damaged or removed in performing the work at contractor expense .
the locations in the contract for signal and light standards controller pedestals conduit runs pull boxes illuminated signs and appurtenances are approximate .
the project manager will establish the exact field locations and elevations .
furnish and install all incidental parts not specified but necessary to complete or modify the traffic signal lighting or other electrical systems at contractor expense .
make arrangements with the serving utility for providing service to the project .
work with the serving utility to determine the schedule for and exact location of the service .
pay all fees and energy costs used for temporary contractor operations .
the department will pay the energy costs to operate signals and lighting used by the public .
all systems must be complete and operable when the work is completed .
coordinate all construction activities to ensure all interim andor permanent pavement markings and all associated signs are in place prior to the signal turnon .
place new traffic signal installations into flash for a period of num to num days immediately prior to the turnon .
the traffic signal will be put into operation upon approval and at the sole discretion of the traffic signal engineer from the traffic engineering section .
the sole discretion of the traffic signal engineer is based on the whether the project intent has been met the completeness of the project and the ability to turn on the traffic signal safely .
inform the project manager of the desired turnon date prior to the time the signals are to become operational .
have the project manager inform the traffic signal engineer of the desired turnon date at least num weeks prior to that date .
the date arranged for the signal turnon will be mutually agreed to and be as close as possible to the contractors desired turnon date .
num equipment lists and drawings submit the following for approval after award num traffic signals and lighting num edition num num .
a complete list of the proposed equipment and material .
include the quantity description size name of the manufacturer and catalog number of each item .
indicate which items are on the qpl .
num .
manufacturers product data sheets for each item of equipment and material listed that are not on the qpl .
the data sheets must have the specific items to be used underlined in red or highlighted including item specifications .
num .
shop drawings design calculations and welding procedures for all metal signal and luminaire standards that are not on the qpl .
check and approve the shop drawings and design calculations before submitting and show the contractors approval on the drawings .
num .
documentation required by the qpl for items that are on the approved qpl list .
num .
certified mill test reports for pole material and the manufacturers certification that pole material and galvanizing meets specifications .
materials and equipment listed as approved on the qpl at the time that the list of proposed equipment and materials is submitted may be accepted as a preapproved qpl item in lieu of the normal submittal and approval process outlined in this section .
obtain further information and requirements on the qpl website located at httpwww.mdt.mt.gov within the contractingconsulting link .
the department has num business days after receipt to approve the submittals .
upon receipt of the approved list of equipment and material immediately order the materials and submit copies of the dated purchase orders for major items .
resubmit any disapproved items for department review within num business days of notification of disapproval .
submit copies of the invoices showing the shipping dates within num calendar days of the invoice dates .
the calendar date or the number of workingcalendar days allowed for completion of the contract will be adjusted by the number of days the departments review of the submittals overran the departments review time if the departments delay effects the contractors operation as shown on the most recently reviewed schedule .
no additional compensation is allowed for these departmentcaused delays .
the department is not liable for any materials purchased labor performed or work delay except as stated above before approval of the required submittals .
all material is subject to inspection after delivery to the project and during installation on the project .
failure by the project manager to note defective material or faulty workmanship during construction does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for removing or replacing defective material or redoing work at contractor expense .
inspection or sampling of certain materials may be made at the factory or warehouse before delivery to the site at the project managers discretion .
no material rejected before delivery is to be delivered to the project and all material rejected on the project must be removed from the work .
submit all equipment guaranties and warranties .
comply with the requirements of subsection num .
num maintenance of signals maintain existing traffic signals that are moved or modified once work begins .
the responsibility for existing traffic signals continues with the agency normally responsible for the traffic signals until work begins .
be responsible for new or modified traffic signals placed in service until the project is accepted .
provide in writing the names and phone numbers of the persons responsible for the operability and maintenance to the jurisdictional law enforcement agency and the project manager in case of signal malfunction .
num edition traffic signals and lighting num num num excavation and backfilling excavate for conduit foundations other equipment and materials as specified .
excavate trenches to the width necessary to install electrical equipment materials and foundations .
saw cut all existing pavements before excavating .
do not start excavation until the conduit equipment and materials are on site .
place excavated material without obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic or surface drainage .
remove and dispose of surplus excavated material at the end of each workday .
backfill excavations in accordance with subsection num .
bring excavations up level with the adjacent surface or grade to drain as required until permanent repairs are made .
when construction is suspended each day clear all equipment and material from the roadway for public use as specified in section num .
num removing and replacing improvements replace or reconstruct existing sidewalks curbs gutters pavement bituminous surfacing base material landscaping and other improvements removed broken or damaged by the contractor with equal or better quality materials .
cut concrete sidewalk and pavement borders to be removed without damaging the adjacent surface .
whenever a part of the existing concrete sidewalk driveway or pavement is broken or damaged remove the entire square or slab and replace the concrete as specified .
repair or remove and replace all existing improvements damaged by the contractor at its expense .
num foundations construct post standard controller cabinet and pull box concrete encasing pad foundations using class general or better hydraulic cement concrete in accordance with section num .
place the concrete foundation bottoms on undisturbed ground .
monolithically pour foundations where practical .
form the exposed faces .
ensure forms are rigid and braced true to line and grade .
finish the footing tops for posts and standards except special foundations to the curb or sidewalk grade or as directed .
position and hold in place conduit ends and anchor bolts using a template until the concrete has set .
provide the proper anchor bolt circle for all standards .
install luminaire and type num signal foundations to ensure that no portion of the foundation or base that is nonbreakaway projects more than num inches num mm above the ground line .
leave anchor bolts projecting at least num inches num mm from the foundation .
apply an ordinary surface finish to the exposed concrete surfaces in accordance with subsection numd .
where obstructions prevent the construction of planned foundations the contractor may propose an alternate foundation construction method .
posts poles standards and pedestals may be erected plumbed and raked after the foundation concrete has cured at least num hours .
concrete quantity increases for foundations to accommodate the standard furnished by the manufacturer are at contractor expense .
construct foundations to accommodate the conduit and anchor bolts as specified .
do not use pancake grounds .
reinforce foundations with no .
num num hoops at numfoot num mm centers and with eight no .
num num bars equally spaced around the hoops .
form the top num inches num mm of the foundation beveling the exposed concrete edge num inches num mm .
electrically bond all steel conduits in each foundation to an anchor bolt using an awg no .
num copper grounding strap .
connect a bare copper awg no .
num solid wire between the grounding lug on the standard and the grounding strap .
num traffic signals and lighting num edition num num standards field drill other holes for wire entry mounting pedestrian and vehicle signals or pedestrian pushbuttons .
treat the holes or threads with a cold galvanizing compound following the manufacturers recommendations .
seal unused pipe tenons on mast arms with metal caps .
once the nonbreakaway standards posts or pedestals are erected and the installation complete grout the gap between the base and foundation using grout in accordance with subsection num .
form or drill a inch drain hole in the grout at the lowest point .
repair all damage to galvanized pole and standard surfaces by applying one coat of cold galvanizing compound to the damaged area .
num luminaires check luminaires on the ground to ensure they provide the specified ansiies light distribution pattern before mounting .
adjust the luminaires at night as directed to provide the best roadway light distribution .
notify the project manager when the luminaire system is complete .
the luminaires may be put into operation when necessary for public use as directed by the project manager .
num advanced flashing beacons furnish mounting hardware to mount the traffic signal and sign as shown in the detailed drawings .
furnish a traffic signal as specified in subsection num .
payment for the sign and its mounting is covered on the signing plans .
num conductors and cable install wiring in accordance with the nec requirements .
neatly arrange and lace wiring in cabinets junction boxes and the like .
run conductors in conduit except inside poles .
remove all dirt and moisture from the conduit runs before pulling wiring .
use powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricant when placing conductors in conduit .
run signal light conductors without splices from a terminal block located in the cabinet compartment or signal head to a similarly located terminal block .
splice conductors only where specified using approved watertight connectors .
locate connectors in pole bases to be easily accessible through the handhole .
furnish watertight connectors with midget ferrule type fuses .
leave num feet num m of slack for all cables or conductors entering each cabinet .
prepare cables for connection in the cabinet by removing at least num feet num mm of the cable sheath .
coil slack cable and conductor neatly inside the cabinet .
furnish spade type connectors for all of the conductors in each cable .
supply connectors and fuses shown in the contract and required to complete the work .
include the cost of these items in the bid items for cable or conductor .
leave at least num feet num mm of slack for each cable and conductor at each standard and pull box .
use a conductor separate from the signal light circuit for all numvolt circuits such as pedestrian pushbutton circuits .
when conductors and cables are pulled through conduit tape the conductor and cable ends to seal out moisture until the splices are made or terminal appliances attached .
tape the ends of spare conductors .
tag cables at controller cabinets to show routing .
label cable and conductor with the appropriate pole number or as approved by the project manager to show individual wire routing .
a .
detector loop shielded cable .
ground the drain wire at the controller cabinet and dead end where the cable connects to the loop wires .
make cable to loop wire connections within the pull boxes with soldered waterproof splices .
num edition traffic signals and lighting num num b .
emergency preemption detector cable .
run the cable from the detector head to the discriminator .
follow the preemption manufacturers recommendations for detector cable connections at the discriminator and detector head .
c. num ohm coaxial cable .
use a standard type n male connector with silver plated bodies and pins at the end of the cable .
use type n connectors manufactured by the coaxial cable manufacturer .
provide a jumper cable to connect the lightning arrestor to the local radio that meets all of the same specifications as the coaxial cable and type n connectors listed above .
provide a jumper cable that is approximately num feet num m in length .
a pre manufactured super flexible jumper cable may be used in place of coaxial cable .
route the cable from the yagi antenna through the traffic signal pole as shown in the details .
field drill a hole in the traffic signal pole of approximately inch num mm diameter for cable entrance .
break sharp edges and treat the hole with cold galvanizing compound .
furnish and install a cableprotecting weatherproofing grommet to ensure the installation is weather tight .
furnish and install a stainless steel wire mesh grip to provide strain relief for the cable .
provide approximately num feet num m of extra cable in the lower right side of the controller cabinet prior to making the connection to the lightning arrester .
install coaxial cable in one continuous run from the antenna to the controller cabinet .
do not place stress on the cable during installation such that the cable is twisted or stretched .
num service and control assembly equip and locate service and control assemblies as shown in the contract .
meet all applicable codes and local utility company requirements .
furnish lock and num keys to the lock .
service pole locations shown in the contract are approximate .
the contractor project manager and serving utility will jointly determine the exact locations .
the utility must specify the riser location when the contractor is to install the lower section of a riser on a utility pole .
include the cost of the num x num inch num x num mm pressure treated wood post if necessary as part of the service assembly bid item .
seat backfill and compact around the poles .
compact backfill in numinch num mm lifts .
plumb and rake the pole as directed .
treat injuries cuts and holes in poles after treatment with three applications of copper napthenate cun solution containing a minimum num copper metal or with cca in accordance with awpa mnum .
furnish all steel conduit ground wire insulated clevis service wire all mounting hardware and fittings required to complete this item of work .
include the cost of these items if necessary as part of the service assembly bid item .
run a bare awg no.num solid copper ground wire from the cabinet to a inch by numfoot num mm x num m copperweld ground rod and clamp as shown in the contract .
num photoelectric controls wire photoelectric controls to meet the contract requirements .
mount the control at the top of the standard with the photocell oriented toward the north sky or as directed .
use a num awg no .
num signal cable in accordance with subsection num between the photoelectric controller and the electrical service .
include the cost of the photoelectric control if necessary as part of the service assembly bid item .
num traffic signals and lighting num edition num num control cabinet pedestals locate the pedestal as specified or directed .
construct the pedestal including the concrete work as specified .
furnish a bare solid copper awg no .
num ground wire ground rod clamp and inch x num feet num mm x num m copperweld ground rod for the controller cabinet as part of this item .
num traffic and pedestrian signals a. optical units .
affix a permanent label indicating the date of installation to the back of each light emitting diode led signal indication installed .
the project manager must approve the label and method of attachment .
install signal heads after all other signal equipment is placed and ready for operation or cover the entire signal head with an opaque covering marked with the words out of service .
use a continuous num conductor awg no .
num signal cable from the traffic signal sideof pole terminal compartment mounted on the signal pole shaft to the end of mast arm signal indication .
use a separate continuous num conductor awg no .
num signal cable from the terminal compartment to the other signal indication closest to the terminal component .
use num conductor awg no .
num to the other signal heads as necessary .
include the cost of these cables in the price per signal standard .
cables run from the end of mast arm indication to the other signal indications are included in the cost of the signal heads .
if not required for signal mounting install a sideofpole terminal compartment for wire termination .
if not used for signal mounting include the cost of the terminal compartment in the price per linear foot of signal cable .
use inch mnum coarse thread stainless steel bolts to mount traffic signals pedestrian signals or terminal compartments to the side of signal poles .
b .
mounting brackets .
plumb or level all elements symmetrically arrange and securely assemble .
conceal all conductors in the poles and assembly .
at each signal location construct a terminal compartment in the bracket system as shown in the contract .
bracket mounted signals that are post top mounted must have a terminal compartment cast with an integral slipfitter .
signal heads mounted on luminaire standards or other tall poles must have a sideofpole terminal compartment to bolt securely to the pole .
c. signal head mounting .
mount signal heads as shown in the contract .
use internally wired plumbing devices for mounting signal heads to mast arms .
use the standard mounting for all threesection mast arm mounted signals unless num feet num m of roadway clearance can not be obtained .
use an elevator plumbizer when necessary to obtain the numfoot num m clearance .
use an elevator plumbizer to mount all four and five section signals .
provide positive lock rings and fittings for all signal heads .
use rings and fittings with serrated contacts .
cooperate with department personal to aim the signal heads after installation prior to the signal turnon .
d. led retrofit .
replace the existing traffic signal lens and reflector assemblies or existing leds with led modules .
install led modules and assemblies per manufacturer guidelines and the requirements of this section .
num loops repair saw cuts through existing pavement markings as directed .
clean the saw cut slot before placing the loop .
num edition traffic signals and lighting num num make loop wire connections in pull boxes or signal standards using soldered waterproof splices .
excess makeup wire leadin or loop wire coils are not permitted .
ensure a minimum of num feet num m of insulated conductor is coiled neatly in the bottom of the pull box for each loop .
tag loop wire in the pull box or signal standard if spliced there with a permanent wire marker indicating the approach loop number and input or output .
the department will verify the following loop characteristics prior to accepting the loop .
a resistance to ground of less than num megohms indicates a faulty loop .
an inductance of less than num microhenries indicates a faulty loop .
a resistance of more than num ohms indicates a faulty loop .
repair faulty loops at contractor expense .
num radio antennas furnish and install suitable brackets for mounting the antenna as illustrated in the contract .
be responsible for providing proper fit of the antenna and associated assembly components .
furnish and install a broadband num mhz to num mhz flangemounted surge suppressor utilizing a ulnumb listed gas tube .
furnish an arrester that is multistrike capable and has a maximum turn on time of num ns for a num kvns surge .
furnish an arrester with an operating temperature range of num to num f. install the surge suppressor in the lower right hand side of the controller cabinet below the incoming power panel or as directed by the project manager .
ensure the surge arrestor is grounded to the cabinet ground bar .
num pedestrian push buttons install the push button and sign on the crosswalk side of the pole with the arrow pointing in the direction of the crosswalk .
use inch mnum coarse thread stainless steel bolts to mount pedestrian push buttons to the side of signal poles .
a .
accessible pedestrian signals .
any additional hardware control unit signal cable or wiring required for operation of each accessible pedestrian signal must be included as part of the accessible pedestrian signals .
at new traffic signal installations do not activate accessible pedestrian signals until the day of the scheduled signal turnon .
department personnel from the traffic engineering section must be present before activation to program accepted soundvolume settings .
at existing traffic signal installations do not install accessible pedestrian signals until department personnel from the traffic engineering section are present .
contact the traffic signal engineer at least num weeks prior to installation to schedule a representative from traffic engineering .
when voice messaging is required submit a custom voice message detail sheet with the electrical material submittals .
num span wiremounted signals install span wire suspended signals on overhead guys providing a sag of num of the total span distance .
raise overhead guys with the signals attached to the specified sag .
adjust the guy mounting height at either or both poles or the sag or the rake of steel poles so that the signals are at the specified height with the proper sag and the poles are plumb when completed .
do not pull guys beyond the specified sag .
num bonding and grounding make metallic cable sheaths conduit and metal poles and pedestals mechanically and electrically secure to form a continuous grounded system .
use copper wire or strap of equal num traffic signals and lighting num edition num cross sectional area to an awg no .
num conductor for bonding and grounding jumpers .
use a no .
num copper bonding strap to bond standards and pedestals attaching it to an anchor bolt and all conduit .
use a bare copper awg no .
num solid wire connected between the grounding lug on the standard or pedestal and the bonding strap .
ground one side of the secondary circuit of series multiple transformers .
ground conduit and neutrals at service points in accordance with the nec or this section except use awg no .
num conductor or equal for grounding .
furnish and install nonferrous ground rods or approved equals of at least inch x num feet num mm x num m at each service point .
install ground rods in accordance with the contract and code requirements .
bond the service equipment to the ground rod using a ground clamp and a bare awg metal no .
num solid copper wire or equal enclosed in a inch num mm diameter schedule num plastic conduit .
num conduit and pull boxes refer to section num .
num field test conduct the following tests on traffic signal and lighting circuits with the project manager present before completing the work num .
test each circuit for continuity num .
test each circuit for grounds num .
perform a megger test on each vehicle detector loop between the loop and ground before and after sealing .
the megger readings must exceed num megohms and num .
a functional test that demonstrates the system functions as specified .
num salvaging and reinstalling electrical equipment a .
salvaging electrical equipment .
remove clean salvage and stockpile or reinstall existing electrical equipment as specified .
underground conduit conductors and foundations not reused are the contractors property and must be removed .
the materials may with written approval be abandoned in place .
replace all electrical equipment damaged or destroyed during salvage operations at contractor expense .
b. reinstalling salvaged electrical equipment .
furnish and install all necessary materials and equipment to complete the new installation .
c. remove and reset existing poles and standards .
remove the specified poles and standards including their attachments from the existing locations and reset them at the specified new locations .
demolish the top of foundations to be abandoned to num feet num mm below the finished grade .
backfill compact and regrade the area to the finished grade .
remove the existing wiring from the poles and standards and replace with new wiring making all connections .
furnish num high strength anchor bolts as specified and num nuts and num washers for each bolt for the new foundation .
ensure the top num inches num mm of the bolt is galvanized .
install a new foundation in accordance with subsection num at the specified locations .
meet all the applicable section num requirements for the reset installation .
num road closure gate assemblies furnish and install road closure gates as shown in the contract .
include all necessary items and work required to erect the road closure gates as shown in the contract as part of this bid item .
the cost of foundations pull boxes luminaire assemblies service assemblies conduit and num edition traffic signals and lighting num num cablesconductors from the service assemblies to the road closure gates are included under separate bid items .
include the type numr cabinet mounted on the road closure gate and internal components thereof as part of this bid item .
furnish a dry type core and coil transformer with num volt primary num volt secondary in accordance with ul standard num .
size of the transformer is a nominal numh x numw x numd .
furnish and install gate arm lights that utilize red leds and have an operating range of num to num vac input voltage .
furnish vehicular traffic signal heads in accordance with subsection num .
num overheight detectors install and adjust the detectors on the poles following the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish the transmitter receiver num poles anchor bolts nuts washers all necessary wiring and connectors for this item .
num method of measurement num lump sum basis when a traffic signal and lighting system or portion thereof is specified in the contract on a lump sum basis the system is measured by the lump sum .
num traffic signals and lighting measurement for traffic signals and lighting is made as follows num .
conduit and pull boxes are measured in accordance with subsection num .
num .
concrete foundations are measured by the cubic yard mnum based on plan dimensions .
deductions are not made for the concrete displaced by reinforcing steel anchor bolts and conduit .
foundation work includes backfill furnishing reinforcing steel electrical bonding and restoring the surface around the foundation .
num .
cables conductors and treated timber poles are measured by the foot m in place .
unless otherwise specified conductors and cables are measured from termination to termination .
num .
the following items are measured by the unit advanced warning flasher controller cabinet pedestals controllers detector loops detector loop amplifiers emergency preemption systems luminaire assemblies overheight detector other component parts as specified in the contract pedestrian push buttons pedestrian signals photoelectric controls remove and reset existing pole foundation measured separately road closure gate assemblies service and control assemblies signal standards standards traffic signals num traffic signals and lighting num edition num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit cables foot m concrete cubic yard mnum conductors foot m conduit and pull boxes see num controllers each controller cabinet pedestals each detector loops each detector loop amplifiers each emergency preemption systems each luminaire assemblies each overheight detector each pedestrian signals each pedestrian push buttons each photoelectric controls each pull boxes each road closure gate assembly each remove and reset existing pole each standards each service and control assemblies each signal standards each traffic signals each traffic signal and lighting system lump sum treated timber poles foot m other components as specified in the contract each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract and to furnish a complete and operational system .
num section num traffic control num description this work is the furnishing installing and maintaining of traffic signs barricades lights signals pavement markings and other specified traffic control devices .
it includes flagging and pilot car operation and furnishing and applying water for dust control .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the contract the mutcd and the following subsection requirements advance warning arrow panels num flagger ahead warning signs num portable sign support assemblies num retroreflective sheeting num signs and channelizing devices num temporary striping tape num temporary striping tabs num temporary waterborne traffic paint num warning lights num furnish work zone traffic control devices that meet the nchrp num or the mash crash test requirements .
num construction requirements num purpose and prosecution of work zone traffic control schedule construction and provide work zone traffic control to accomplish the following num .
provide the protection safety and convenience for motorists bicyclists pedestrians and other roadway users num .
ensure the protection and safety of construction personnel num .
advance the project work in the most beneficial manner to the public and num .
provide mobility for highway users .
provide work zone traffic control for all construction activities on the roadway and within the clear construction zone and other specified areas .
the construction clear zone is the area within num feet num m of the edge of a traffic lane .
furnish work zone traffic control in accordance with the contract requirements the mutcd and the approved traffic control plan .
num traffic control plan the detailed drawings and the mutcd provide traffic control requirements for the contract .
a .
traffic control plan requirements .
furnish a traffic control plan addressing the proposed operations to take place a minimum of num weeks prior to beginning the associated construction activities .
address contingencies in the submitted plan .
deviations or modifications from the submitted traffic control plan may be made to address field conditions if approved by the project manager .
limit inconvenience to the traveling public as much as practicable and account for the safety of both the traveling public and project personnel .
the detailed traffic control plan for the proposed activities must consist of the following num .
contract specific drawings .
provide contract specific traffic control drawings that include proposed traffic control configurations .
provide drawings with the same level num traffic control num edition num of detail as in the mutcd and the detailed drawings .
identify the type and location of work zone traffic control devices proposed for use .
num .
special features .
identify the location and purpose of proposed flaggers temporary signals pilot car use business access signs authorized vehicle median crossings temporary median crossings interchanges interstate crossovers and detours .
detours not identified in the contract are subject to the approval of the project manager .
num .
sequencing details .
provide details for each phase in the sequence of operations and for each type of construction operation .
at a minimum include details for earthwork operations gravel placement paving seal and cover striping bridge work detours permanent sign installation guardrail work temporary blunt end protection temporary access breaks equipment crossings and any other work within the clear zone .
sequence the work such that equipment does not operate against the flow of traffic without the approval of the project manager .
num .
continuous traffic .
provide details that ensure the continuous flow of traffic through the work zone .
maintain access to and from the premises of adjacent property owners and approaches at all times .
do not stop traffic in both directions at the same time unless approved by the project manager .
maintain a minimum of one lane of traffic at all times .
return traffic to normal two lane operation at night and on nonworking days .
identify measures to provide suitable passage of mail delivery and scheduled school bus runs within the project limits .
address traffic control measures for peak travel times on urban projects signal replacements and increased traffic due to public events on or near the project .
num .
offhighway vehicle ohv separation .
identify proposed measures and devices to keep articulated trucks scrapers and other ohvs separated from traffic .
separate ohvs from traffic by means of separate haul roads .
do not operate ohvs faster than num mph or the speed limit signed for the traveling public whichever is lower .
if any ohv operator violates this requirement or drives in an unsafe or erratic manner upon written notice by the project manager this driver must be removed from the project as an ohv operator .
if a separate haul road is not physically possible submit an alternate plan to the project manager for approval .
in order to be considered the plan must meet the following requirements at a minimum the traveling public has the rightofway .
when an ohv approaches vehicles the ohv must come to a complete stop until all vehicles pass including traffic lines led by pilot cars .
equip the ohvs with a backup alarm backup camera and warning light .
num .
emergency vehiclessituations .
identify proposed measures to manage traffic delays due to incidents within the project limits and to accommodate emergency vehicles into and through the project limits .
these measures must be presented to any local governments tribes or jurisdictions affected by the project .
num .
pedestrian traffic control .
identify proposed measures and routes to maintain pedestrian traffic control if there are any pedestrian facilities within the project limits .
provide ada compliant temporary measures for pedestrian facilities at all times .
do num edition traffic control num num not close pedestrian routes without project manager approval .
if closures of pedestrian routes are required identify the proposed measures to warn direct and guide pedestrian traffic .
num .
certifications .
submit a completed form csbnum_num prior to placing traffic control devices .
at the project managers request provide certification that each type of traffic control device in use or to be used on the project meets retroreflectivity and nchrp num or mash requirements .
num .
written narrative .
provide a wn that details the proposed traffic control configuration for the projects construction operations .
the wn must consist of the following a .
supporting details and explanation for the traffic control configuration proposals .
b .
detailed descriptions of the proposed traffic control for each separate operation of work .
c. a description of the construction sequence of operations and how the traffic control plan will accommodate each sequence .
ensure that the traffic control sequence of operations corresponds with the project schedule as described in subsections num and num. d. schedule of maintenance of traffic control devices .
b .
traffic control plan updates .
submit an updated traffic control plan that represents proposed activities .
if the traffic control plan previously provided to the project manager is current and changes to traffic control operations are not anticipated provide written notification to the project manager of this information .
failure to submit an updated traffic control plan on time and in the manner required renders the traffic control plan unacceptable .
submit updates to the traffic control plan to the project manager at the following times num .
on the numst of each month for projects located in the billings glendive or great falls districts .
on the numth of each month for projects located in the butte or missoula districts .
num .
when changes to the original construction operation plan requires a change to the traffic control plan .
coordinate the revision of the traffic control plan with the submission of the project schedule updates per subsections num and num .
if the traffic control is not proceeding consistent with the contractors most recent traffic control plan the project manager may require that the contractor submit an updated traffic control plan that accurately reflects the contractors construction operations .
if a required updated traffic control plan is not received or operations are not being conducted as per the current traffic control plan the project manager may issue a project shut down order .
submit an updated traffic control plan prior to continuing work .
shut down orders due to the failure to meet traffic control requirements will not be considered as justification for additional compensation or contract time .
num traffic control conference attend a work zone traffic control conference organized by the project manager before starting work that alters the publics use of any roadway .
the provisions for traffic control proposed for each stage of construction will be reviewed .
num traffic control reviews designate personnel to be responsible for traffic control work and its continuous surveillance .
the designees must be available num hours a day to respond to calls concerning damage to traffic num traffic control num edition num control devices from any cause .
provide the names and telephone numbers of the persons responsible for the surveillance .
the project manager and the designees will conduct periodic reviews of the traffic control throughout the work to ensure compliance with the traffic control plan .
the reviews will be conducted at night during adverse weather conditions when construction work is active and inactive and at other times as necessary .
num traffic control general requirements meet all traffic control plan requirements before starting work affecting the roadway .
use devices that are new or like new in condition .
properly maintain clean and operate devices when in use .
immediately remove the devices when they are no longer applicable to the work .
install traffic control devices in accordance with manufacturers recommendations or instructions .
immediately remove or cover the entire sign face of nonapplicable signs .
use coverings that are opaque nonreflective and securely fastened to eliminate visibility of the sign face .
cover signs with shapes having a specific meaning such as stop and yield from both sides in a manner that masks the shape .
use materials of sufficient durability to resist deterioration due to weathering and atmospheric conditions .
do not use tape paper garbage bags or cardboard for the covering .
do not rotate signs .
remove portable traffic control devices when not in use .
limit the number of portables towed at a single time as necessary for safe travel .
immediately remove existing signs and other traffic control devices on the present traveled way or on connecting state or federal routes to be abandoned when they no longer apply .
ensure roadways are always appropriately signed .
turn removed signs over to the department .
provide functional traffic lanes with signing and channelizing appropriate to the roadway condition at the close of each work day .
for longterm stationary operations greater than num days remove pavement markings in the traveled way that are no longer applicable in accordance with subsection num .
minimize pavement scarring when removing pavement marking material .
do not paint over existing pavement markings with black paint or spray with asphalt as a substitute for removal or obliteration .
provide the traffic an unobscured view of the traffic control devices at all times .
store or park construction equipment vehicles materials and debris at least num feet num m behind guardrail or outside the clear zone .
when this is impractical use approved warning devices and protective measures to delineate the item .
only equipment and materials for immediate use or incorporation into the work may be placed within the clear zone .
store unused traffic control devices outside the clear zone .
contractor furnished traffic control devices are the contractors property .
traffic control devices furnished by the department or installed on a force account basis are the departments property .
repair or replace all damaged traffic control devices at contractor expense .
if the contractor fails to provide the required traffic control the project manager will provide the work and deduct the costs from monies due or that may become due the contractor .
num access breaks submit a written proposal on the request for access break approval form available from the project manager for temporary breaks in interstate access control or rw fences for approval .
see the form for access breaks requiring fhwa approval .
include all information requested on the form .
interstate access breaks used for noninterstate contracts are prohibited .
num edition traffic control num num provide a written narrative that describes how the traffic control plan addresses traffic safety and minimizes delay to the mainline traffic .
ensure the plan meets the mutcd and the departments detailed drawings requirements .
do not begin work on the access break until the department has returned an approved proposal .
obtain the project managers approval for all modifications to the original plan and submit the changes in writing .
excluding traffic control assume all costs associated with construction maintenance removal of the access break and restoration of the area once the access break is removed .
num crossing entering and using roadways a .
general .
construct temporary approaches and crossings with numhnumv side slopes and include drainage provisions .
remove all temporary approaches and median crossings once the work is complete .
restore and reseed disturbed areas .
do not use areas within the rw as borrow sources or disposal areas for the construction or restoration of temporary approaches .
provide the means and traffic control devices to allow safe crossings whenever articulated trucks scrapers and other offhighway vehicles are crossing the roadway being used by traffic as included in the traffic control plan and approved by the project manager in advance of operations .
operate registered and licensed hauling units such as dump trucks belly dumps side dumps etc .
with the flow of traffic .
do not operate any hauling units on roadway shoulders .
b .
controlled access and multiplelane roadways .
use frontage roads and interchanges for equipment access to controlled access highways whenever possible .
do not stop the general traffic on oneway roadways for the convenience of haul units without department approval .
use interchanges or a series of appropriate lane closures at authorized vehicle median crossings or temporary median crossings for haulunit operations on oneway roadways .
haul unit turning movements are restricted to rightturn movements only when there is access to the project by frontage roads or where leftturn movements by hauling units would pose a hazard to the traveling public .
the use of authorized vehicle median crossings or temporary median crossings will not be allowed unless stated in the contract .
if the construction of temporary median crossings is allowed as part of the contract their use will be subject to all requirements of section num .
submit an updated traffic control plan detailing the use of authorized vehicle median crossings or the construction of temporary median crossings including the following num .
the distance between any num median crossings including interchanges authorized vehicle median crossings and temporary median crossings must be at least num miles num km unless a shorter distance is approved by the department .
num .
median crossings must be at least num feet num m from structures and have a minimum num feet num m of sight distance at num feet num m above the pavement .
num .
sign median crossings as specified in the contract .
num .
when not in use protect crossings through median barriers by one of the following methods a .
place an approved impact attenuator at each end of the barrier opening .
b .
close the inside lanes to traffic with a controlled lane closure .
c. close the opening by replacing and pinning the median barrier .
num traffic control num edition num c. twolane roadways .
always provide at least one functional lane for traffic .
meet table num requirements .
table num traffic control requirements for hauling units entering or crossing numlane roadways average daily traffic adtload frequency traffic control requirement less than num adt stop hauling units for traffic num to num adt less than num loads per shift stop hauling units for traffic num to num adt more than num loads per shift provide flaggers to control traffic more than num adt provide flaggers to control traffic limit the number of locations at which flagging is provided at roadway crossings entrances or exits to num .
one location per material source or plant site entrance or exit or num .
roadway crossings approved by the project manager in the traffic control plan .
the project manager may adjust the adt or load frequency at which flagging is required in table num .
the project manager may add or reduce flagging locations to ensure the safety and mobility of the traveling public and workers within the construction limits .
where flaggers are not required by table num the contractor may use flaggers and traffic control with project manager approval at the contractors expense .
num traffic control at dropoff areas when existing slopes are numhnumv or flatter temporarily fill constructed dropoffs within num feet num m of the edge of travel lanes used by traffic to a numhnumv slope or flatter at the close of work each day .
furnish and install at contractor expense traffic control devices for slopes not temporarily filled to a numhnumv or flatter .
when existing slopes are steeper than numhnumv temporarily fill constructed dropoffs within num feet num m of the edge of travel lanes used by traffic that matches or is flatter than the existing slope at the close of work each day .
furnish and install at contractor expense traffic control devices for slopes not temporarily filled to match or that are steeper than the existing slope .
temporary filling of dropoffs protected by positive barriers is not required .
determine device spacing using the following formula factor in feet m a x c x w s x d where a adt adjustment c degree of curvature metric radius factor w recoverable width numhnumv or flatter in feet m from the dropoff to the far edge of the adjacent traffic lanes with the same direction of traffic s posted speed in mph kmh d average dropoff depth in inches mm use the c factors in table num for dropoffs outside of horizontal curves .
num edition traffic control num num table num c factors for dropoffs on the outside of horizontal curves degree of curve english radius c metric radius c less than num greater than num feet num greater than num m num num to less than num num feet to greater than num feet num num m to more than num m num num to less than num num feet to greater than num feet num num m to more than num m num num or greater num feet or less num num m or less num use the c factor for curves with a degree of curve less than num greater than num m for drop offs on the inside of horizontal curves .
use the adt adjustment from table num .
table num adt adjustment factor adt a under num num num num num num num num over num num round the computed spacing to the nearest num feet num m. use table num to determine the device type using the spacing factor .
table num traffic control device based on spacing factor spacing factor device type num feet num m or greater flexible guideposts or standard delineators num to num feet num to num m type num object marker num to num feet num to num m type c steady burn warning lights on alternate panels less than num feet num m positive barrier if num hours lapses before filling space devices at the spacing factor .
if w is less than num feet num m do not exceed spacing in feet that is double the posted speed in miles per hour .
do not space type num object markers less than num feet num m. num traffic control for paving and milling operations provide flaggers at paving and milling machines .
locate the flagger num to num feet num to num m upstream from the machines .
meet the following requirements for night paving operations num .
place a num x numinch num x num mm night paving ahead warning sign in advance of each warning sign series .
num .
ensure all personnel working on or adjacent to traveled lanes are wearing class num apparel in accordance with subsection num .
apply temporary striping in accordance with subsection num .
place temporary striping at the end of each working day in which a full width section is completed before opening to traffic .
num traffic control num edition num do not use lane closures in place of temporary striping .
traffic control beyond the end of the work day unless ordered by the project manager is at contractor expense .
the project manager may suspend paving operations if a lack of temporary striping results in lane closures longer than the length of a days paving .
num reserved num traffic control for seal coat operations a. twolane twoway and multiplelane twoway roadways .
place loose gravel wnum do not pass rnum and speed limit num rnum signs at the beginning of each work zone .
place the same sign combination for each direction of travel at nummile num km intervals within the work zone .
remove loose gravel wnum signs once loose cover material is swept .
leave remaining signs in place until pavement markings within the zone are completed .
control traffic with pilot cars until initial sweeping is completed for a maximum of num hours .
the numhour period associated with pilot car use for each section begins once the seal and cover has been placed and rolling is complete .
for this work a section is defined as the area of seal coat completed in each day of production .
traffic control beyond these num hours unless ordered by the project manager is at contractor expense .
b .
interstate highways .
use lane closures and lane control devices for seal and cover operations on interstate highways .
do not use pilot cars unless approved by the project manager .
place loose gravel wnum and speed limit num rnum signs at the beginning of each work zone .
sign both sides of the roadway .
place the same sign combination at nummile num km intervals within the work zone .
remove loose gravel wnum and speed limit num rnum signs once loose cover material is swept .
traffic control beyond these num hours unless ordered by the project manager is at contractor expense .
num traffic control for striping operations provide the following traffic control for striping operations not performed under closed lane or pilot car situations .
num .
furnish and operate a shadow vehicle equipped with a truckmounted attenuator in accordance with subsection num conforming to appropriate test levels .
position the truck to follow within num to num feet num num m on pavement marking removal and application .
when placing or removing traffic cones that protect the pavement markings use a vehicle with a truckmounted attenuator or follow with a shadow vehicle possessing a truck mounted attenuator .
num .
equip shadow vehicles with an arrow board facing rearapproaching traffic .
a .
on multiplelane roadways place the arrow board display in lane shift mode sequential arrow mode .
b .
on twolane twoway roadways place the arrow board in a hazard warning mode not displaying the laneshift mode num .
if peak hours are specified in the contract provide the project manager a schedule of striping operations at least num hours prior to striping .
perform striping operations during offpeak hours in order to minimize impacts to the traveling public unless approved differently by the project manager .
num .
include all costs associated with this work in the striping bid item .
num edition traffic control num num num .
if requested by the project manager provide a wn identifying the proposed traffic control devices to be used for striping operations .
if the contractor and project manager agree that additional traffic control devices not listed in items num through num are warranted the additional traffic control devices will be measured and paid in accordance with subsections num and num .
failure to properly notify the project manager or provide adequate traffic control renders the striping operation unacceptable and unauthorized .
unacceptable or unauthorized work will be addressed in accordance with subsection num .
num traffic control device location and installation lay out the standard distances for traffic control devices to within an accuracy num .
the project manager may direct adjustments to the device locations to fit site conditions .
display all signs with the legend not more than num numinch per foot num mm per num mm from the horizontal plane .
display the signs at the required mounting height with the hinged signs closed or nonhinged signs removed when not applicable .
the bottom of signs mounted on barricades or other portable devices must be at least numfoot num mm above the shoulder of the travelled way .
use only one type of reflective sheeting in each sequence or group of signs or devices .
stabilize sign trailers to prevent movement by wind or passing vehicles .
mount work zone traffic control signs to posts when they are to remain at the same location for more than num consecutive days .
trailermounted wnuma flagger ahead signs with generators are excluded from this requirement .
ensure the gnum road work next x miles and gnum end road work signs do not conflict with other construction signing .
remove these signs when directed .
install work zone traffic control devices sequentially toward the work area beginning with the device located farthest from the work area .
remove sequentially in the opposite direction .
use arrow boards in the sequential or flashingarrow mode to supplement channelizing devices and standard signing when one or more lanes of a multiplelane roadway are closed .
do not use arrow boards in the sequential or flashingarrow mode for lane closures or at flag stations on twolane twoway roadways .
do not use flexible guide posts in place of the specified hazard identification devices for shoulder dropoffs or other hazards adjacent to the travel lanes .
refer to subsection num .
flexible reflectorized warning signs are acceptable for daylight hour use .
do not use traffic cones for channelization devices .
do not use steel barrels for work zone traffic control .
ensure that construction zone and work zone speed limits signs comply with the desired minimum speed limit values in table num .
the project manager may direct adjustments to the speed limits or device locations to fit the conditions .
submit a written recommendation if the contractors proposed limits differ from those in table num .
give the locations and reasons for limits differing from those provided in table num num .
reasons should be based upon the conditions of the roadway and the ability of traffic to flow safely and uniformly through the construction zone or activity area .
the project manager will provide a written response to the recommendation detailing the speed limit signs to be used .
num traffic control num edition num table num traffic control speed limits in construction zones speed limit activity description existing construction activities are num feet num m beyond the edge of the traveled way and construction vehicles are not crossing the traveled way .
construction activities suspended during winter shutdown or prolonged periods of time based upon roadway conditions .
holiday weekends and no work days when work is not in progress and ptw has not been impacted .
interstate merging tapers .
survey crew activities not on the ptw or parking shoulder .
num mph twolane twoway traffic on interstates .
onelane oneway traffic on interstates with no activities in closed lane .
num mph onelane oneway traffic on interstates with activities encroaching on closed lane .
twolane twoway noninterstate traffic traveling on nonimpacted roadway surfaces when construction activities are suspended or not present based upon roadway conditions .
num mph interstate crossovers .
twolane twoway noninterstate traffic traveling on impacted roadway surfaces when construction activities are suspended or not present based upon roadway conditions .
two and fourlane roadways with construction activities within the clear zone but not encroaching on the shoulders andor driving lanes .
num mph seal coat operations on interstates increased to num mph once initial brooming roadway is completed .
interstate roadways with construction activities on shoulders .
num mph seal coat operations on twolane twoway and multiplelane twoway roadways increased to num mph once initial brooming roadway completed .
in advance of flagging stations or temporary traffic signals .
interstate and multiplelane roadways with construction activities in closed lanes within the work zone only .
twolane twoway roadways with construction activities on shoulders .
num mph temporary diversions on graveled surfaces .
pilot car queues .
survey crew activities within the traveled way .
noninterstate two or multiplelane roadways in an urban area with construction activity in a lane within the work zone only .
num flagging operations provide flaggers that are currently certified by the montana flagger training program the atssa flagger program or idaho oregon or washington state flagger training programs .
flaggers are required to carry proof of flagger certification and present to the project manager when requested .
provide flaggers that are competent and equipped as required in the departments flaggers handbook furnished by the department .
num edition traffic control num num maintain constant radio contact between flaggers at each end of a work zone and pilot vehicles when visual contact is not possible .
use twoway v.h.f .
or u.h.f .
fm radios operable in the terrain .
place the wnuma flagger ahead warning sign signals so the leds are visible num feet num m in advance of the sign .
place and operate the sign only when a flagger is at the flag station .
provide a second flagger when more than num vehicles are stopped at a flag station num of the time to advise traffic of the delay .
place an additional wnuma sign num to num feet num to num m ahead of the average end of the stopped vehicle line .
a .
nighttime flagging requirements .
nighttime flagging operations are those that occur from sunset to sunrise .
provide the following enhancements when nighttime flagging is used num .
illuminated flagging stations .
use portable light plants or portable balloon lights to illuminate flagging stations with a minimum luminance level of num footcandles .
locate the illumination source so as not to create a hazard to the travelling public and to minimize glare to oncoming drivers .
shield light as necessary to prevent overflow onto adjacent properties .
when requested by the project manager use a luminance meter with a minimum accuracy of num capable of measuring with a minimum resolution of num lux to take a luminance measurement at the flagging station .
take the measurement on a horizontal plane num feet num mm above the roadway surface .
num .
illuminated flagger paddles .
flagging paddles must be of octagonal shape at least num inches num mm wide with letters at least num inches num mm high fixed to a rigid handle .
use signs having red colored flashing led lights inside the stop face and amber colored flashing lights inside the slow face having a flash rate of num to num flashes per minute .
led arrangement must display an octagonal shape for stop and a diamond shape for slow .
the power source must be fully enclosed within the pole section .
num .
garments .
use high visibility safety apparel that meets the performance class num requirements of the ansisea num publication entitled american standard for high visibility safety apparel and headwear .
num .
flashing flagger sign .
the wnuma sign must be illuminated with amber leds in accordance with subsection num .
subsection num requirements apply for mounting the portable signs and the illumination power source .
num .
temporary transverse portable rumble strips .
place num temporary transverse portable rumble strips num to num feet num to num m apart at the location of the wnum be prepared to stop sign .
use temporary transverse portable rumble strips that meet the following a .
provide significant audible and vibratory alerts to drivers b. dimensions are a minimum of num feet num m long numfoot num mm wide and  inch num mm thick c. maintains position on roadway without the use of adhesives or fasteners d. maintains rigidity with no curling e. a bevel on the leading edge within the range of num degrees f. made of flexible polymer material with a nonslip surface g. able to function on wet surfaces and h. capable of being installed and removed without any auxiliary equipment or machinery .
num traffic control num edition num num pilot car operations use pilot cars as specified .
equip the cars with amber flashing lights and the gnum sign designated in part vi of the mutcd .
mount the sign in a conspicuous position on the vehicle with the bottom sign edge at least num feet num m above the ground .
schedule and cycle pilot vehicles to depart each flag station at maximum numminute intervals .
num water for dust control furnish haul and apply dust control of water using tank trucks equipped with spray systems that uniformly distributes the water over the application area .
discontinue watering as directed .
num method of measurement the contract quantities for traffic control devices temporary pavement markings flagging and pilot car operation are an estimate only and may vary from the actual quantities used or required in the contract .
no additional compensation is considered or allowed due to these quantity differences .
signs and devices must meet standards outlined in the current atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices to be measured for payment .
failure to adequately maintain and clean traffic control devices in use renders the traffic control operation unacceptable .
the contractor upon receiving written or verbal notification will be given num hours to make the traffic control operation compliant .
traffic control directly affecting the safety of the public must be attended to immediately .
the project manager may deduct num of the daily traffic control units due to traffic control operations not meeting the requirements set forth in section num .
failure to submit an updated traffic control plan on time and in the manner required renders the traffic control plan unacceptable .
the department may withhold num of each monthly progress estimate for failure to submit an updated traffic control plan on time and in the manner required .
payment withheld for violation of the traffic control plan requirements will be included in the next progress estimate following the contractors submission and the project managers approval of the updated traffic control plan .
providing the traffic control plan is incidental to and included in payment for the traffic control bid item .
num traffic control units traffic control devices are measured by the units of traffic control devices used and accepted .
a unit of traffic control device is the base value used for establishing the relative value of each type of traffic control device .
the relative value of each traffic control device in units is shown in the traffic control rate schedule .
num traffic control lump sum traffic control is measured by the lump sum .
provide a written request for compensation resulting from a change in scope of work differing site conditions or additional work .
quantities approved by any requested change will be measured by the units of traffic control devices used and accepted .
num flagging flagging is measured by the hour for the actual number of approved flagging hours provided on the project for each flagger used .
travel time for flaggers to and from the project is not measured for payment .
num pilot car operation pilot car operation is measured by the hour for the approved number of hours of operation for each properly equipped pilot car .
num edition traffic control num num num reserved num items not eligible for separate payment the following items are not measured or paid for separately amber flashing or strobe lights on equipment vehicles and hauling units impact attenuators for median barrier openings permits and costs relating to project access construction drainage maintenance removal restoration and reseeding of areas used for temporary roads approaches and crossovers radios for flaggers and pilot vehicles illumination of work areas reflectorized safety equipment garments and headgear vehiclemounted arrow boards on stripers and shadow vehicles replacing temporary pavement marking tabs and tape destroyed by traffic temporary pavement marking tabs used for seal coat operations costs to clean and maintain installed traffic control devices devices not properly maintained devices placed beyond num feet num m of the work termination point for that day adjustments or moving of devices that were initially installed improperly adjustments or moving of devices solely to aid contractor operations such as temporarily relocating devices to allow equipment access additional traffic control costs resulting from corrective actions on items failing to meet contract requirements traffic control at commercial pits and other miscellaneous materials and equipment required for proper traffic control that are not included in the traffic control rate schedule .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit traffic control unit traffic control lump sum temporary pavement markings mile km payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num traffic control units traffic control devices are paid for at the contract unit price per unit of traffic control devices .
the units of each type of traffic control device paid for are calculated by multiplying the measured quantity of each device by the value per each unit shown in the traffic control rate schedule .
payment for traffic control devices is made for each setup directed by the project manager .
replacing properly installed traffic control devices destroyed by traffic is paid for at the contract unit price per unit of traffic control devices .
payment for barricades and drums includes the required ballast .
payment for signs mounted on barricades is made only for the original mounting .
payment for flashing arrow boards is made only for the actual hours of operation approved by the project manager .
payment includes the cost of operating the trucks or trailers on which the arrow boards are mounted .
num traffic control num edition num store devices in approved staging areas with a maximum of one staging area per nummile segment of roadway .
detail the staging areas in the traffic control plan submitted for the project managers approval .
all devices not stored in the approved staging areas will be paid for at category num payment amounts .
payment for traffic control devices will be made in accordance with one of the following two categories num .
category num standard installation .
the following movements constitute a standard installation initial device placement and setup .
device relocation and setup requiring the device be loaded into or hitched to a truck or vehicle for movement to a new location .
num .
category num adjustments .
the manual moving of a device conducted by dragging carrying etc .
of the device required to move it to a new location of a traffic control operation .
payment for traffic control devices will be paid for at the rates listed in table num according to the category and device type .
table num traffic control rates based on category and device type category device payment amount percent num all category num devices num num type iii barricades num num all other category num devices num num traffic control lump sum payment for all costs associated with performing traffic control is included in the lump sum bid for traffic control .
payment for quantities approved by any requested change will be in accordance with the traffic control rate schedule and will be paid under traffic control fixed .
partial payments for traffic control will be monthly based on the lump sum contract price at the rates listed in table num .
table num traffic control lump sum progress payments progress estimate payment percent of lump sum item first partial payment after start of contract work num estimate paying num of original contract amount num estimate paying num of original contract amount num estimate paying num of original contract amount num final partial payment after conditional final acceptance date remainder of traffic control contract price num section num signs and delineators num description this work is furnishing fabricating erecting removing and resetting signs and delineators .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the detailed drawings and the following subsection requirements delineators detailed drawings flexible delineators num signing material num num construction requirements num definitions the following definitions apply to the signing work in the contract .
a .
new .
signs designated new are to be furnished new and erected on new supports at the specified locations .
b. reuse sign face .
signs designated reuse sign face are to be removed from the existing supports and remounted on new supports at the specified locations .
c. replace .
signs designated replace are to be removed and replaced with the specified new signs including new supports at the existing or specified new locations .
d. replace sign face .
signs designated replace sign face are to be removed from the supports and replaced with the specified new signs using the existing supports .
e. use as is .
signs designated use as is are to be left in place .
f. reset .
signs designated reset are to be removed and reset at the specified locations using the existing sign faces and supports .
g. remove .
signs designated remove are to be removed including the sign or sign assembly and sign supports .
furnish new materials for signing work in accordance with table num .
table num materials required for sign work alum .
sheeting sign face support post breakaway foundation new x x x x reuse sign face x x x replace x x x x replace sign face x use asis reset x x remove note .
the materials mentioned above are based on planned operations .
meet the requirements of the contract .
if no pay item exists for necessary materials absorb the costs of these items in other signing components .
num design calculations and shop drawings the department will furnish the sign design calculations for the project at the pre construction conference .
the furnished sign design calculations must include the calculations for num signs and delineators num edition num the specified guide signs special design signs and other signs shown in the montana sign and sign materials book but not include those signs in the fhwa standard highway signs book .
submit contractor approved stamped shop drawings and welding procedures for sign bridges and overhead cantilever sign structures .
submit shop drawings on minimum size num x num sheets anum paper welding procedures on num x num anum paper sheets .
the department has num business days upon receipt of the drawings for drawing review .
drawings returned to the contractor for corrections or additional information must be re submitted within num business days of receipt .
after the structural steel shop drawings and welding procedures have been reviewed and checked by the department all required corrections will be returned to the contractor who must make the corrections and resubmit num copies of the corrected drawings and welding procedures for final review and approval within num business days .
all final drawings must be stamped approved by the department before fabrication begins .
submit shop drawings and current approved weld procedures for tubular sign posts and structural steel sign posts .
the department inspector will compare the drawings and weld procedures to the posts during post inspection at the point of fabrication .
submit weld procedures for approval every num months or whenever they are changed or modified .
submit shop drawings and welding procedures at one time in a complete package for the departments initial and subsequent reviews .
individual parts of the submittals will not be accepted for review .
num fabrication and erection fabricate the signs and sign legends before delivery to the project except for signs too large to transport in one piece to the project .
fabricate all signs using the hole spacing specified in the fhwa standard highway signs book or the detailed drawings .
the lengths of poles and steel posts shown in the contract are estimated lengths .
the project manager will furnish the required length of each pole and steel post prior to fabrication .
locate and erect signs as specified or directed .
the project manager may change sign locations due to field conditions .
erect signs so the sign face is vertical and aligned as specified .
sign supports must not project above the sign faces .
when necessary use full width piano hinges for all folding signs .
ensure that hinges are capable of withstanding normal dead and live loads applied and be securely fastened by bolting or riveting to the sign .
the hinge must meet the requirements of subsection num .
submit num copies of the manufacturers installation instructions for all sign post breakaway devices installed on the project to the project manager at least num calendar days prior to installation .
after the sign is installed and adjustments are made jam the threads of the mounting bolts or use vandal resistant nuts for groundmounted sign faces num square feet num mnum and smaller .
the specified foundation depth for timber posts and poles is a minimum depth .
field cut the poles to the correct length or bury the extra length to provide the specified mounting .
excavate or bore foundation holes for sign supports at least num inches num mm larger than the largest diameter of post or pole placed in each hole .
backfill foundation holes for timber posts and poles as follows combine and thoroughly mix the material excavated from the foundation with cement using a mix ratio of num parts excavated material to num part cement .
do not mix in the hole .
add water to make the soilcement mixture .
place the sign post or pole in the hole without the sign attached .
num edition signs and delineators num num backfill the hole with the soilcement mixture in numinch num mm maximum lifts .
compact each lift by hand tamping or using mechanical methods .
allow the foundation to cure for num days before mounting the sign face to the support .
foundation holes for wooden sign supports may be backfilled with clsm using the specifications for constructing foundations for steel sign posts as follows .
construct foundations for steel sign posts with class general concrete in accordance with section num .
finish foundations flush with the adjacent surfaces .
signs may be post mounted after the concrete has set num hours .
weld metal joints and post breaks in accordance with sections num and num .
num inspection the completed signs will be inspected at the fabricators plant and on the project before they are installed .
defects including but not limited to cracks tears splits crazing gouges or curled edges of the background sheeting or legend are cause for rejecting the sign .
the installed signs will be inspected at night for nighttime retroreflectivity and readability .
adjust signs exhibiting specular reflection as directed .
num sheet aluminum overlay meet the contract requirements for sheet aluminum overlays .
install the sign legend and other components plumb and level .
match the color shade and type of existing reflective sheeting used as a background for partial overlays .
fully cover the existing legend and symbols with partial overlay backgrounds .
match the size of the existing sign with complete overlay backgrounds .
num replace reuse sign face and reset use new materials in accordance with section num for that required over and above those materials salvaged from signs to be reset or reused .
install breakaway devices on existing posts when specified .
reset signs in accordance with subsection num .
repair or replace all contractor sign damage resulting from dismantling moving and resetting at contractor expense .
with no exception remount or reset within one hour all removed warning regulatory signs and route markers .
reinstall guide signs within num hours and only during daylight hours .
re display warning regulatory and guide signs by dusk .
erect the new sign and support before removing the existing sign being replaced .
do not display conflicting signs together .
do not obscure existing signs when placing new signs .
reerect existing multiple support signs to be removed and reset using the original post spacing .
num installation date tags and route markers install date tags and route identification tags on all highway signs before final acceptance .
meet the contract requirements for design color and installation .
num delineators furnish and install new delineators at the locations specified and marked by the project manager .
remove delineators conflicting with new construction as specified .
removed delineators are the contractors property .
num flexible delineators install delineators as specified by the manufacturers recommendations and at the locations shown in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num signs and delineators num edition num num acceptance signs and traffic guide devices are accepted for payment individually or in lots as completed work once installed .
delineator posts with reflectors are accepted in lots of num or more units .
guide directional and warning signs with a surface area of up to num square feet num mnum on one side are accepted in lots of num or more .
signs with a surface area of up to num square feet num mnum on one side are accepted in lots of num or more .
overhead structures and signs larger than num square feet num mnum in sheeting area are accepted individually .
the department will assume maintenance responsibility for signs and other traffic guide devices once accepted and in place .
repair or replace signs and devices at contractor expense that are damaged or destroyed by the contractors operations .
num permanent barricade furnish and install permanent barricades as specified and shown in the detailed drawings .
num breakaway system furnish breakaway devices listed on the qpl and in accordance with subsection numd .
install per manufacturers recommendations .
num remove signs remove foundation material left after removing the existing signs to at least numfoot num mm below groundline .
backfill and compact the holes left from removal using clean material or crushed base .
do not cut off and leave existing posts in place .
existing signs and supports specified for removal are the contractors property .
dispose of removed sign materials in accordance with local state and federal regulations .
disassemble and store signs specified to remain the departments property at the designated location .
num method of measurement num aluminum and plywood signs aluminum sheet aluminum sheet increment and plywood signs are measured by the square foot mnum of sign face .
num metal posts metal posts are measured by the pound kg .
the pay weight is calculated by multiplying the nominal weight per foot m by the installed length of each post as noted in the detailed drawings .
when applicable the weight of the anchor sleeve will be added to the post weight .
if there is no breakaway system bid item include with the post weight the weight of the base plates fuse plate and stub post or anchor sleeve including the embedment length .
num treated timber poles and posts treated timber poles and posts are measured by the foot m in even numfoot num mm increments .
when the measurement falls between increments the measured length for payment is the next higher numfoot num mm increment .
num delineators delineators of each type specified are measured by the unit and include the reflector mounting hardware and post complete in place .
removal of existing delineators is not measured for payment .
num edition signs and delineators num num num flexible delineators flexible delineators of each type specified are measured by the unit .
num reset signs the reset of guide warning regulatory and route marker signs is measured by the unit for each sign removed and reset in a new location .
sign groups of num or more signs mounted on a single support or multiple supports are measured as a single sign .
when signs designated as reset require new supports to achieve the proper mounting height include the costs of the supports in the cost of reset signs .
when there is not a bid item in the contract for reset sign this work is incidental to other items of the contract .
num remove signs the removal of guide warning regulatory and route marker signs is measured by the unit for each sign removed including supports .
sign groups of num or more signs mounted on a single support or multiple supports are measured as a single sign .
num replace signs new materials for signs designated replace are measured in accordance with subsections num num and num .
removal of existing signs designated replace are measured in accordance with subsection num .
new materials for signs designated replace sign face are measured in accordance with subsection num .
num reuse sign face new material for supports for signs designated reuse sign face is measured in accordance with subsections num and num .
removal of existing signs designated reuse is measured in accordance with subsection num .
num sheet aluminum overlay sheet aluminum for signs designated sheet aluminum overlay is measured by the square foot mnum of sign face complete in place .
num breakaway system a .
square tubular steel post .
breakaway systems are measured per each and include the breakaway device and all associated hardware required to attach the breakaway device .
b .
structural and tubular steel posts .
breakaway systems are measured per each and include the breakaway device fuse plate and all associated hardware required to attach the breakaway device .
include the cost of the concrete anchors to attach the breakaway to the foundation in the cost of the breakaway .
num permanent barricade permanent barricade as shown in the detailed drawings is measured by the foot m of the barricade width and includes all materials for the barricade .
num signs and delineators num edition num num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted work is made under the following pay item pay unit aluminum and plywood signs square foot mnum breakaway system each delineator type and design each metal sign post pound kg permanent barricade foot m remove signs each reset signs each sheet aluminum overlay square foot mnum timber sign post foot m payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work including excavation and backfill concrete foundation miscellaneous hardware welding date tag and route identification tags and installation in accordance with the contract .
num section num pavement marking application num description this work is the application of temporary striping interim pavement markings and final pavement markings .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsection requirements epoxy traffic paint num high durability waterborne traffic paint num preformed plastic material num reflective glass beads num temporary striping tabs num temporary striping tape num temporary waterborne traffic paint num waterborne traffic paint num num construction requirements num general furnish a manufacturers material certification or data sheet for the product to be used .
do not apply materials that do not meet the contract requirements .
the project manager may request a manufacturers sample or take field samples for testing .
furnish a material sample weighing at least num pounds num kg .
furnish temporary waterborne traffic paint waterborne traffic paint high durability waterborne traffic paint epoxy traffic paint and glass beads listed on the qpl .
num layout of pavement markings the project manager will lay out the final pavement marking configurations and locations .
notify the project manager a minimum of num business days before striping in the permanent location is to begin .
preserve all marking configurations and locations after the initial layout by the department .
apply the markings to within inch num mm of the specified width .
apply the centerline and shoulder lines within num feet num mm of the true line .
ensure the stripe does not deviate by more than numfoot in num feet num mm in num m. apply all other markings words symbols stop bars crosswalks hash marks and others within num feet num mm of the location marked by the project manager .
apply words symbols letters andor numeral pavement markings free of gaps and fully solid .
the project manager will determine the accuracy of the applied markings .
remove and replace out of specification pavement markings as directed at contractor expense .
num equipment use equipment manufactured to apply the material type .
ensure the equipment prevents paint spray or bead loss outside the specified line width .
equip the pavementmarking machine with a flow meter and totalizer that measures paint quantities in gallons l to the nearest num gallon num l. calibrate the flow meter before use on the project and when directed .
locate the flow meter in the flow line to the spray nozzles .
locate the totalizer where it can be easily read .
ensure the calibration adjustment is accessible without meter removal or using a calibration adjustment device .
num pavement marking application num edition num ensure the application equipment is acceptable to the manufacturer .
submit calibration certificates from an independent agent for the paint tank .
recertify the tank at the beginning of each year before using the equipment on department contracts .
the project manager may inspect the tank before each use and as determined necessary .
stop bars crosswalks and wordssymbols may be applied with handoperated equipment .
terminate marking application when the equipment fails to apply the markings in accordance with the contract requirements .
make equipment adjustments and resume striping .
for material paid by the gallon l quantities will be verified by measuring the equipments paint tanks using tank stabs .
the project manager will visually witness tank stabs at the beginning and end of each work shift any time additional paint is added to the tank at the beginning and end of each routeroad segment on contracts with multiple routeroad segments at the beginning and end of each certified paint lot and at other intervals as necessary .
park the equipment on a level surface approved by the project manager for each tank measurement .
num surface preparation and weather limitations a .
general .
prepare the surface to be painted in accordance with the paint manufacturers recommendations .
remove loose material by sweeping and brooming no more than num days before striping .
if not bid separately the cost of this operation is included with the cost of the striping and is not measured separately for payment .
inform the project manager and modify when required the surface preparation to ensure optimal bonding of the marking to the surface and to provide the specified marking requirements .
apply the material following the manufacturers recommendations .
apply pavement markings during daylight hours only .
obtain project manager approval to apply pavement markings any other time .
grind all surfaces with existing epoxy pavement markings within num calendar days before applying the pavement markings .
grinding is surface abrasion to provide a roughened surface free of loose paint chips loose seal aggregate and surface debris .
grind to a depth that completely removes the existing pavement markings .
immediately stop grinding if the depth exceeds that of the existing pavement markings and make adjustments to meet the specified grind depth .
b .
concrete surfaces .
prepare existing concrete surfaces in accordance with subsection numa .
do not grind or apply final pavement markings on new concrete until num calendar days after it has been placed .
c. removal limits .
meet the following removal limits do not grind more than numinch num mm wider than the existing stripe .
do not grind more than num inches num mm from the beginning or end of the stripe being removed .
d. disposal .
collect and dispose of all removed material and new traffic marking materials spilled during the work .
process handle transport and dispose of the materials in accordance with the current applicable solid waste laws and regulations .
num temporary striping temporary striping consist of the centerline markings for twolane twoway roadways lane line markings for divided fourlane interstates and centerlines and lane lines for twoway undivided three or more lane roadways .
divided roadways are roadways where the paved surface for each direction of travel is physically separated by an unpaved section .
apply temporary striping for paving and milling operations in accordance to subsection num .
num edition pavement marking application num num remove at contractor expense all temporary striping that conflicts with interim or final pavement markings .
remove conflicting temporary stripes the same day the interim or final pavement markings are applied .
a .
temporary waterborne traffic paint .
apply a num num mil num num mm thick wet film immediately followed by applying at least num pounds per gallon num kgl of glass beads to temporary striping .
b .
tape .
follow the tape manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparation and installation .
install the tape in accordance with the contract .
c. tabs .
follow the tab manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparation and installation .
install the tabs in accordance with the contract .
num interim pavement markings interim pavement markings consist of all longitudinal striping centerlines edge lines shoulder lines lane lines etc .
and words and symbols identical to the final pavement marking configuration .
use the material specified in the contract .
apply interim pavement markings no later than num calendar days after the application of temporary striping on intermediate lifts and before opening to traffic on top lift .
do not apply interim pavement markings when the ambient air temperature is lower than num f num c. stripe newly constructed pavements including partially completed sections .
apply the interim pavement markings matching the final pavement marking configurations and locations .
interim pavement markings placed prior to chip seal may be offset as approved by the project manager .
the project manager will suspend all remaining contract work if the interim striping is not applied within the time specified above .
a. waterborne traffic paint .
apply a num num mil num num mm thick wet film immediately followed by applying at least num pounds per gallon num kgl of montana type num or num glass beads .
b .
high durability waterborne traffic paint .
apply a num num mil num num mm thick wet film immediately followed by applying at least num pounds per gallon num kgl of montana type num or num glass beads .
num final pavement markings apply final pavement markings a minimum of num calendar days and a maximum of num calendar days after concrete is placed or after seal coat operations through initial sweeping are completed .
when final pavement markings are the only remaining item of work on the project contract time assessment will be suspended until either beginning final pavement markings application or num calendar days elapse after seal coat operations are completed or concrete placement is completed .
the project manager may extend the num days due to holidays or inclement weather that prevent the application of final pavement markings .
use the material specified in the contract .
a. epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint .
submit a copy of the manufacturers instructions for surface preparation and material application .
include in the instructions equipment requirements approved work methods and procedures material application range ambient surface temperature requirements weather limitations precautions all other requirements for successful application and material performance .
num pavement marking application num edition num do not place materials before furnishing complete instructions to the project manager .
apply a num num mil num num mm thick wet film immediately followed by applying at least num pounds per gallon num kgl of montana type num glass beads to the epoxy .
ensure application equipment accurately meters the two components and produces and maintains the mixing head temperature all meeting the epoxy manufacturers specifications .
immediately terminate striping application if the applied stripes are less than num mils thick .
grind all nummil and thinner striping in accordance with subsection num and replace the striping in accordance with the contract at contractor expense .
correct all deficient striping before continuing with the remaining striping work .
the project manager will identify deficient stripe thickness by comparing the tank quantities measured and used against the length width and application rate of the applied stripe .
apply the pavement marking material when the pavement is dry and the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising or follow the manufacturers surface and temperature requirements whichever is more restrictive .
b. preformed plastic materials .
apply pavement markings up to num inches num mm wide in a single application to the specified width .
apply pavement markings over num inches num mm wide in num or numinch num or num mm multiple applications and minimum fractional numinch num mm applications .
apply the marking material at the thickness specified in the contract .
cut and true the marking material edges .
apply inlaid plastic materials into the new asphalt pavement just before final compaction and roll it flush with the roadway surface during the final plant mix compaction .
num concrete curbs use the material specified in the contract .
apply curb paint during the application of the final pavement markings .
clean the concrete surfaces in accordance with the paint manufacturers recommendations .
apply paint on concrete a minimum of num calendar days after the concrete has been placed .
paint the tops and traffic sides of curbs at restricted parking locations as specified .
apply yellow paint to the tops and traffic sides of all island curbs median curbs and other similar curbs .
apply type num or type num reflective glass beads at a minimum rate of num pound per gallon num kgl immediately following the application of epoxy to concrete curbs .
num marking protection furnish all traffic control necessary to protect markings until dry .
correct smeared or damaged markings at contractor expense .
num marking removal remove existing temporary and final pavement markings using any of the following sand blasting with air or water highpressure water steam or superheated water or mechanically grinding sanding scraping brushing .
submit the method or methods to be used .
the contractor may submit written proposals for other removal methods .
an approved method may be subsequently disapproved if it damages the marking surface or inadequately removes existing markings .
num edition pavement marking application num num remove all pavement markings that would conflict with newly applied striping or markings at contractor expense .
remove conflicting pavement markings the same day new markings are applied .
remove sand or other material on the surface left by the removal as the work progresses .
satisfactorily repair surfaces damaged by marking removal at contractor expense .
num method of measurement num temporary striping quantities temporary striping is measured by the mile km of stripe applied centerline whether pass or no pass is measured once per application .
only those pavement markings represented by a manufacturers certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
num interim pavement marking quantities interim pavement markings are measured by the gallon l. only those pavement markings represented by a manufacturers certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
should the actual quantity measured by the project manager using tank stabs or totalizer exceed the quantity calculated using an application rate of num mils num mm times the specified width without applying the tolerance times the length of line applied the lesser quantity will be paid for .
num epoxy traffic paint epoxy is measured by the gallon l. only those pavement markings represented by a manufacturers material certification at the time of application and actually used and witnessed on the project are eligible for payment .
should the actual quantity measured by the project manager using tank stabs or totalizer exceed the quantity calculated using an application rate of num mils num mm times the specified width without applying the tolerance times the length of line applied the lesser quantity will be paid for .
num preformed plastic materials preformed plastic and thermoplastic pavement striping is measured by the foot m. words and symbols are measured by the square foot mnum .
num curb painting painting curb is measured by the gallon l. num hand painted pavement markings words and symbols hand painted pavement striping words and symbols stop bars crosswalks hash marks and other striping not applied by a striping truck are measured by the gallon l. quantity measurements are based on flow metertotalizer readings taken before and after each run or if a calibrated tank is used tank measurements are taken before and after each run .
computerized quantity print outs will be compared against tank stabs and the quantity calculated based on the surface area times the application rate for the product used .
the amount of paint measured for payment is the difference between the startup readings and the end readings .
should the actual quantity measured by the project manager using tank stabs or totalizer exceed the quantity calculated using the application rate times the surface area applied the lesser quantity will be paid for .
all readings that measure paint for payment will be taken by the project manager .
provide all necessary assistance to make the readings including sufficient notice before the paint work begins .
num pavement marking application num edition num num removal of pavement markings if bid separately pavement striping removal is measured by the foot m based on a numinch num mm width for the actual quantity of striping removed .
lines wider and narrower than num inches num mm are converted to the equivalent linear feet m of numinch num mm wide line .
removal of words and symbols is measured by the square foot mnum and converted to the equivalent linear feet m of numinch num mm wide line .
if not bid separately removal of pavement markings is incidental to other items and is not measured separately for payment .
num line control establishing line control for pavement markings is not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item payunit curb painting gallon l plastic markings square foot mnum or linear foot m remove pavement markings square foot mnum or linear foot m striping gallon l temporary striping mile km words symbols gallon l line control is not paid for separately but is included in the cost of the pavement markings .
interim stripe applied over temporary stripe is measured and paid for as interim stripe .
the quantity that is paid for marking materials is the lesser of the following quantities flow meter and totalizer calibrated tank and measuring device tank stabs and surface area times the application rate specified .
payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num remove reset and adjust facilities num description this work is removing resetting or adjusting facilities and items as specified .
num materials use the materials specified in the contact .
materials not specified and used in the work must be equal and comparable to those found in the existing work .
obtain the project managers approval before using material substitutions .
num construction requirements be responsible for the condition and care of each facility from the time removal starts until resetting is completed .
do not damage facilities when removing and resetting .
lower or raise existing manholes catch basins inlets water valve boxes gas and water shutoffs and similar structures to grade as specified or directed .
make adjustments without damaging adjacent structures .
construct masonry tops for manholes to the specified line and grade before placing the ring and cover .
restore existing facilities to a structurally solid condition as specified .
make height adjustments to water valve boxes without using an extension if possible .
adjust manholes catch basins inlets water valve boxes and other similar structures to temporary grade before placing base course material .
make final adjustment of structures to match the grade of the new pavement .
replace and set to grade cast iron rings and covers once the pavement is placed .
backfill around structures in accordance with section num .
backfill holes left by removed facilities .
reusable materials from removed structures or facilities may be used to rebuild the work .
stockpile all removed material not reused as specified .
the material is the facility owners property .
num method of measurement remove reset and adjust facilities is measured by the unit .
num basis of payment the item description for remove and reset is abbreviated to reset .
payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit reset facilities each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num remove reset and adjust facilities num edition num num section num geotextiles num description this work is furnishing and installing geotextiles .
num materials furnish materials in accordance with the following subsections permanent erosion control geotextile num and num separation geotextile num and num stabilization geotextile num and num subsurface drainage geotextile filter num and num temporary silt fence geotextile num num classification a geotextile is defined as any permeable polymeric textile used with foundation soil rock earth or any other geotechnical engineering related material as an integral part of a civil engineering project structure or system .
a. separationstabilization geotextile .
use to prevent mixing of a subgrade soil and an aggregate cover material .
num .
separation geotextile .
use separation geotextile for unsaturated firm subgrade conditions .
num .
stabilization geotextile .
use stabilization geotextile for soft wet saturated subgrade conditions .
b. subsurface drainage geotextile filter .
use against soil to allow longterm passage of water into a subsurface drain system while retaining the in situ soil .
c. permanent erosion control geotextile .
use as a filter between energy absorbing armor systems riprap and the in situ soil to prevent soil erosion and hydraulic uplift pressures .
d. silt fence .
use between the edge of construction disturbance and a water resource and at a critical resource or rw line that is adjacent to construction activity .
use silt fence to assist in sediment control by retaining some of the eroded soil particles and slowing the runoff velocity to allow particle settling .
num source approval submit the following information regarding each geotextile proposed for use manufacturers name and current address full product namenumber geosynthetic material and structure and proposed geotextile uses .
submit a sample to the project manager for evaluation .
product acceptance is determined by comparing the average test results of all specimens within a given sample to the minimum average roll values marv listed in section num .
install geotextiles only after the material has been tested and accepted .
replace all geotextiles installed prior to acceptance that do not meet specifications at contractors expense .
num sampling cut a sample from the geotextile roll with the minimum dimensions of num feet num m by the full width of the roll beyond the first wrap .
after the sample and the required information have been submitted to the project manager allow num calendar days for evaluation .
num geotextiles num edition num num identification shipment and storage conform to astm dnum standard guide for identification storage and handling of geotextiles .
clearly label each roll of geotextile shipped to the project with the name and address of the manufacturer full product namenumber quantity and roll number .
for all permanent installations submit a manufacturers certificate of compliance signed by an authorized manufacturers official .
the certificate must attest that the geotextile meets all the marv requirements specified in section num as evaluated in accordance with the manufacturers quality control program .
the project manager will reject materials that are mislabeled or misrepresented .
wrap each roll with a material that protects the geotextile including ends of the roll from damage due to shipment water sunlight and contaminants .
maintain the protective wrapping during periods of shipment and storage .
do not damage the geotextile or wrapping when unloading or transferring from one location to another .
do not drag the rolls .
during storage elevate geotextile rolls off the ground and adequately cover to protect them from the following site construction damage precipitation ultraviolet radiation including sunlight chemicals that are strong acids or strong bases flames including welding sparks temperatures in excess of num f num c and mud dirt dust debris and any other environmental condition that may damage the physical property values of the geotextile .
num construction requirements num general prepare the surface on which the geotextile is to be placed so that no damage occurs to the geotextile .
do not drive construction equipment on the geotextile .
dispose of material with defects rips holes flaws deterioration or other damage .
do not use defective material in the work .
if sewn seams are used for seaming the geotextile use thread that consists of high strength polypropylene or polyester .
do not use nylon thread .
for erosion control applications use thread that is resistant to ultraviolet radiation .
use thread that is of contrasting color to that of the geotextile itself .
for seams that are sewn in the field provide at least a numfoot num m length of sewn seam for sampling by the project manager before the geotextile is installed .
for seams that are sewn in the factory provide samples as directed and witnessed by the project manager at random from any roll of geotextile that is used on the project .
for seams that are field sewn use the same equipment and procedures for both the sampling and production seams .
if seams are to be sewn in both the machine and cross machine direction provide samples of seams from both directions .
submit the seam assembly description along with the sample of the seam .
include in the description the seam type stitch type sewing thread and stitch density .
num separationstabilization geotextile prepare the installation site by clearing grubbing and excavating or filling the area to the design grade .
this includes removal of topsoil or vegetation .
the project manager will identify soft spots and unsuitable areas during site preparation .
excavate these areas and backfill with approved granular material and compact as specified .
grade the area to be covered by the num edition geotextiles num num geotextile to a smooth uniform condition free from ruts potholes and protruding objects such as rocks or sticks .
spread the geotextile immediately ahead of the covering operation .
do not place geotextile over frozen material .
lay the geotextile smooth without wrinkles or folds on the prepared subgrade in the direction of construction traffic .
remove wrinkles and folds by pulling the geotextile taut as required .
use soil piles or the manufacturers recommended method as approved by the project manager to hold the geotextile in place until the specified cover material is placed .
overlap sew or join adjacent geotextile rolls and roll ends as shown in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
overlap in the direction shown in the contract .
overlap adjoining edges a minimum of num feet num m or use sewn seams .
on curves cut or fold the geotextile to conform to the curve .
fold or overlap in the direction of construction and hold in place using pins staples or piles of fill or rock .
do not cover the geotextile until inspected for damage by the project manager .
repair or replace all damaged geotextile at contractors expense .
make repairs following the manufacturers recommendation or use a patch of the same material placed over the damaged area overlapped at least num feet num m from the edge of any part of the damage .
sewing repairs are an acceptable alternative .
place fill over the geotextile by dumping onto previously placed material and pushing the material into place .
do not operate any construction equipment directly on the geotextile under any circumstances .
place the fill material in uniform layers so that there is the minimum specified lift thickness between the geotextile and equipment tires or tracks at all times .
the minimum thickness of the first lift is num inches num mm .
do not allow construction equipment to turn on the first lift of material above the geotextile .
if the subgrade is very soft with an undrained shear strength less than num psf num kpa minimize pile heights to less than num feet num m and spread piles as soon as possible after dumping to minimize the potential for localized subgrade failure due to overloading of the subgrade .
do not use sheepsfoot or studded compaction equipment on the first lift placed over the geotextile .
stop vibrator on compaction equipment if pumping occurs .
do not operate any construction equipment that results in rutting in excess of num inches num mm on the first lift .
if rutting exceeds num inches num mm decrease the construction equipment size andor weight or increase the lift thickness .
use only rubbertired rollers for compaction if any foundation failures occur when placing subsequent lifts .
compact all lifts to the moisture and density requirements for earth embankment specified in subsection num .
do not blade material down to remove ruts .
fill any ruts or depressions with additional material and compact to the specified density .
num subsurface drainage geotextile filter excavate trench in accordance with the contract .
do not allow large voids to occur in the sides and bottom of the trench .
grade the surface to be smooth and free of debris .
place the geotextile loosely with no wrinkles or folds and with no void space between the geotextile and the ground surface .
press the geotextile into the corners of the trench .
overlap successive sheets of geotextiles a minimum of numfoot num m with the upstream sheet overlapping the downstream sheet .
place a sufficient width of geotextile to entirely cover the perimeter of the trench and allow for the required overlap .
in trenches equal to or greater than numfoot num m width after placing the drainage aggregate fold the geotextile over the top of the backfill material in a manner to produce a minimum overlap of numfoot num m. in trenches less than numfoot num m wide but greater than num inches num mm wide overlap the geotextile the entire width of the trench .
where the trench is less than num inches num mm wide sew or otherwise bond the geotextile in num geotextiles num edition num accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as approved by the project manager .
all seams will be subject to the approval of the project manager .
if the geotextile is damaged during installation or aggregate placement place a geotextile patch over the damaged area extending beyond the perimeter of the damaged area a distance of numfoot num mm or the specified seam overlap whichever is greater .
place the drainage aggregate immediately following geotextile placement .
cover the geotextile with a minimum of num inches num mm of loosely placed aggregate prior to compaction .
if a perforated collector pipe is to be installed in the trench place a minimum of a num inch num mm bedding layer of drainage aggregate below the pipe with the remainder of the aggregate placed to the minimum required construction depth .
compact all placed aggregate to a minimum of num of the maximum standard proctor density in accordance with mt num .
num permanent erosion control geotextile place the geotextile on a smooth graded surface approved by the project manager .
place the geotextile loosely and anchor it in place with sand bags soil piles or steel pins .
place the geotextile in such a manner that placement of the riprap does not stretch or tear the geotextile .
place the riprap from the bottom of the slope up to the top of the slope .
after placement of the riprap key the geotextile at least num inches num mm into the ground at the top of the embankment .
do not key the geotextile in until all of the riprap has been placed on the slope .
secure the geotextile at the toe by lapping the material back and securing with riprap .
limit atmospheric exposure to a maximum of num calendar days following lay down to minimize damage potential .
place the geotextile with the machine direction parallel to the direction of water flow which is normally parallel to the slope downslope for erosion control runoff and wave action and parallel to the stream or channel in the case of stream bank and channel protection .
join adjacent geotextile sheets by either sewing or overlapping .
overlap seams of roll ends a minimum of numfoot num mm except where placed under water or on slopes numhnumv or steeper .
overlap seams of roll ends placed under water or on slopes numhnumv or steeper a minimum of num feet num mm .
overlap adjacent rolls a minimum of numfoot num mm in all instances .
for slopes flatter than numhnumv use pins or staples to hold the overlap in place during placement of riprap .
pin the geotextile loosely so it can easily conform to the ground surface and give when riprap is placed .
do not use pins at overlaps for slopes numhnumv or steeper .
overlap successive sheets of the geotextile upstream over downstream andor upslope over downslope .
in cases where wave action or multidirectional flow is anticipated sew all seams perpendicular to the direction of flow .
avoid damaging the geotextile as a result of the installation process .
if the geotextile is damaged during installation place a patch over the damaged area extending a minimum of num feet num mm beyond the perimeter of the damaged area .
begin riprap placement at the toe and proceed up the slope .
avoid stretching and subsequent tearing of the geotextile .
do not drop riprap and heave stone from a height of more than numfoot num mm .
do not allow stones weighing more than num lbs num kg to roll down the slope .
do not drop slope protection and smaller sizes of stone material from a height exceeding num feet num mm unless the project manager approves the procedure following a demonstration showing the geotextiles are not damaged by the procedure .
in underwater applications key the geotextile in at the bottom of the slope .
develop and demonstrate to the project manager a method of underwater placement to secure the geotextile in place without damaging the geotextile .
place the geotextile and the backfill material in the num edition geotextiles num num same day .
backfill all void spaces in the riprap with smaller stone to ensure full coverage of the geotextile .
after placement of the riprap no grading of the slope is allowed if it results in movement of the riprap directly above the geotextile .
replace any geotextile damaged during backfill placement as directed by the project manager at the contractors expense .
num silt fence install silt fence in accordance with this specification and with the detailed drawings .
the maximum cut or fill slope for a silt fence is numhnumv .
for cut or fill slopes steeper than numhnumv use alternative methods of soil stabilization bmps .
use fence posts at least num inches num m in length .
drive fence posts a minimum of num inches num mm into the ground .
use fence posts having a sufficient strength to resist damage during installation and to support the applied loads due to material build up behind the silt fence .
there are two types of silt fence installations num .
unstabilized .
silt fence supported with either wood or metal fence posts .
num .
stabilized .
silt fence supported with metal posts and with woven wire backing .
for stabilized silt fence use woven wire having a maximum of numinch num mm mesh spacing and a minimum of num gauge wire .
excavate a trench at least num inches num mm wide by num inches num mm deep at the base of the silt fence .
the vertical entrenchment component consists of burying the silt fence a minimum of num inches num mm below the ground surface .
vertical and horizontal entrenchment of the silt fence consists of placing the silt fence in a j configuration in the trench extending a minimum of num inches num mm below the ground surface and a minimum of num inches num mm horizontally along the bottom of the trench .
the initial silt fence installation requires only the vertical entrenchment component unless the project manager determines both vertical and horizontal entrenchment components are necessary .
if the fence requires replacement due to failure from pullout or undercutting the subsequent entrenchment must include both vertical and horizontal entrenchment components in a j configuration .
backfill the trench with the excavated material and compact .
splice the geotextile with a sewn seam or overlap num sections of fence in accordance with the detailed drawings .
place the posts at a minimum spacing of num feet num m and at a maximum spacing of num feet num m. securely fasten the silt fence geotextile to the upslope side of the fence post .
place silt fence continuous and transverse to the flow .
follow the contours of the site as closely as possible .
place the fence so that water can not run off and around the end of the fence .
inspect all temporary silt fences immediately after each rainfall and at least daily during prolonged rainfall .
immediately correct any deficiencies at the contractors expense .
make a daily review of the location of silt fences in areas where construction activities have altered the natural contour and drainage runoff to ensure that the silt fences are properly located for effectiveness .
where deficiencies exist as determined by the project manager install additional silt fence as directed by the project manager .
repair or replace damaged silt fence promptly .
remove sediment from behind the silt fence when it occurs to onethird the original height .
leave the silt fence in place until the project manager directs to remove it .
either grade and seed or remove the sediment deposits prior to removal of the fence .
num geotextiles num edition num num method of measurement geotextiles are measured by the square yard mnum as staked by the project manager except silt fence which is measured by the yard m of fence .
seams excavated vertical faces and laps including any portion of geotextile keyed into the subgrade or fill material are not measured for payment .
for subsurface drainage filter geotextile the entire drainage trench perimeter and the top width is measured for payment .
num .
basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit geotextile erosion control square yard mnum geotextile filter subsurface drainage square yard mnum geotextile separationstabilization square yard mnum geotextile silt fence yard m payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num section num mailboxes num description this work is the removal temporary reset and maintenance and furnishing and installation of new mailboxes and crashworthy supports at the specified locations or as directed .
num materials use mailboxes listed on the qpl for mailbox and mailbox large .
the mailbox carrier service door must be embossed with the following two statements u.s. mail in a minimum of inch num mm high letters and approved by the postmaster general in a minimum of numinch num mm high letters .
provide permanent address markings on the flag side of the mailbox at least numinch num mm high and in contrasting color in neat legible letters and numbers .
if the mailboxes are grouped provide address numbers on the mailbox door .
furnish a crashworthy mailbox support as shown in the detailed drawings a mailbox support identified in the current edition of the aashto guide for erecting mailboxes on highways or other commercially manufactured nchrp num or mash compliant crashworthy mailbox support .
furnish a nchrp num or mash compliant crashworthy support for temporary resets of mailboxes .
do not use traffic control devices as mailbox supports .
if multiple mailboxes are required at one location furnish and install a multiple box support system in accordance with the current edition of the aashto guide for erecting mailboxes on highways .
num construction requirements coordinate with the u.s .
postal service and mailbox owner prior to any activities impacting mailboxes .
reset and maintain all mailboxes specified by the project manager that are removed during construction .
temporary supports and locations must be approved by the project manager .
install permanent mailboxes and supports at the locations shown in the contract .
salvage existing mailboxes if requested by landowner .
dispose of nonsalvaged mailboxes .
num method of measurement mailbox and support are measured as a unit .
removal temporary resets salvage numbering disposal and maintenance are not measured for payment .
num basis of payment payment for the completed and accepted quantities is made under the following pay item pay unit mailbox each mailboxlarge each payment at the contract unit price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the item of work in accordance with the contract .
num mailboxes num edition num num section num welding num description weld in accordance with the current edition of the applicable american national standard welding codes .
num materials use welding electrodes in accordance with aws and aashto .
num construction requirements num general contact the project manager num business days prior to anticipated work for scheduling of the certified welding inspector cwi .
num .
weld tubular members including pipe piles and hand or pedestrian rails to ansiaws dnum .
num .
weld on existing structures for repair or strengthening to ansiaws dnum .
num .
weld reinforcing steel to ansiaashtoaws dnum .
num .
weld bridge structural steel to ansiaashtoaws dnum .
num welder qualifications num .
have all welders certified by a cwi for each process or procedure performed .
obtain certifications prior to beginning welding for the project .
num .
if department staff is available certification testing of welders will be provided by the department at a cost of num per hour .
this certification will be provided in helena at this cost only once per person per project .
num .
an outside agency will be allowed to administer the testing if conducted by an aws cwi and the process is in accordance with department procedure .
num .
the welders qualification will remain in effect for an indefinite period unless the welder has not used the qualified welding process for a period exceeding num months or there is some specific reason to question the welders ability .
for the welder to remain qualified a verification record continuity should be kept on file and updated by the contractor for that welder documenting the performance of the given process and procedure during the previous num months .
num submittals for all employees who will be welding on department projects and who may have obtained certifications submit num copy of certification record and continuity information to the project manager at least num calendar days prior to that individual welding .
include the following information num welding num edition num num .
certifying agency name address and phone number num .
cwis stamp and number num .
cwis signature num .
date tested num .
code under which the test was given e.g .
aws dnum num .
positions qualified num .
base metal designation e.g .
anum anum num .
backer use num .
process used num .
manipulation type num .
electrode type e.g .
num num .
diameter of electrode num .
operators name num .
operators employer at the time of the test num method of measurement welding is not measured separately but is incidental to the items being welded .
num basis of payment welding is not paid for separately but is included in the cost of the item welded and includes all materials and resources necessary to complete the work .
num section num aggregates num aggregate for concrete these specifications describe the quality and size of aggregate for hydraulic cement concrete pavements and bases highway bridges and incidental structures .
the following test methods are used to evaluate the quality of aggregates for concrete coal and light particles aashto t num clay lumps aashto t num fineness modulus of fine aggregate aashto m num mortarmaking properties aashto t num organic impurities aashto t num sieve analysis for fine and coarse aggregate mt num sulfate soundness aashto t num or astm cnum wear test mt num combining aggregate gradations mt num when wear factors are specified in the contract the term aggregate surfacing includes the coarse aggregate for concrete .
num fine aggregates for concrete a .
general requirements .
fine aggregate is natural sand having hard strong durable particles meeting the gradation requirements in table num .
other approved inert material with similar characteristics or combinations of the above materials may be used if the materials meet these specifications .
do not mix or store in the same pile fine aggregate from different sources or use alternately in the same class of construction or mix without the project managers written permission .
the deleterious substances and soundness specified in subsections numb and c below will be waived for aggregate used in structures or portions of structures not exposed to weather .
b. deleterious substances .
meet the deleterious material limits in table num .
table num limits on deleterious material in fine aggregate material maximum by wt .
coal and lightweight pieces num clay lumps num ensure that the material does not contain other deleterious material .
c. soundness .
when fine aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium or magnesium sulfate soundness test the total corrected loss can not exceed num by weight for the sodium sulfate .
num by weight for the magnesium sulfate .
d. organic impurities .
aggregate subjected to the colorimetric test for organic impurities and producing a color darker than the standard will be rejected unless the aggregates pass the mortar strength test specified in subsection nume .
do not use aggregates showing a darker color than that of samples originally approved for the work until tested num aggregates num edition num to determine whether the increased color indicates a harmful quantity of deleterious material .
e. mortarmaking properties .
the fine aggregate when mixed with type i or ii cement and tested using the mortar making property test must develop at num days a minimum compressive strength of num of the strength developed by a mortar made with the same cement in accordance with aashto t num .
f. grading .
the gradation requirements listed in table num are the outer acceptance limits for use from all supply sources .
the gradation must be uniform from any one source and not change from the low to the high gradation limits .
the fineness modulus of samples taken from proposed sources must be a minimum num and a maximum num when tested in accordance with aashto m num .
fine aggregate from a source with a fineness modulus variation greater than num from the design fineness modulus of the sample may require a concrete mix redesign .
applying the num variation does not permit the fineness modulus to be less than num or more than num .
table num table of gradations fine aggregate for concrete percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num a maximum num of the fine aggregate can be retained between any two consecutive sieves .
num coarse aggregate for concrete a .
general requirements .
coarse aggregate is crushed stone gravel or blastfurnace slag having hard strong durable pieces free from adherent coatings .
other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or combinations of the above materials may be used provided they are in accordance with the contract .
the limits for deleterious material and soundness specified in subsection numb and c will be waived for aggregate used in structures or portions of structures not exposed to the weather .
b. deleterious substances .
meet the deleterious material in accordance with table num .
num edition aggregates num num table num limits on deleterious substances in coarse aggregate substance maximum by wt .
coal and lignite num clay lumps num soft fragments num thin or elongated aggregate having a length greater than five times average thickness .
num material passing the no .
num num mm sieve num notesnum .
in crushed aggregates if the material finer than the no .
num num mm sieve consists of fracture dust essentially free from clay or shale the maximum limit may be increased to num .
ensure that the material does not contain other deleterious material .
c. soundness .
when the coarse aggregate is subjected to five cycles of the sodium or magnesium sulfate soundness test the total percentage loss can not exceed num and num by weight respectively .
d. percentage of wear .
furnish coarse aggregate having a wear factor not exceeding num .
e. reserved .
f. grading .
furnish numinch num mm aggregate in accordance with table num for no .
num to numinch num to num mm furnished in two separate sizes respectively meeting the gradations for no .
num to inch num to num mm and  to numinch num mm to num mm size material .
furnish inch num mm aggregate meeting the gradations for no .
num to inch num to num mm material .
furnish coarse aggregate uniformly graded between the limits in accordance with table num .
the aperture shape used for coarse aggregate acceptance has no relation to the size and shape of the aperture or screen type used in producing the material .
table num table of gradations coarse aggregate for concrete percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves designated sizes sieve size no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num to num num to num mm no .
num to  num to num mm  to num num to num mm no .
num to  num to num mm numinch num mm num num numinch num mm num num numinch num mm num num inch num mm num num num num inch num mm num inch num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num note nos .
num num num and num correspond to aashtoastm designations num num num and num respectively .
num aggregates num edition num num optimized gradations for concrete optimizing a gradation by combining two or more sizes of aggregate is allowed and may be required for specific classes of concrete .
meet all the specifications listed in subsections num and num for fine and coarse aggregate respectively except for the gradation requirements .
furnish a combined gradation in accordance with mt num .
if the combined gradation in the mix design submittal is approved adhere to the tolerances listed in table num during concrete production .
the tolerances will be placed on the combined percent passing each sieve as defined in mt num .
table num optimized gradation requirements sieve size production tolerance no .
num or greater num mm or greater num no .
num to no .
num num mm to num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num or lesser num mm or lesser num perform quality control gradations as necessary to control the production of aggregate and concrete .
the combined aggregate gradation tests must meet the mix design target gradation and the tolerances listed above .
do not target a combined percent passing of more than num on the num sieve .
num aggregate for surfacing num general requirements the following test methods are used to evaluate the surfacing aggregate quality fracture mt num liquid limit plastic limit plasticity index mt num microdeval mt num sand equivalent mt num sieve analysis for fine and coarse aggregate mt num sulfate soundness aashto t num or astm cnum wear test mt num passing wear test results are mandatory for department approval of sources .
microdeval or sulfate soundness tests may be used by the department for source approval .
if microdeval is used and the test fails the department will conduct the sulfate soundness test .
if the sulfate soundness test fails the contractor may not use the source to produce coarse surfacing aggregate .
meet the following microdeval requirements coarse aggregate num loss maximum for acceptance .
meet the following sulfate soundness requirements when coarse aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium or magnesium sulfate soundness test the total corrected loss can not exceed num and num by weight respectively .
if the test results indicate the aggregate does not meet the requirements the contractor may make a written request for an independent laboratory to retest the material in question .
the contractor and the department must agree upon the choice of the independent laboratory before release of the sample for testing .
the department will maintain and provide the original sample num edition aggregates num num in the event of a retest .
the independent laboratory results will be averaged with the results provided by the department and the averaged results will be binding on both parties for acceptance of the material in question .
the contractor must pay the cost of duplicate testing if the average results in a failing test .
the department will pay the cost of duplicate testing if the average results in a passing test .
furnish aggregate that does not contain wood and other plant material .
do not use scoria fired clay commonly found in conjunction with burned coal in the lignite fields of the state as aggregate .
sources of scoria are common but not limited to daniels sheridan roosevelt mccone dawson prairie wibaux custer fallon rosebud treasure bighorn powder river and carter counties .
that portion of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve is coarse aggregate and that passing the no .
num num mm sieve is fine aggregate .
when wear factors are specified in the contract the term aggregate surfacing includes all aggregates specified in subsections num through num .
the department has num calendar days from receipt of the test sample to furnish the test results .
contract time will be increased working day for working day for each day the test results are delayed beyond the numday review period if the departments delay affects the contractors operation as shown on the current work schedule .
contract time will not be extended if the delay occurs from november numth through april numth unless the contractor is being charged contract time under subsection num .
num select surfacing furnish select surfacing including added binder or blending material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations selected surfacing percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade num grade num grade num grade num grade num grade num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num no .
num num mm num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num .
num sand surfacing furnish sand surfacing in accordance with table num .
num aggregates num edition num table num table of gradations sand surfacing percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade num grade num grade num grade num grade num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
no .
num num mm num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num .
num crushed base course type a furnish crushed base course type a including added binder or blending material in accordance with table num .
glass cullet meeting subsection num requirements may be used as blending material .
table num table of gradations crushed base course type a percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade numa grade numa numinch num mm num numinch num mm num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num meet the following requirements for crushed base course type a num .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num num .
dust ratio limitations do not apply num .
a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions num .
furnish binder meeting subsection num requirements and num .
at least num by weight of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has at least one mechanically fractured face .
num crushed base course type b furnish crushed base course type b including added binder or blending material in accordance with table num .
num edition aggregates num num table num table of gradations crushed base course type b percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade num grade num grade num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num max .
num max .
num max .
meet the following requirements for crushed base course type b num .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num num .
dust ratio the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve must not exceed two thirds of the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve num .
a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions num .
up to num by weight of material one grade larger than that being produced is allowed .
for example when producing numinch num mm material up to num of the total weight of material produced may be numinch num mm material num .
furnish binder meeting subsection num requirements and num .
at least num by weight of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve must have one mechanically fractured face .
num crushed top surfacing type a furnish crushed top surfacing type a including added binder or blending material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations crushed top surfacing type a percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade num grade num grade num grade num grade num numinch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num meet the following requirements for crushed top surfacing type a including added binder or blending material num .
dust ratio the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve can not exceed twothirds of the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve num .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num num aggregates num edition num num .
the composite aggregate does not contain adherent films of clay and other matter that prevents thorough coating with bituminous material .
bituminous material must remain adhered to the material upon contact with water num .
when the aggregate is to be bituminized both the material source and the composite aggregate must not show cracking or disintegration num .
do not remove intermediate sizes from the material during production unless authorized in writing num .
have a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions and num .
at least num by weight of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve must have at least one mechanicallyfractured face .
num crushed top surfacing type b furnish crushed top surfacing type b including added binder or blending material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations crushed top surfacing type b percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size grade num grade num grade num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num meet the following requirements for crushed top surfacing type b including added binder or blending material num .
dust ratio the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve can not exceed twothirds of the portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve num .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not be below num or above num num .
a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions and num .
at least num by weight of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve must have one fractured face .
num crushed cover aggregate cover material furnish cover material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations cover material percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size type num type num inch num mm num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num edition aggregates num num meet the following requirements num .
the composite aggregate must not have adherent films of clay vegetable matter frozen lumps and other extraneous matter that prevents thorough coating with bituminous material .
bituminous material must remain adhered to the material upon contact with water .
no combination of shale clay coal and soft particles can exceed num num .
the aggregate must have a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions and num .
a minimum of num by weight of the coarse aggregate must have at least one fractured face .
num aggregate for ctb furnish aggregate for ctb including added blending material in accordance with table num num .
table num table of gradations aggregate for ctb percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num meet the following requirements num .
for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve the liquid limit must not exceed num and the plasticity index must not exceed num and num .
the material used to produce the aggregate must have a wear factor not exceeding num at num revolutions .
num aggregate for bituminous mixtures num general requirements the following test methods will be used to evaluate the quality of aggregate to be bituminized num aggregates num edition num table num aggregate requirements coarse aggregate no .
num num mm and larger angularity mt num or astm dnum see table num wear mt num or aashto t num num max num maxnum flat and elongated particles astm dnum num ratio by mass no .
num num mm and larger num max .
absorption aashto t num num max fine aggregate all material passing no .
num num mm angularity aashto t num method a num min .
sand equivalent mt num or aashto t num num min .
notes num .
for inch num mm mixes only .
num .
for warm mixes only .
num .
as determined by alternate method no .
num .
all aggregate must be nonplastic when tested in accordance with mt num or aashto t num and t num .
passing wear test results are mandatory for department approval of bituminized material aggregate sources .
microdeval or sulfate soundness tests may be used by the department for source approval .
if microdeval is used and the test fails the department will conduct the sulfate soundness test .
if the sulfate soundness test fails the contractor may not use the source to produce coarse aggregate to be bituminized .
meet the following microdeval requirements coarse aggregate num loss maximum for acceptance .
meet the following sulfate soundness requirements when coarse aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium or magnesium sulfate soundness test the total corrected loss can not exceed num and num by weight respectively .
if the test results indicate the aggregate does not meet the requirements the contractor may make a written request for an independent laboratory to retest the material in question .
the contractor and the department must agree upon the choice of the independent laboratory before release of the sample for testing .
the department will maintain and provide the original sample in the event of a retest .
the independent laboratory results will be averaged with the results provided by the department and the averaged results will be binding on both parties for acceptance of the material in question .
the contractor must pay the cost of duplicate testing if the average results in a failing test .
the department will pay the cost of duplicate testing if the average results in a passing test .
furnish aggregate that does not contain wood and other plant material .
do not use scoria fired clay commonly found in conjunction with burned coal in the lignite fields of the state as aggregate to be bituminized .
sources of scoria are common but not limited to daniels sheridan roosevelt mccone dawson prairie wibaux custer fallon rosebud treasure bighorn powder river and carter counties .
num edition aggregates num num the portion of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve is defined as coarse aggregate and that passing the no .
num num mm sieve is defined as fine aggregate .
the department has num calendar days from receipt of the test sample to furnish the test results .
contract time will be increased working day for working day for each day the test results are delayed beyond the numday review period if the departments delay affects the contractors operation as shown on the current work schedule .
contract time will not be extended if the delay occurs from november numth through april numth unless the contractor is being charged contract time under subsection num .
num aggregate for plant mix surfacing furnish aggregate for plant mix surfacing including hydrated lime when required in accordance with following .
num edition aggregates num num table num grade s aggregate design requirements inch num mm inch num mm and inch num mm nominal maximum aggregate size percent by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve gradation limits inch num mm inch num mm inch num mm min max min max min max job mix tolerance numinch num mm num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num num num inch num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num notes percentage or quantity of hydrated lime will not be subtracted from the aggregate gradation table num hamburg wheel track requirements pg binder grade water bath temperature not to exceed numinch num mm rut in number of passes produced plant mix mix design pg num num f num c num passes num passes pg num and pg num num f num c num passes num passes pg num num f num c num passes num passes num aggregates num edition num table num grade s specifications inch num mm inch num mm and inch num mm nominal maximum aggregate size property job mix target limits job mix tolerance startup job mix range num inch num mm inch num mm inch num mm inch num mm inch num mm inch num mm vma num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num vfa num to num num num to num vtm ndes num num to num num num to num da num num to num num num to num commercial plant mix requirements vma num to num num to num num to num na na vfa num to num na na vtm num num to num na na da num to num na na notes num .
choose the design and production air voids target to be the lowest value within the range in table num inclusive of num and num such that all other criteria are met .
num .
percentages or quantities of hydrated lime will not be subtracted from the aggregate gradation .
num .
startup job mix range only applies to production before initial target set .
tolerances do not apply to start up job mix range .
num foundation and bedding material for structures num bedding material furnish bedding material for minor drainage structures and culvert foundations .
glass cullet meeting subsection num requirements may be used as blending material .
furnish bedding material that is reasonably free of clay silt and other deleterious material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations bedding material percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing numinch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num maximum num edition aggregates num num num foundation material foundation material is one or more aggregate material courses to provide a stable foundation for culvert and drainage structure installations in unstable areas .
use shot rock pitrun aggregate crushed aggregate or any combination of these materials .
the largest rock or rock fragment allowed may be as great in dimension as the thickness of the lift being placed .
in the top numfoot num mm of the foundation the largest rock or rock fragment can not exceed num inches num mm .
use wellgraded material in the top numfoot num mm of foundation material .
a maximum num by weight of the foundation material must pass a no .
num num mm sieve .
num granular bedding material furnish granular bedding material in accordance with table num no .
num .
num filter material furnish filter material in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations filter material percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size no .
num no .
num numinch num mm num numinch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num riprap furnish stone that is hard durable and angular in shape resistant to weathering and water action free from overburden spoil shale structural defects and organic material .
each stone must have its greatest dimension not greater than num times its least dimension .
do not use rounded stone or boulders from a streambed source as riprap .
do not use shale or stone with shale seams .
the stone will be accepted based on visual analysis the departments riprap evaluation form or both .
submit samples before placing the riprap .
num handlaid riprap furnish stone or rock fragment at least num inches num mm thick a minimum .num cubic foot num mnum in volume weighing at least num pounds num kg excluding rock spalls .
extend all stones and fragments through the revetment except spalls used to chock larger stones and fill voids between the larger stones .
num random riprap furnish the specified random riprap in accordance with table num .
num aggregates num edition num table num table of gradations random riprap class weight of stone equivalent spherical diameternum of total weight that must be smaller than given size i num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num num num num ii num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num num num num iii num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num pounds num kg num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num feet num mm num num num num note num .
based on unit weight of num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum .
num grouted riprap furnish stone for grouted riprap in accordance with subsection num .
num bank protection furnish rock that is hard dense and durable .
use either quarried rock or natural coarse gravel .
rock may be obtained from adjacent roadway excavation .
do not use rock obtained from streambeds .
furnish the specified bank protection in accordance with table num .
table num size requirements bank protection type num num num num nominal thickness numinch num mm numinch num mm numinch num mm coarse gravel overall thickness including bedding numinch num mm numinch num mm numinch num mm as specified in the contract largest rock permissible  cubic yd .
num m  cubic yd .
num m num cubic ft. num m  cubic ft. num m smallest rock permissible num cubic ft. num m num cubic ft. num m numinch num mm numinch num mm num sandgravel cushion furnish sandgravel cushion for concrete slope protection in accordance with subsection num for bedding material except that all the material must pass a numinch num mm sieve .
num edition aggregates num num num backfill for metal bintype retaining walls furnish backfill for the bins specified by the bin manufacturer .
if not specified use a gravel type soil with num passing the numinch num mm sieve and not more than num passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
the material must have a plasticity index not exceeding num .
num drain aggregate furnish drain aggregate that is rounded to subrounded aggregate in accordance with table num .
table num table of gradations drain aggregate percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing numinch num mm num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num glass cullet for soilaggregate filler when requested and approved as an aggregate blending material furnish and blend glass cullet in accordance with aashto m num .
meet the following requirements for the glass cullet and the blended product a. furnish glass cullet containing no more than num cullet originating from nonbeverage container glass .
furnish the project manager certification that the cullet meets this limit before it is used .
if the cullet exceeds this limit submit a laboratory test plan that meets the requirements of the appendices of aashto m num .
approval of the cullet will be based on the approved testing plan and the test results b .
have the glass cullet tested to ensure it meets the physical properties and deleterious substances requirements in aashto m num .
furnish the project manager copies of the test results before using the glass cullet c. produce a glass culletaggregate blended product that meets all requirements for the specified aggregate and d. limit the glass cullet content to no more than num of the total blended product .
num digout and subex replacement material if crusher reject material is used for digout and sub excavation replacement material meet the gradation requirements in table num .
table num digout and subex replacement material crusher reject percentage by weight passing square mesh sieve sieve size percent passing numinch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num maximum num bridge end backfill furnish bridge end backfill in accordance with table num .
num aggregates num edition num table num table of gradations bridge end backfill sieve size percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves type num type num type num numinch num mm num num numinch num mm num num modified aashto soil class anuma numinch num mm num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num note num .
provide a minimum of num of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve having at least num mechanically fractured face .
num section num bituminous materials num bituminous materials a. furnish bituminous materials in accordance with following tables .
cationic emulsified asphalt aashto m num table num emulsified asphalt aashto m num table num high float emulsions table num medium curing liquid asphalt mc table num performance graded asphalt binder table num polymermodified cationic emulsified asphalt table num note num .
cement mixing test does not apply when ssnum or cssnum emulsion is used for spray or tack application .
meet the requirements for bituminous materials in accordance with the contract .
b. polymerize crsnump emulsions using at least num polymer by weight mass of the asphalt binder .
num testing and acceptance bituminous materials are accepted on the test results of samples selected and tested by the department or its authorized representative .
collect samples in accordance with subsection num and tested using the applicable aashto method .
the project manager may permit using bituminous materials before the test results are available if the test results of material previously furnished by the refiner have consistently been satisfactory .
the use of bituminous materials before receipt of the test results as permitted by the project manager does not waive the departments right to accept or reject materials under these specifications .
asphalt cement penetration is sampled and accepted in accordance with subsections num and numb .
table num basis for acceptance of bituminous materials sample tested specification limitsnum remarks test results within limits test results outside limitsnum original sample accept material test retained sample retained samples may be tested by the department at any time .
retained sample accept material accept material at reduced price or reject notes num .
see specification for bituminous materials .
num .
pay adjustments will be applied under qa .
if test results of both the original and retained samples are not within the tolerance limits the average of the two values will determine the basis for acceptance of the material .
exception if either of the two test values are outside the applicable astm repeatability range then the test value numerically nearest the specification requirement will be used as the basis for acceptance .
in the event a material fails more than one test requirement that requirement with the greatest violation will determine the basis for acceptance .
see subsection numc for the method of calculating price reductions .
num bituminous materials num edition num table num specification for performance graded asphalt bindernum property test method aastho requirements by performance grade num num num num original flash point c t num num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
rotational viscosity pas num c t num num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
dynamic shear kpa gsin  num rad.sec t num num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
test temperature num c num c num c num c rtfo residue t num mass change t num num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
dynamic shear kpa gsin  num rad.sec .
t num num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
test temperature num c num c num c num c ductility cm num c t num num min .
num min .
pav residue r num num c num hrs num psi dynamic shear kpa g sin  num rad.sec .
t num num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
test temperature num c num c num c num c creep stiffness mpa t num num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
test temperature num c num c num c num c mvalue t num num min .
num min .
num min .
num min .
direct tension strain t num notes num .
for performance graded asphalt binders not shown in table num refer to aashto m num table num .
num .
pull rate is established at num cmminute .
use pg num asphalt cement if not specified elsewhere in the contract .
num edition bituminous materials num num table num laytex or polymer modified crsnum emulsified asphalt property test method crsnump viscosity at num f num c sec .
aashto t num num sieve aashto t num num max .
settlement num days aashto t num num max .
demulsibility aashto t num num min .
storage stability test num day aashto t num num max .
particle charge aashto t num positive ash content aashto t num num max .
tests on residue by evaporation residuenum penetration num g num sec .
at num f num c dmm ductility at num f num c num cm per minute cm elastic recovery aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num num min .
num num min .
num min .
note num aashto t num residue by evaporation will be used to obtain samples for all residue testing requirements .
aashto t num is modified by deleting note num .
num bituminous materials num edition num table num specification for medium curing liquid asphalts mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
kinematic viscosity at num f num c centistokesnum num num num num num num num num num num flash point tag opencup f c num num num num num num num num num num water num num num num num distillation test distillate percentage by volume of total distillate to num f num c to num f num c to num f num c to num f num c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num residue from distillation to num f num c volume percentage of sample by difference num num num num num tests on residue from distillation penetration num g num sec .
at num f num c dmm ductilitynum num cmmin cm solubility num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num spot test negative for mcnum only notes num .
as an alternate sayboltfurol viscosities may be specified as follows grade mcnum furol viscosity at num f num c num to num sec .
grade mcnum furol viscosity at num f num c num to num sec .
grade mcnum furol viscosity at num f num c num to num sec .
grade mcnum furol viscosity at num f num c num to num sec .
grade mcnum furol viscosity at num f num c num to num sec .
num .
if the ductility at num f num c is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at num f num c is more than num .
num edition bituminous materials num num table num specifications for high float emulsions grade hfnum min .
max .
tests on emulsions viscosity saybolt furol at num f num c sec .
storage stability num hr .
sieve test demulsibility num ml num gl caclnum by mass distillation residue oil distillate by volume of emulsion num num num num num num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration at num f num c num g num sec .
dmm ductility at num f num c num cm per min .
cm solubility float test at num f num c sec .
num num num num num num bituminous materials num edition num num section num lighting signal materials num general furnish all electrical equipment that meets the contract and the following requirements num .
nema num .
the nec num .
the standards of the astm num .
ansi and num .
all state and local laws or ordinances that may apply .
references to the above codes or standards are the current editions of the code order or standard at the time the contract is let and governs throughout the life of the contract .
furnish galvanized parts in accordance with astm anum bnum class num or other applicable astm galvanizing specifications .
galvanize the top num inches num mm of anchor bolts .
galvanized bolts and nuts must thread together without damaging the coating .
num conduit num plastic conduit furnish rigid polyvinyl chloride pvc in accordance with ul num or continuous length high density polyethylene hdpe in accordance with ul numb schedule num num f num c wire rated direct bury type .
num steel conduit furnish galvanized rigid steel conduit and fittings of mild steel in accordance with ul num and ansi c num .
num pull boxes num concrete pull boxes furnish concrete pull boxes extensions and covers made of reinforced concrete .
use class general concrete in accordance with section num .
use reinforcing steel in accordance with section num .
meet the pull box size and details specified in the contract .
inscribe reinforced concrete covers for signal systems andor lighting systems with the words electric .
furnish a steel cover designed to withstand aashto hsnum loads for pull boxes subject to vehicular traffic loads .
furnish metal frames and covers for boxes or vaults formed in the concrete .
inscribe covers with the wording specified in the contract .
ensure gasket surfaces form a true plane .
install a  inch num mm onepiece neoprene gasket on the frame or cover for the seal .
num composite pull boxes furnish pull boxes and covers made of polymer concrete with fiberglass reinforcement .
furnish pull boxes having continuous fiberglass cloth reinforcement on the inside and outside perimeters .
furnish covers having a minimum of num layers of fiberglass cloth reinforcement .
ensure the pull boxes and covers comply with all test provisions of the most current ansiscte num for tier num applications .
furnish pull boxes and covers that have been tested and certified by a nationally recognized third party independent testing firm such as ul or intertek testing services verifying that the boxes and covers meet all test provisions of the ansiscte num .
furnish pull boxes that have markings showing the tier num rating labeled or stenciled on the inside and outside of the box .
furnish covers that have markings showing the tier num rating num lighting and signal materials num edition num embossed in the top surface of the cover .
furnish covers having pull slots rated for a minimum pull out of num pounds num kg .
furnish  x numinch mnum x num mm lag thread hex head bolts to secure the cover to the pull box .
num standards and posts num general furnish standards fabricated and inspected in accordance with section num and designed to the num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
use a minimum luminaire dead load of num lb num kg and a minimum luminaire projected area of num square feet num mnum for design purposes .
use a design wind velocity for all standards of num miles per hour .
include on the shop drawings the following reaction data at the base of the pole reported as reactions normal to the standard global coordinate system moment x mx ft.lb .
moment y my ft.lb .
torsion z mz ft.lb .
shear force x vx lb .
shear force y vy lb .
axial load p lb .
fabricate all standards from steel .
meet the standard manufacturers requirements for the anchor bolt placement in the foundation .
num type num signal standards furnish standards in accordance with the contract .
furnish a cast aluminum base with an internal ground lug and handhole with removable cover .
plumb bases with factorymade shims .
furnish num high strength steel anchor bolts with each base .
furnish l shaped anchor bolts with a minimum num inches num mm of the bolt threaded at the top .
furnish a nut and washer with each anchor bolt for the base .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for anchor bolt size .
all accessories welded to the shaft must be factorywelded to the shaft before galvanizing num type num and num signal standards furnish a single steel section shaft formed into a round continuous taper with a single automatic electrically welded seam or an approved equal .
show the type of steel used for the shafts on the shop drawings .
furnish num highstrength steel anchor bolts with each shaft .
furnish each anchor bolt with num nuts and num washers over and under the shaft base to adjust rake and plumb .
all accessories welded to the shaft must be factorywelded before galvanizing .
furnish rain tight metal covers for the top of type numa and numa signal standards .
num type num luminaire standards shafts must be a single section formed into a round continuous taper with a single automatic electrically welded seam or approved equal .
steel shafts must be a minimum no .
num manufacturers standard gauge .
show the type of steel on the manufacturers shop drawings .
furnish raintight metal covers for the top of each shaft .
num edition lighting and signal materials num num shafts not mounted on transformer bases must have a handhole with removable cover and an internal grounding lug as shown in the contract .
locate the handhole in the same quadrant as the mast arm .
shafts mounted on transformer bases do not require a handhole or grounding lug .
the shaft base anchor or breakaway to be used is specified in the contract .
the shaft base plate must be a onepiece plate circumferentially welded to the shaft for anchor and breakaway base types .
for anchor bases the base plate must attach directly to the anchor bolts .
furnish each anchor bolt with num nuts and num washers for plumbing and raking the shaft .
for breakaway bases the plate must be attached to a breakaway device that attaches to the anchor bolts .
use breakaway bolt couplings unless they do not function with the approved luminaire standard .
the bolt coupling must meet the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals requirements .
use frangible transformer bases where bolt couplings can not be used .
transformer bases must have an access door grounding lug and factorymade shims for plumbing .
provide each anchor bolt with one nut and one washer .
furnish num high strength steel anchor bolts with each shaft .
furnish l shaped anchor bolts with a minimum num inches num mm of the bolt threaded at the top .
size the anchor bolt in accordance with the shaft manufacturers recommendations .
anchor bolts used with breakaway bolt couplings must project out of the foundation the length recommended by the coupling manufacturer .
furnish the breakaway bolt coupling washer nut and bolt covering that enclose the area between the base plate and foundation .
anchor bolts used with transformer bases must project at least num inches num mm from the foundation .
provide a mounting base where the mast arm connects to the shaft .
provide an opening in the base for running wire from the shaft to the mast arm .
all accessories welded to the shaft must be factorywelded before galvanizing .
num mast arms signal and luminaire traffic signal mast arms up to num feet num m in length must be single tapered members .
traffic signal mast arms over num feet num m long may be two piece tapered members .
luminaire mast arm ends must have a numinch num mm slipfitter tenon at least num inches num mm long .
all accessories welded to the mast arm must be factorywelded before galvanizing .
mast arm lengths and mounting heights are shown in the contract .
num welding steel meet the requirements of section num and the following ensure that all nondestructive testing is performed by personnel qualified in conformance with the american society for nondestructive testing recommended practice no .
snttcnuma to minimum testing level ii for the individual methods .
provide asnt certifications and procedures before testing .
meet all the applicable aashto and aws welding inspection requirements including those modified as follows num .
circumferential weld splices .
perform radiographic testing or ultrasonic testing as approved by the project manager meeting aws dnum structural welding code section num .
num .
longitudinal seams .
inspect num of all full penetration groove welds using radiography or testing may be by ultrasonic test methods aws dnum structural welding num lighting and signal materials num edition num code ultrasonic section num both of the above test methods to be approved by the project manager before use .
randomly test num of all partial penetration welds and fillet welds per component using magnetic particle test methods .
num .
base connection welds .
randomly inspect num of all base connection welds and all fillet welds using magneticparticle testing specified in aws d num structural welding code section num .
num reserved num finish furnish standards galvanized inside and out .
a primer finish is not acceptable .
use stainless steel or zinc cadmium or galvanized coated fasteners .
provide galvanized nuts washers and shims for anchor bolts .
num wire protection use insulated bushings or grommets to prevent wire abrasion at all wire openings and inlets .
num inspection all standards will be inspected at the project before they are erected and may be inspected where fabricated .
num conductors and cable num conductors furnish conductors of solid or stranded copper of the gauge shown in the contract .
insulation for conductors must be type thw xhhw use rhh rhw thwn or thhn .
all insulation must be designed for num volts and meet nec requirements .
num signal cable furnish cable in accordance with the imsa specification no .
num or num .
individual conductors must be stranded copper .
num detector loop shielded cable use detector loop shielded cable as a leadin between the loop pull box and the loop detector as specified .
furnish with an aluminumpolyester shield with two awg no .
num stranded tinned polyethyleneinsulated copper conductors a stranded and tinned copper awg no .
num or num drain wire all encased in a black polyethylene jacket meeting imsa specification no .
num .
num emergency preemption detector cable use cable recommended by the manufacturer for the emergency preemption system .
num communication cable furnish bjfc num pair awg no .
num copper cable in accordance with rea specification pe num .
num numohm coaxial cable furnish  or inch num or num mm super flexible low loss foam filled watertight coaxial cable .
furnish coaxial cable with the following characteristics num .
impedance of num ohms num ohm .
num .
maximum attenuation of num dbnum m at num mhz .
num .
outer conductor of bonded aluminum tape and an overall braid of tinned copper with an inner conductor of copperclad aluminum .
num .
foam polyethylene dielectric .
num .
uv protected black polyethylene jacket .
num edition lighting and signal materials num num num .
minimum bending radius of numinch num mm for installation num inches num mm for repeated bending for inch num mm .
minimum bending radius of num inches num mm for inch num mm cable .
furnish coaxial cable that is compatible with type n connector .
num service and control assembly furnish cabinets meeting nema type num numr or num made of aluminum or necgrade steel having a hinged lockable door .
include a terminal strip having the number of attaching points for the required conductors with the service and control assembly .
ensure the terminal strip has the capacity equal to an awg no .
num conductor .
num control equipment num flasher furnish a solidstate dual circuit plugin type electronic flasher producing between num and num flashes per minute with equal onandoff time intervals meeting all nema type num requirements and conforming to part numbnum of the mutcd .
num loop detectors furnish two channel loop detectors of the rack mount type .
the loop detectors must be solidstate digital using external power .
the front panel must contain sensitivity controls mode selector switch and an actuation indicator led .
the loop detectors can not not use more than num ma of current at num volts dc .
the output must be by relay and plug mounted .
the relay must be normally energized providing failsafe functioning should the power fail .
furnish loop detectors in accordance with all nema temperature requirements .
use a num pin edge card connector to make all electrical connections .
num traffic and pedestrian signals a. optical units .
furnish vehicular signal indications which utilize leds in accordance with the latest issue of the i.t.e .
vehicle traffic control signal heads specification .
furnish numinch num mm circular and arrow signal indications that have clear polycarbonate lenses .
the lens must be diffused or the module must have some other method of achieving the appearance of an incandescent lamp smooth and nonpixilated .
furnish bimodal greenyellow arrow indications that utilize leds .
furnish pedestrian signal indications which utilize leds in accordance with the latest issue of the i.t.e pedestrian traffic control signal indication specification and the mutcd .
furnish num x numinch num x num mm pedestrian indications that utilize leds for the upraised hand symbol the walking person symbol and the countdown display .
furnish indications that have the countdown display and pedestrian displays in the same housing .
furnish indications with a countdown display that is at least num inches num mm in height .
furnish indications that have filled in symbols to give the appearance of an incandescent indication .
furnish indications that are compatible with the pedestrian signal housing .
supply led indications that have a guarantee to be replaced or repaired if a signal indication fails to function as intended due to workmanship or material defects within the first num months of operation .
furnish led indications that work with a conflict monitor utilizing nemaplus functions specifically dual indication .
b .
signal housing .
assemble the signal head housing sections together in a watertight assembly .
each section must house an individual optical unit complete with a onepiece hinged door a mounting for the lens and other optical system parts watertight gaskets and a noncorrodible doorlock .
num lighting and signal materials num edition num construct the optical system so the individual components swing open for access or removal .
ensure sections are interchangeable and constructed so sections can be added or removed .
each section must have a round opening in the bottom and top to receive a numinch num mm supporting pipe frame .
the housing including the doors and end plates must be diecast aluminum clean and smooth free from flaws cracks blow holes or other imperfections .
hinges pins lens clips and locking devices must be noncorroding metal .
mount a terminal block inside at the back of the housing .
wire all sockets with a white wire connected to the socket shell and a black wire to the bottom or end terminal of the socket .
connect these wires to the terminal block mounted in the housing .
the terminal block must have studs to terminate all field wires and lamp wires independently .
permanently identify the terminals .
use paint in accordance with section num .
factoryenamel signal heads and fittings black or dark olivegreen as to not require painting in the field .
apply one coat of primer and two coats of enamel to signal heads and other components including the outside of visors and backplate backs .
use the same color for like components in the same intersection .
furnish with each section of each vehicle signal head a removable tunnel visor open bottom of the appropriate size made from at least numinch num mm thick aluminum .
factory apply two coats of flat black enamel to visor interiors in accordance with this subsection .
c. backplates .
furnish and install back plates on all traffic signal heads to form a numinch num mm border around the signals .
make backplates from at least numinch num mm sheet aluminum .
factory apply num coats of flat black enamel to front faces of backplates in accordance with subsection numb .
furnish backplates with a numinch num mm wide yellow strip of type ix retroreflective sheeting .
apply the sheeting around the outer edge of the backplate .
d. mounting brackets .
mount signal heads using brackets made from numinch num mm standard steel pipe and malleable iron or brass pipe fittings .
the slip fitter must fit over a numinch num mm standard pipe .
provide each slipfitter with two rows of three set screws in each row to plumb the assembly .
provide cadmium plated set screws .
provide each compartment with a terminal block with twelve terminals each with num pressure type connectors .
size each connector to accommodate at least num no .
num conductors .
provide the terminal compartment with an access opening to the terminal block with a raintight cover .
all slipfitters and terminal compartments must be made of nonfrangible metal .
e. opticallyprogrammed traffic signals .
the traffic signals must be optically programmed and visible only to a specific area of the intersection .
meet all other contract requirements for construction or signal heads .
use led programmable visibility modules for opticallyprogrammed signals that are compatible with the signal heads .
num loops furnish preformed and prefilled detector loops constructed from conduit .
use one continuous length of stranded no .
num xhhw or stranded no .
num thhn or tffn conductor from the pull box through the loops and returning back to the pull box .
construct loops using continuous inch num mm conduit for no .
num conductor or inch num mm conduit for no .
num conductor .
num edition lighting and signal materials num num completely fill the conduit with hot rubberized asphalt or an approved flexible sealant to prevent incursion of moisture and to set the turns of wire firmly in place .
encase leadin wires in a nonconductive num psi num kpa flex hose constructed with a seamless extruded polyester fiber braid reinforcement and a nonconductive seamless extruded urethane nonperforated jacket .
fill the leadin hose completely with hot rubberized asphalt or flexible sealant .
twist wires in all leadins a minimum of num turns per foot num mm for the entire length of the leadin .
attach leadins to loop heads with a schedule num cpvc tee and a cpvc adapter bushing .
supply loops with sufficient leadin to reach adjacent pull boxes .
use a continuous conductor without splices throughout the entire loop and leadin hose .
num pedestrian push buttons furnish tamperproof pedestrian push buttons using a piezo type switch meeting ada requirements .
the push button must be flush with the housing and be at least num inches num mm in the smallest dimension .
the push button housing must be weatherproof and electrically insulated to prevent shock under all weather conditions .
furnish a dark olive green housing back plate to fit the pole curvature and when required provide saddles to make a near fit .
furnish push button signs shown in the contract .
num accessible pedestrian signals aps tactile push buttons furnish aps that include the pedestrian pushbutton and housing combination .
the pushbutton must be in accordance with subsection num .
the housing must have a locator tone to indicate the location of the button .
the volume of the locator tone must be adjustable by digital means and must automatically adjust to ambient noise level .
the volume over ambient noise level must be adjustable in increments of num decibels db .
the button must have a raised arrow which can be adjusted to point toward the appropriate crosswalk .
the button and housing combination must also provide feedback that a call for service has been placed .
the feedback must be in the form of a lit led and an audible indication .
the accessible signal must also provide vibrotactile information in the form of the button vibrating during the appropriate walk signal .
the pedestrian signals must operate without any additional equipment in the signal cabinet or additional signal conductors from the cabinet .
when voice messaging is required provide accessible pedestrian signal stations with custom voice messages that provide location information on a button push and street crossing message when the appropriate walk signal activates .
the voice messages will be in the following format voice on location vol wait to cross street to be crossed at intersecting street .
walk message street name being crossed .
walk sign is on to cross street name to be crossed .
num luminaires furnish and install luminaires and lamps meeting these specifications and the contract requirements .
wire all luminaires for numvolt operation .
furnish and install clear high pressure sodium vapor lamps having a num hour rated life .
meet the following wattage and initial lumens requirements num .
num watt num initial lumens .
num .
num watt num initial lumens .
num .
num watt num initial lumens .
ballasts and luminaire must be integral with the ballast providing num f num c starting capacity .
multiple ballasts must be num volt regulated lag type num power factor with an operating range of num .
starting and open circuit voltamperes must not exceed operating values .
num lighting and signal materials num edition num furnish the unit with an independent replaceable starting board .
the luminaire assemblies must be slipfitter type end mounted on a numinch num mm pipe tenon .
furnish ansiies fullcutoff flat lens medium type iii distribution luminaires .
num photoelectric controls furnish photoelectric control units of the twistlock type .
furnish units that turn on at num num foot candles have a turnonoff ratio in the range of num to num and are rated for a minimum of num watts at num volts .
incorporate a time delay mechanism into the control preventing operation during brief light condition changes .
provide a failsafe that leaves the load on or becomes energized if the control fails .
num radio antennas num master antenna furnish an omnidirectional antenna with the following specifications num .
frequency range of num mhz to num mhz num .
gain of num dbd num .
impedance of num ohms num .
termination with a type n connector and num .
wind survival rating of num mph num kph .
num yagi antenna furnish a yagi antenna for mounting on traffic signal poles as shown in the detailed drawings that meets the following specifications num .
frequency range of num mhz to num mhz num .
front to back ratio of num db num .
nominal gain of num dbd and num .
bandwidth of num mhz .
furnish an antenna that withstands wind speeds of num mph num kph plus a num gust factor .
construct the antenna of rust resistant corrosive free materials .
provide an antenna that has inch num mm coaxial cable meeting subsection num integrally attached by the manufacturer .
num class num treated timber poles furnish the pole length and place as specified in the contract .
furnish ansi class num poles as specified in the contract .
full length pressuretreat poles with a num solution of pentachlorophenol or copper napthenate cun in accordance with awpa standards and commodity specification d and use category numa .
num overheight detector an overheight detector consists of a transmitter and receiver each mounted on an adjustable metal pole .
furnish detectors meeting the following requirements operating voltage num ac num operating temperature range num f num c to num f num c detector beam infrared or visiblered leds alarm output adjustment num to num second duration ensure the detector can discern the vehicles direction of travel and is able to detect vehicles traveling between num mph num kmh and num mph num kmh .
the transmitter and receiver must mount on metal poles that permit adjusting the detector height from num to num feet num to num m. num section num signing materials num material for signs num sheet aluminum use aluminum alloy in accordance with the aluminum association alloy aanumhnum or aanumtnum requirements .
meet the sheet thickness requirements listed in table num .
table num single post mounting sign size inches mm thickness inches mm regulatory series without back bracing num to num num to num wide inclusive num num num to num num to num wide inclusive num num num to num num to num wide inclusive num num warning series without back bracing num x num num x num or smaller num num num x num num x num num num num x num num x num num num num x num num x num num num delineator reflectors all sizes num num all signs with back bracing maximum back brace spacing thickness thickness inches mm num num num num num num num num num num num num use the sheet thickness shown in the regulatory series for the route marker series using the widest point on the cutout shield for the width dimension .
make all signs not listed above from numinch num mm thick sheeting .
num aluminum sheet increment construct aluminum sheet increment signs using aanumhnum or aa numtnum sheet aluminum thickness in subsection num fastened to an extruded tsection aanumtnum back brace with numinch num mm blind rivets .
use the back brace and rivet spacing shown in the detailed drawings .
use extruded tsections weighing a minimum num pounds per linear foot num kgm with a minimum moment of inertia about the neutral axis of num inchesnum num mmnum .
num plywood use douglas fir meeting the commercial standard num for douglas fir plywood bb high density overlay num with plastic overlay both sides inch num mm thick .
do not use plywood on multiple post installations .
num signing materials num edition num num aluminum and steel posts a .
general .
furnish posts meeting the contract requirements .
treat steel post field cuts and holes with one coat of metal primer and two coats of aluminum paint .
coat galvanized posts meeting aashto m num specifications .
b .
steel posts .
num .
structural steel .
furnish structural steel posts having a nominal weight exceeding num pounds per foot num kgm meeting astm anum requirements .
bid these posts as steel structural sign posts .
paint the posts meeting the detailed drawing requirements .
num .
steel u sign posts .
furnish steel posts formed into a flying u shape having a nominal weight exceeding num pounds per foot num kgm meeting aashto m num .
bid these posts as steel u sign posts .
num .
tubular steel posts .
furnish round tubular steel posts meeting astm anum type e or s grade b requirements .
furnish square or rectangular tube posts meeting astm anum or anum requirements .
painted or galvanized posts are acceptable .
meet astm anum requirements for galvanizing .
paint the posts in accordance with the detailed drawing .
num .
square tubular steel posts .
ensure that all square tubular perforated and non perforated steel post telescoping devices meet the velocity change criteria of the current aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
furnish square tubular steel sign posts anchor posts anchor sleeves and splice sleeves meeting one of the following requirements a. astm anum grade a steel in num or num gauge having a numpsi num mpa minimum yield strength and a numpsi num mpa minimum tensile strength .
b. astm anum steel in num or num gauge having a numpsi num mpa minimum yield strength and a num num mpa minimum tensile strength .
use astm anum grade num bolts and nuts .
ensure the sign posts sleeves anchor posts auxiliary fittings and anchor sleeves have numinch num mm diameter holes or knockouts on numinch num mm centers on all four sides .
the permissible pole straightness variation is numinch in num feet num mmm with the corner radius being numinch num mm numinch num mm .
coat the post with type num aluminum paint at a minimum num ounces per square foot num kgmnum of surface area measured by triple spot testing under aashto t num .
follow with a chromate conversion coating and a thin acrylic or polymer resin film or a triple coating of hot dipped zinc weighing num num ounces per square foot num kg num kgmnum in accordance with aashto m num followed by a chromate conversion coating num num micrograms per square inch num mmnum and a clear organic coating num num mils num mm num mm thick on the outside surface .
provide double inline application of a full zincbased organic coating num num mils num mm num mm thick tested in accordance with astm bnum on the inside surface .
c. aluminum u posts .
furnish aluminum posts made of aanumtnum alloy extruded to a u channel in accordance with astm bnum .
d. breakaways .
num .
structural and tubular steel .
furnish frangible bolt devices and reduced section or perforated fuse plates .
use devices commercially manufactured and designed in accordance with aashtos current edition of standard specifications for structural steel support for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals crash tested and approved for use by fhwa .
num edition signing materials num num num .
square tubular steel posts .
furnish slip base breakaway devices in accordance with the detailed drawings .
ensure the breakaway device meets the velocity change criteria in accordance with aashtos current edition of standard specifications for structural steel support for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals for both single tube and telescoping installations .
num reserved num treated wood posts and poles timber poles are specified by the top diameter .
meet table num top diameter limits table num timber pole top diameter limits specified top diameter inch mm diameter limits inch mm min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num furnish posts and poles num feet num m in length or less free of crooks and sweeps greater than inch num mm from the post centerline .
the maximum offset from centerline for posts and poles longer than num feet num m is inch num mm plus numinch num mm per additional foot of length .
the centerline is defined as a straight line from the center of the tip to the center of the butt .
gain and chamfer posts and poles in accordance with the detailed drawings .
perform all machining before treatment .
full length pressuretreat all timber posts and poles in accordance with subsection num regardless of length .
treat round posts and poles in accordance with awpa standards for commodity specification b and use category numa regardless of length .
supply round posts and poles meeting the awpa minimum penetration requirements specified for natural posts and poles with a penetration of at least inch num mm .
posts and poles must have sufficient sapwood to provide the inch num mm minimum penetration .
gain each post and pole on the sign face at least num inches num mm in width in accordance with the detailed drawings .
use construction grade num x numinch num x num mm actual thickness pressure treated in accordance with subsection num in snums for back bracing .
num reserved num overhead structures furnish overhead sign structures in accordance with aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals including fatigue requirements in section num .
include fatigue design requirements for all sign structures as follows design life num years fatigue category num galloping cantilevered structures only truckinduced gusts posted speed limit natural wind gusts num signing materials num edition num num concrete use class general concrete in accordance with section num for steel sign post foundations .
hand mixing is not allowed .
add an air entraining agent to all foundation concrete .
num retroreflective sheeting a .
general .
furnish the type of retroreflective sheeting and color specified in the contract .
use traffic control sheeting in accordance with astm retroreflective sheeting on the traffic control devices specified in table num .
the following traffic control devices in the traffic control rate schedule require astm designated retroreflective sheeting as specified .
provide orange sheeting that is fluorescent .
all other sign colors need not be fluorescent table num astm retro_reflective sheeting requirements traffic control rate schedule group no .
specification type num num sign panel num num panel and all other work zone sign faces e.g .
flag person paddles pilot car signs etc .
astm dnum xi x ix viii vii or vi num num num num and all cones and tubular markers astm dnum iii or v reflective sheeting may only be overlaid on reflective sheeting of the same color .
remove any existing legend prior to overlaying .
b .
letters direct applied .
furnish letters numerals symbols and borders from type iii sheeting permanently adhered to the sign face reflective sheeting .
apply the letters numerals symbols and borders following the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
follow the size series and spacing in the fhwas standard alphabets proportion and spacing requirements .
use finished pieces that are clean cut free of ragged borders .
c. acceptance .
submit manufacturers certification that the retroreflective sheeting used meets the designated astm type retroreflective requirement specified .
the department may take sheeting samples for analysis and testing .
the project manager may visually compare the sheetings diffuse day color in the field using standard color charts and test the signs retroreflectivity using a retroreflectometer .
replace rejected material at contractor expense .
num reserved num paint use paints in accordance with section num .
num hardware a. miscellaneous .
use bolts washers nuts lock washers incidental hardware and angles for erecting aluminum sheet and plywood signs that are num .
galvanized in accordance with astm anum or astm bnum or num .
aluminum alloy in accordance with astm bnum for alloy numtnum .
b .
hinges .
use only nonrusting hardware of like material .
when mounting on aluminum sheeting for folding signs use hinges that are num .
aluminum alloy in accordance with astm bnum for alloy numtnum or num .
stainless steel in accordance with astm anum .
num edition signing materials num num num fabrication of signs num aluminum signs provide a reflectorized sheet background .
clean rust white rust oil and dirt from the aluminum sheeting .
degrease the sheeting using vapor or alkaline degreasing agent following the degreasing agent manufacturers recommendations .
degrease acid or alkaline etch rinse and dry the sheeting as recommended by the etching solution manufacturer .
treat the etched sheeting with a light tight adherent chromate conversion coating before applying the reflective sheeting .
this coating must not leave a powdery residue and may leave a silvery iridescence to pale yellow appearance .
coat in accordance with astm bnum class num num to num milligrams thick per square foot num mnum .
hot air dry the sheeting once coated .
apply and seal the reflectorized sheeting on the prepared aluminum sheeting following the reflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
apply legends and borders in accordance with subsection numb .
color the blind rivet heads to match the sign face .
apply background material to the sheet aluminum before fabricating the sign .
butt the sheet increments together to produce a joint that meets the specified tolerances limits .
do not use water to float the reflective sheeting or legends into place during fabrication .
num plywood signs provide a reflective background .
seal all wood edges including interior joints before fabrication using one coat of exterior aluminum paint followed by one coat of enamel colored to match the reflective background sheeting .
apply the reflective sheeting and seal the edges following the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
a. screenprocessed legend and borders .
screen process or reversescreen process the legend and borders on reflectorized backgrounds meeting the contract requirements .
use the process and paints recommended by the sheet manufacturer .
b. reflective sheeting legend and borders .
cut the legend and borders from type iii sheeting .
do not splice legend characters .
apply legends following the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
do not use water to float the reflective sheeting or legend into place during fabrication .
c. demountable reflective legend and borders .
fabricate demountable legend in accordance with subsection numb .
furnish the letter type specified in the contract .
letters can not be spliced .
make borders and median sections in the longest pieces possible .
butt all joints with no overlap .
num inspection and acceptance completed signs will be inspected where fabricated for acceptance .
signs will be rejected for defects including but not limited to cracks tears splits crazing gouges and curled edges of background sheeting or legends .
num flexible delineators furnish delineator material that is impact resistant within a temperature range of num to num f num to num c. ensure the material from which the vertical tube post is fabricated flexes upon impact and results in little or no damage to impacting vehicles .
use a delineator that is ultra violet stabilized and resistant to ozone and hydrocarbons .
ensure the delineator design allows for quick and easy removal and replacement of delineator tube with only the use of common hand tools .
use delineators that are listed on the qpl and in accordance with nchrp num or mash requirements .
num signing materials num edition num ensure the delineator is flexible selferecting to original position and capable of withstanding numerous impacts from a direction without splitting breaking or detachment from the base or the surface to which the base is attached .
use delineators with a minimum height of num inches num mm and width configuration that allows a minimum of num square inches num cmnum of retroreflective sheeting to be affixed at the top of the post .
place retroreflective sheeting completely within the top num inches num mm of the delineator .
ensure color area and configuration of retroreflective sheeting equals that required by the standard drawings for the type of delineator specified .
use a post color that matches the attached sheeting .
provide the mounting as specified in the contract .
a .
surface mount flexible delineators .
ensure base material is flexible high impact composite material with a maximum of num square inches num cmnum surface area and capable of being mechanically attached to the mounting surface .
b. driveable flexible delineators .
ensure anchor is made of rigid materials and can not collapse or buckle when driven into dense soil .
metallic materials must be galvanized .
ensure anchor is driveable with manual or common installation tools .
num section num guardrail num guardrail furnish metal beam and cable guardrail materials in accordance with the contract .
num steel beams and fittings furnish steel beam guardrail in accordance with aashto m num class a type num requirements .
supply rail in lengths that place the splices on posts .
shape rail to be erected on curve radii less than num feet num m before erecting .
use astm anum bolts with astm anum grade a or better nuts .
use ansi bnum type a plain steel washers .
galvanize all bolts nuts washers and fittings in accordance with astm anum or bnum class num .
furnish rounded end sections buffer sections and terminal connectors in accordance with aashto m num class b type num .
num wood posts and blockouts furnish wood posts and blockouts made from douglas fir hemlock ponderosa pine spruce larch southern yellow pine or lodgepole pine .
furnish posts that are straight sound free from defects and meet the dimensions specified in the contract .
meet the western wood products association requirements or equivalent grading rules for no .
num grading or better in accordance with astm dnum .
ensure the posts surfaces do not vary more than numinch num mm from a straight line connecting the ends .
saw the wood posts before treating .
ensure the wood posts and blockouts are seasoned to accept the specified treatment in accordance with subsection num .
other acceptable blockouts may be manufactured from recycled plastic or recycled plastic with wood fibers provided they meet the requirements of subsection num .
use only one type of blockout in each run of guardrail .
num concrete posts furnish precast concrete posts in accordance with the contract .
use class general concrete or concrete of equal strength in accordance with section num .
manufacture transport and handle guardrail posts in accordance with section num .
use reinforcing steel in accordance with section num .
num lightweight concrete guardrail posts lightweight aggregates may be used in manufacturing guardrail posts .
produce both fine and course aggregates for lightweight concrete by expanding calcining or sintering blast furnace slag clay diatomite shale or slate .
meet aashto m num aggregate requirements .
use separate fine and course aggregate .
use fine aggregate in the no .
num num mm to num size .
use course aggregate of either inch num mm to no .
num num mm or inch num mm to no .
num num mm .
meet a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa equal to class general concrete with a maximum absorption of num by volume and a maximum unit weight of num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum .
aggregate prewetting may be required .
use reinforcing steel in accordance with section num .
steel size and shape is specified in the contract .
the aashto m num freezethaw test is not required .
num guardrail num edition num num steel posts furnish steel posts for cable guardrail in accordance with the contract .
spot paint all bruised broken scaled or damaged coating on steel posts with two coats of cold galvanizing compound following the paint manufacturers recommendations .
furnish minimum numfoot num mm long steel guardrail posts for steel beam guardrail .
ensure that steel guardrail posts and associated hardware meets the aashto guide to standardized highway barrier hardware task force num report .
num wire rope and connecting hardware furnish wire rope and hardware for cable guardrail in accordance with the contract .
num wood treatment and painting num wood treatment furnish wood posts and blocks pressure treated in accordance with subsection num using commodity specification a with retention specifications from commodity specification b use category numb .
chamfer and perform other required framing and boring of bolt holes before post treating .
plug drill holes used for determining preservative penetration depth with tight fitting treated wood plugs .
num painting use paint and perform painting in accordance with the contract .
num section num treated and untreated timber num structural timber and lumber furnish timbers and lumber being a .
standard sawn douglas fir or larch .
b. graded under the current west coast lumber standard grading rules or the western lumber grading rules .
c. grade stamped by an american lumber standards certified inspection agency .
the recommended design values under the rules for grading timbers and lumber grades can not be less than those shown in the contract for the required minimum timber stress .
note the grade the grading rule and the recommended design stress value for that rule on the shop drawings for each size .
use only pieces of sound wood free from all decay .
when untreated timber is specified it must show at least num heartwood on the girth measured where the least amount of heartwood occurs on any girth .
when treated timber is specified there are no heartwood requirements and the sapwood amount is not limited .
num reserved num poles and posts furnish the poles and posts in accordance with the contract .
num treated timber and lumber furnish structural timber and lumber treated with a wood preservative specified as follows .
num treating furnish timber and lumber that is pressure treated meeting the preservative retention and penetration requirements found in awpa standards unum and tnum commodity specification a b or d use category numa appropriate for the application of material .
use one of the following preservatives num by weight solution of pentachlorophenol meeting awpa standards pnum using solvent meeting awpa pnum type a cca type c meeting awpa standard pnum .
cun solution meeting awpa standard pnum using solvent meeting awpa pnum type a .
treated timber or lumber to receive paint must permit the paint to adhere to the treated surface without discoloration .
meet aashto m num requirements for all preservatives and their sampling and testing methods .
treat injuries cuts and holes in wood after treatment with three applications of copper naphthenate solution containing a minimum of num copper metal or with cca meeting awpa mnum requirements .
num incising mechanically incise timber and lumber as specified in section num of commodity specification a part num of awpa standard tnum having a nominal thickness of num inches actual num mm thickness or greater before treating .
incise timber and lumber num inches num mm actual thickness thick or greater on all four sides .
incise timber and lumber less than num inches num mm actual thickness thick on the wide faces only unless otherwise specified .
ensure incision depth and pattern for all material are dense enough to achieve uniform depth of penetration as specified in section num of commodity specification a part num of awpa standard tnum .
incise intermountain douglas fir then treat to num treated and untreated timber num edition num refusal with preservative and retention requirements meeting awpa standards listed in num .
refusal being specified as the pressure and temperature shall be maintained constant or be increased within a range with good practice for the material being treated until the quantity of preservative absorbed in each of any two consecutive half hours in not more than num of the amount already injected .
numinch num mm actual dimension centermatched material used for flumes boxes etc .
does not need to be incised .
ensure incised wood meets the penetration and retention requirements appropriate for identified use category commodity specification .
num inspection wood products will be inspected in accordance with mt num .
only wood products with worm holes and any staining due to fungus will be inspected in the white along with the moisture content of intermountain douglas fir .
for inspecting wood in the white a minimum of num hours advanced notice must be given and must be traceable from inspection in the white to inspection of the treated product .
if stain is present in the wood use only material with blue stain .
the correct moisture content for intermountain douglas fir is num num and the method to obtain this moisture content is outlined in the awpa standards .
the acceptance of any material or finished members by the inspector does not prevent their rejection if found defective .
replace rejected material and work at contractor expense .
num section num joint materials num concrete joint fillers num concrete pavement a .
expansion joint filler .
furnish expansion joint filler type ii cork in accordance with aashto m num .
b .
joint sealing material .
furnish sealing material for all types of pavement joints that is a hotpoured thermoplastic rubber or rubber asphalt compound in accordance with aashto m num furnished in one grade only .
use readymixed cold applied joint fillers for sealing concrete pavement joints only with the project managers prior written approval .
num concrete structures other than pavement a .
expansion joint filler .
furnish type ii cork preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
b .
expansion joint system .
furnish expansion joint system in accordance with the contract .
c. silicone joint seal .
furnish silicone joint seal in accordance with the contract .
d. fabric reinforced neoprene joint seal .
furnish fabric reinforced neoprene joint seal in accordance with the contract .
e. expansion joint asphalt plug .
furnish expansion joint asphalt plug in accordance with the contract .
num concrete curbs gutters and sidewalks use preformed expansion joint filler for concrete curbs gutters and sidewalks in accordance with aashto m num .
num culvert sealers num rubber gaskets furnish ring gaskets in accordance with astm cnum .
num flexible joint sealers furnish flexible joint sealants in accordance with astm cnum .
num sheet copper rubber and plastic waterstops num sheet copper furnish sheet copper for waterstops in accordance eith astm bnum for copper sheet strip plate and rolled bar type etp with a nominal weight of num ounces per square foot num kgmnum num .
num rubber furnish molded or extruded rubber waterstops having a uniform cross section free from porosity or other defects and meeting the nominal dimensions specified in the contract .
an equivalent standard shape may be furnished if approved .
the waterstop may be compounded from natural rubber synthetic rubber or a blend of the two together with other materials that produce a finished waterstop in accordance with the contract .
reclaimed material can not be used .
furnish a manufacturers certificate showing the material composition and the values for the designated properties in table num .
furnish samples when requested .
num joint materials num edition num table num properties and test methods finished rubber waterstop property federal test method standard no .
num requirement hardness shoredurometer num num to num compression set num num max .
tensile strength num num psi num mpa min .
elongation at breaking num num min .
tensile stress at num elongation num num psi num mpa min .
water absorption by weight num num max .
tensile strength num num min .
after aging original num plastic furnish plastic waterstops manufactured from virgin pvc plastic or other material in accordance with table num .
table num properties and test methods finished plastic waterstop astm standard property requirement dnum hardness num num dnum tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa dnum ultimate elongation min .
num dnum low temperature no failure procedure b brittleness at num c furnish for approval a drawing or catalog cut of the waterstop intended for use and a written certificate from the manufacturer that the waterstop meets the specifications .
num section num concrete plastic and fiber pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num general use cement in reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with aashto m num for portland cement .
furnish reinforced concrete pipe produced by a manufacturing plant that has been approved by the department before the contract award date .
the bid tabulations specify only the span dimension to the nearest inch mm of pipe arch culverts as shown in the detailed drawings for the culverts .
the contract show both span and rise dimensions .
the department will inspect and approve the equipment and methods for manufacturing protecting curing and storing pipe before fabrication .
meet aashto m num requirements for reinforcement in circular or elliptical pipe .
use type v cement unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num circular reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe furnish pipe in accordance with aashto m num except that part num does not apply .
use a minimum wall b pipe .
num reinforced concrete arch culvert storm drain and sewer pipe furnish pipe in accordance with aashto m num with class aiii pipe strength requirements .
num reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe furnish pipe in accordance with aashto m num .
num flared end terminal sections and tee risers furnish flared end terminal sections and the riser of tee sections in accordance with aashto m num class iii pipe .
num concrete pressure pipe furnish reinforced concrete low head pressure pipe in accordance with astm cnum .
num perforated concrete pipe furnish perforated concrete pipe in accordance with aashto m num .
num porous concrete pipe furnish porous concrete pipe in accordance with aashto m num .
num pvc gravity sewer and drain pipe num pipe furnish gravity pipe numinch through numinch num num mm nominal diameter produced by continuous extrusion and having selfextinguishing characteristics .
the pvc plastic must have a cell classification of numb numc or numb minimum tensile modulus of num psi num mpa as specified in astm dnum .
meet astm dnum requirements for pipe and fittings .
meet a minimum standard dimension ratio sdr of num .
furnish perforated pipe in accordance with astm dnum .
furnish pipe with nominal laying lengths of num feet num m except for connections to manholes inlets and other appurtenances .
ensure each pipe length is marked with nominal size pvc cell classification sdr and astm designation .
num concrete plastic and fiber pipe num edition num num pipe joints each pipe length must have a bell end .
the bell must have an elastomeric rubber gasket in a retaining groove to provide a watertight joint when the pipe is joined .
the rubber gasket must maintain a watertight joint under all service conditions including expansion contraction settlement and pipe deformation movements .
make the joint connections following the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
num appurtenance joints make all connections to manholes inlets or other appurtenances watertight using rubber gaskets waterstops or nonshrink portland cement grout for grouted joints .
num pvc pressure water pipe num pipe furnish pressure pvc water pipe numinch through numinch num mm num mm nominal diameter in either class num with a dimension ratio dr of num or class num with a dr of num in accordance with awwa specification cnum .
pipe sections must be marked with diameter code designation dr pressure class and awwa specification .
num pipe joints each manufactured length of pipe must have an integral bell with an elastomeric gasket in a retaining groove that provides a watertight joint when joined .
num corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe furnish heavy duty corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe or tubing and fittings in accordance with aashto m num type s nonperforated or type sp perforated requirements for nominal diameters num through num inches num num mm and aashto m num for nominal diameters num through num inches num num mm .
num high density polyethylene pipe furnish and install polyethylene pipe and fittings manufactured from a pe num pe num or pe num resin in accordance with astm dnum .
molded and fabricated butt fusion fittings must meet astm dnum and have at least the same pressure rating as the pipe .
num pressurized polyethylene pipe furnish pressure rated polyethylene pipe less than or equal to numinch num mm diameter in accordance with astm dnum .
use a class num with a dr of num for polyethylene pipe .
num solid wall polyethylene pipe furnish solid wall polyethylene pipe greater than numinch num mm in diameter in accordance with astm fnum .
num section num metal pipe num ductile iron and steel water pipe num ductile iron pipe furnish ductile iron pipe in accordance with awwa c num for the pipe class specified in the contract .
use mechanical or slipon joints in accordance with awwa c num ansi a num .
construct the joints to provide electrical conductivity using bronze shims or gaskets with metallic shims molded into the gasket .
num steel water pipe furnish steel pipe in accordance with awwa c num standard for water pipe num inches num mm and larger .
field weld joints and bends in accordance with awwa c num .
meet awwa c num requirements for shop and field coatings .
num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches furnish corrugated steel pipe that is lock seam helically corrugated pipe or continuously welded seam corrugated pipe .
furnish corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches and coupling bands in accordance with aashto m num excluding projection bands under num and the following a .
when pipe is cut and to be rejoined matchmark cut pipe ends and rejoin the matching ends during installation .
b .
when using corrugated locking bands reroll the pipe ends forming at least two annular corrugations .
unraveling of lock seams due to rerolling pipe ends is a defect and the pipe will be rejected .
repair zinc or aluminized pipe coating damaged by rerolling using a zinc rich paint .
apply the paint to provide a minimum num inch num mm thickness .
if flanges are provided on the pipe ends the coupling may be made by interlocking the flanges with a preformed channel band or other band incorporating a locking channel in accordance with aashto m num .
these bands may be used only on pipes with diameters up to and including num inches num mm .
the coupling bands or devices other than those specified in aashto m num require the project managers approval before use .
meet the following additional requirements for syphon and irrigation pipe installations num .
use lock seam helically corrugated pipe or welded seam helically corrugated pipe num .
continuously weld lock seams from end to end of each lock seam helically corrugated pipe section for syphon installations .
perform the welding after rerolling the ends num .
for irrigation installations using lock seam helically corrugated pipe weld the lock seams as specified above or fabricate by inserting a numinch num mm diameter continuous rubber chord meeting pipe industry standards into the lock seam during fabrication in accordance with aashto m num and num .
construct watertight field joints .
make the connection using a numinch num mm wide hugger type band .
hugger bands must have oring gaskets .
lubricate and install gaskets and coupling bands following the manufacturers recommendations .
the project manager may direct the fabricator to conduct a watertightness test witnessed by an inspector on the type or types of pipe and coupling devices to be furnished .
submit the test method to the project manager for approval before testing .
alternate test methods may be required .
num metal pipe num edition num num steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches use galvanized corrugated steel structural plates and fasteners for constructing pipe in accordance with aashto m num .
bevel the end plates of structural steel pipe plate arches as specified in the contract .
meet aashto m num requirements for allowable tolerance in span and rise for pipe arches .
submit a suppliers itemized statement of the plate sizes for each shipment for field inspection of the plates .
department inspection will include examining pipe for deficiencies in the lengths of sheets used and evidence of poor workmanship .
samples may be taken for chemical analysis and weight of spelter coating .
num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches and steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches meet aashto m num pipe coating requirements except as modified below clean and dry the surface to be coated before applying the bituminous coating .
apply coating with the ambient air temperature at least num f num c and rising .
coat the full circumference of the pipes outside and the bottom up to one third of the vertical height of the pipes inside circumference .
provide a coat thickness of at least num inch num mm .
num precoated galvanized steel culverts and underdrains meet aashto m num m num and subsection num for irrigation and syphon pipe installations .
provide a minimum numinch num mm coating for both inside and outside surfaces in accordance with aashto m num section num .
num corrugated steel pipe for underdrains furnish pipe and coupling bands in accordance with aashto m num .
the class of underdrain in aashto m num is the contractors option .
furnish semicircular underdrain and coupling bands in accordance with aashto m num and the detailed drawings .
furnish nuts caps screws and other parts galvanized in accordance with astm anum or bnum class num .
furnish screens and caps for semicircular underdrains in accordance with the detailed drawings .
furnish bituminous coated underdrains in accordance with aashto m num .
nuts bolts and screens must not be coated .
num corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts furnish corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts in accordance with aashto m num and the modifications to aashto m num specified in subsection num .
num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains furnish corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains in accordance with aashto m num .
num seamless steel pipe furnish seamless steel pipe in accordance with astm anum .
num copper pipe furnish copper pipe and tube in accordance with astm bnum type k. num slotted corrugated steel pipe furnish slotted corrugated steel pipe that is commercially fabricated with the grate and steel pipe an integral unit .
pressure or fusion weld the grate spacer bars to the bearing bar .
meet astm anum requirements for grating materials galvanized after fabrication .
num edition metal pipe num num num type ii aluminized corrugated steel pipe furnish pipe and coupling bands fabricated from material in accordance with aashto m num .
ensure the prefabricated pipe and coupling bands are in accordance with subsection num .
num metal pipe num edition num num section num paints num pigments vehicles and thinners ensure all materials from which paints are made and formulated are in accordance with the following specifications aluminum pigments astm dnum black synthetic iron oxide pigment astm dnum bone black pigment astm dnum calcium carbonate pigments astm dnum carbon black pigment astm dnum chrome oxide green pigment astm dnum chrome yellow and chrome orange pigments astm dnum lampblack pigments astm dnum liquid paint driers astm dnum magnesium silicate pigments astm dnum mica pigment astm dnum ochre ferrous earthy pigments astm dnum petroleum spirits mineral spirits astm dnum raw and burnt sienna pigments astm dnum raw and burnt umber pigments astm dnum red and brown iron oxide pigments astm dnum titanium dioxide pigments astm dnum yellow iron oxide pigmenthydrated astm dnum zinc dust pigment astm dnum zinc oxide pigments astm dnum num paints and enamels a .
general .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations including but not limited to storage application thinning safety precautions and film thickness unless otherwise specified .
furnish all paints under this section free of lead or zinc chromate unless specified .
provide the manufacturers msds .
supply the paint in the original container labeled with the manufacturers name address paint type formula identification date of manufacture and lot or batch number .
paints for structural steel where multiple coats are applied must be produced by the same manufacturer .
provide the project manager certified test results from an independent testing facility showing the following paints supplied meet the applicable requirements .
b. paints for miscellaneous metals .
use the following paints on metal unless otherwise specified .
num .
reserved .
num .
aluminum epoxy paint .
furnish aluminum epoxy paint that is a selfpriming two component high build aluminum filled epoxy mastic .
the paint must adhere to metal surfaces and existing painted surfaces when the surface is prepared following the paint manufacturers recommendations .
apply the coating following all the manufacturers recommendations to produce a minimum num mil num mm dry film thickness .
meet table num minimum paint composition requirements .
num paints num edition num table num aluminum epoxy paint composition composition solids num num by volume astm dnum pigment num by volume vehicle num by volume percent nonvolatile vehicle num nominal voc num pounds per gallon num gl the mixed paint must weigh between num to num pounds per gallon num to num kgl when measured in accordance with astm dnum at num num f num num c. the mix ratio of the two components must be num by volume and have a minimum pot life of num hours at num f num c when thinned following the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
epoxy paint for pipe pile .
furnish epoxy paint that is a twocomponent selfpriming epoxy coating in accordance with table num .
table num epoxy paint for pipe pile requirements requirement drying time at num f num c to touch to cure num hours max .
num days max .
pot life at num f num c num hours min .
abrasion resistance astm dnum csnum wheel num gram load num cycles num mg loss max .
direct impact resistance astm dnum num inchpounds num nm minimum additional requirements a .
salt fog .
no blistering cracking or film delamination when tested in accordance with astm bnum for num hours and b. moisture condensation resistance .
no blistering cracking or film delamination when tested in accordance with astm dnum for num hours at num f num c. num .
equipment enamel .
furnish equipment enamel that is formulated using federal specification ttenumb class a spray or brush consistency in accordance with the contract .
match the appropriate color chip available from the materials bureau .
meet the thinner requirements of federal specification tttnum .
use at a maximum rate of num pint per gallon num ll when required .
num .
white yellow and black enamel .
furnish water resistant enamels made from synthetic gums capable of brush application to vertical metal surfaces without running streaking or sagging .
meet table num requirements .
num edition paints num num table num enamel paint requirements white yellow black coarse particles and skins retained on no .
num sieve num mm max .
num num num nonvolatile matter min .
num num num dry to touch at num f num c time in hours max .
num num num dry hard at num f num c time in hours max .
num num num toughness kauri reduction test at num f num c min .
num num num hiding power square feet per gallon mnuml by pfund cryptometer model e num num black plates min .
num num meet federal test method standard no .
numc for whitening dulling or change in color brushing flowing covering and leveling properties .
the white enamel must be equal in brightness to rutile type iv titanium dioxide pigment .
yellow enamel must match standard color sample for dnum yellow guardrail paint .
black enamel must be jet black and cover completely in one coat .
num .
zinc phosphate paint .
zinc phosphate paint may be used as a primer or finish coat unless otherwise specified .
provide the finish paint color specified in the contract and match the appropriate color chip available upon request .
the paint must a .
be well ground b .
show no skinning in a freshly opened full can c. not cake or settle in the container d. readily break up with a paddle to a smooth uniform consistency e. brush easily possess good leveling qualities and f. dry to a hard uniform finish .
meet table num requirements .
num paints num edition num table num zinc phosphate paint requirements requirement min .
max .
pigmentnum num num vehiclenum num num pigment composition zinc phosphate num titanium dioxide rutilenum num calcium carbonate num vehicle composition alkyd phthalic resin num solids num raw linseed oil num mineral spirits num driers and additives num finished paint consistency krebsstormernum num ku num ku weight num pounds per gallon gml num num dry to touchnum num hours dry to handlenum num hours dry film thickness mil mm num num notes num .
by astm dnum num .
by astm dnum num .
federal test method standards numc method num num .
federal test method no .
nummethod num num .
federal test method no .
nummethod num num .
astm dnum num paint coating systems for structures a. epoxy zinc rich primer .
meet aashto m num type i or ii requirements excluding those in section num .
b .
intermediate coat .
use a twocomponent polyamide epoxy in accordance with table num .
table num structures intermediate coat requirements requirement drying time num f num c to touch tack free cure num hours max .
num hours max .
num days max .
pot life num f num c num hours min .
abrasion resistance astm dnum csnum wheel num cycles num mg max .
loss direct impact resistance num inchpounds num nm minimum num edition paints num num additional requirements num .
salt fog .
no blistering softening cracking or film delamination when tested in accordance with astm bnum for num hours and num .
moisture condensation resistance .
no blistering rusting or delamination when tested in accordance with astm dnum for num hrs .
at num f num c. c. finish coat .
provide urethane paint in accordance with table num .
table num structures finish coat requirements requirement drying time num f num c to touch num hours max .
tack free num hours max .
cure num days max .
pot life num f num c num hours min .
abrasion resistance astm dnum csnum wheel num cycles num mg. max .
loss impact resistance num inchpounds num nm minimum additional requirements num .
salt fog .
no blistering softening cracking or film delamination when tested in accordance with astm bnum for num hours and num .
moisture condensation resistance .
no blistering rusting or delamination when tested in accordance with astm dnum for num hours at num f num c. num powder coating prequalification and certification provide certified test results of the tests shown in table num for powder coated material .
submit certified test results and samples for approval .
only coatings approved are permitted to be used .
table num certified test results test name astm designation specification limits salt spray test dnum bnum rating number minimum num from table num after num hours impact test dnum num inchpounds num nm minimum cross hatch adhesion test dnum numa or numb minimum hardness test dnum numh bend test dnum num bend inch num mm diameter mandrel with no breaks flaking or cracks uv exposure gnum num hours no film failure thickness gnum num mil num mm minimum abrasion taber abraser dnum num gram num cycles num mg maximum weight loss submit two num x numinch num x num mm by num gauge num mm coupons along with the test results of the coating material used to the project manager .
the coating must be representative of expected quality and color of coatings from a production line .
num paints num edition num num antigraffiti coatingpermanent furnish a permanent nonsacrificial siloxanebased antigraffiti coating capable of withstanding multiple cleanings which is listed on the qpl .
coating must allow graffiti to be removed through the use of a water pressure washer and without detergents or chemicals .
product must be approved by the manufacturer for use on the intended material or surface and have a finished dry film thickness of not less than num mils num mm .
remove any graffiti prior to application of an antigraffiti coating .
prepare the substrate surface apply cure and maintain coating in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num section num reinforcing steel structural steel hardware and miscellaneous structure items num reinforcing steel num bar reinforcing furnish the specified reinforcing steel in accordance with aashto m num .
the project manager may accept small lots of reinforcing steel subject to it passing the bending test specified in aashto m num .
num epoxycoated reinforcing bars furnish epoxycoated reinforcing bars in accordance with astm anum and the contract requirements .
epoxycoating on reinforcing bars must be in accordance with astm anum or astm anum .
ensure the bars are coated by an applicator plant listed on the qpl and certified under the crsi epoxy coating plant certification program for fusionbonded epoxy applicator plants .
num wire and wire mesh furnish concrete reinforcing wire in accordance with aashto m num .
furnish wire mesh reinforcing for concrete in accordance with aashto m num and the contract .
furnish bar mats aashto m num .
num structural steel furnish structural steel for a. bridge superstructure applications in accordance with aashto m num .
use material in accordance with charpy vnotch impact test requirements for zone num to fabricate webs flanges in tension or stress reversal zones splice plates wshaped rolled beams .
this requirement applies to diaphragms and diaphragm connection plates for horizontally curved girders .
b .
other applications in accordance with aashto m num .
num structural steel tubing furnish structural steel tubing in accordance with astm anum grade b for coldformed welded seamless carbon steel structural tubing in rounds and shapes .
num pins and rollers furnish pins and rollers of annealed carbon steel forgings in accordance with aashto m num class c requirements or coldfinished carbon steel shaft in accordance with aashto m num grades num to num inclusive .
fabricate pins and recessed pin nuts as detailed in the aisc manual of steel construction .
num welding electrodes use welding electrodes in accordance with aws aashto and the contract .
num high tensile strength bolts furnish high strength bolts for structural steel joints in accordance with astm anum type num or num astm anum type num or num as specified in the contract .
num reinforcing steel structural steel num edition hardware and miscellaneous structure items num a .
tension control bolts .
meet the requirements of astm fnum when substituting tension control bolt assemblies for astm anum bolts .
meet the requirements of astm fnum when substituting tension control bolt assemblies for astm anum bolts .
b .
nuts .
furnish heavy hex nuts for high strength bolts in accordance with table num .
table num heavy hex nuts bolt type heavy hex nut astm anum astm anum type numplain grade c cnum d dh dhnum type numgalvanized dh type num grade cnum dhnum astm anum type num grade dh dhnum type num grade dhnum notes num .
plain heavy hex nuts grades c cnum and d must have a minimum hardness of num hrb .
num .
anum grade numh may be substituted for anum grade dh num .
when galvanized fasteners are specified furnish assemblies manufactured and lubricated with a visible dye so a visual check verifies the lubricants presence at installation .
c. hardened washers .
furnish washers for astm anum or anum bolts in accordance with astm fnum .
washers are to be circular beveled or extra thick as required in the contract .
washers must have the same surface condition and weathering characteristics as the bolts specified in the contract .
d. direct tension indicators .
furnish direct tension indicators in accordance with astm fnum .
galvanize dtis by mechanical deposition in accordance with astm bnum class num .
hot dip galvanizing is not allowed .
e. galvanized high strength bolts .
hot dip galvanize astm anum bolts and hardware in accordance with astm fnum .
hot dip galvanizing astm anum bolts is not allowed .
testing for failure and additional rotation will be done in accordance with mt num .
num bolts and nuts furnish bolts threaded rod and nuts in accordance with astm anum grade a requirements .
num galvanized metal furnish galvanized ferrous metal products in accordance with aashto m num or when applicable meeting astm bnum class num requirements .
num welded stud shear connectors furnish shear connector studs in accordance with aws dnum section num specification for stud welding and the contract .
num steel piling num structural steel piles furnish new steel h piles melted and manufactured in the usa in accordance with aashto m num grade num mpa num ksi and contract .
num edition reinforcing steel structural steel num hardware and miscellaneous structure items num num steel pipe piles furnish new steel pipe piles melted and manufactured in the usa in accordance with astm anum grade num with a minimum yield strength of num ksi num mpa .
steel pipe diameter and wall thickness is specified in the contract .
num prestressing steel furnish prestressing steel in accordance with astm anum .
num castings num steel castings for highway bridges furnish castings in accordance with astm anum .
num chromium alloy steel castings furnish castings made from grade canum in accordance with aashto m num .
num drainage structure castings furnish structural drainage castings in accordance with the detailed drawings and aashto m num hsnum .
num bearing assembly anchor bolts for bridges furnish anchor bolts sized in accordance with aashto m num .
num elastomeric bearing devices furnish elastomeric bearings in accordance with aashto m num and the contract .
for reinforced elastomeric devices furnish steel laminates in accordance with aashto m num grade num or astm anum .
num compression joint seals furnish preformed elastic joint seals in accordance with the open cell compression seal requirements of astm dnum and the contract .
furnish joint seals that accommodate the design movement specified in the contract and follow the manufacturers recommended installation width .
use the seal manufacturers recommended adhesive lubricant for seal installation .
use lubricant in accordance with astm dnum .
furnish a minimum numfoot num mm long seal sample taken from each size and type furnished on the project .
order the seals num feet num mm longer than required for the installation .
submit a copy of the manufacturers certificate of compliance in accordance with subsection num attesting that the material meets specifications .
obtain the project managers approval of all joint seals before installation .
install the seals following the manufacturers recommendations .
do not field splice seals .
furnish and install the seals including these costs in the bid price for structural steel .
num fiber reinforced pads furnish vulcanized rubberfiber pads made from new unvulcanized rubber and synthetic fibers .
each component must make up num of the pads weight .
the pad surface must have num .
a standard rubber hardness of num num shore a durometer num .
an ultimate compressive breakdown strength of at least num psi num mpa and num .
a minimum and maximum pad thickness of numinch num mm and inch num mm respectively .
submit the manufacturers certification that the pads meet these specifications .
a copy of the certification must accompany the shipment to the project .
pads not meeting these requirements will be rejected .
num reinforcing steel structural steel num edition hardware and miscellaneous structure items num fiber reinforced pads are incidental to and included in payment for other structural steel work .
num metal bintype retaining walls furnish metal bintype retaining walls in accordance with the contract .
furnish the necessary bolts and appurtenances for complete assembly of the members into a continuous closedface wall of connected bins .
ensure the base metal and spelter coating are in accordance with aashto m num .
use galvanized bolts nuts washers and other hardware in accordance with astm anum or bnum class num type i .
ensure all members are fabricated so units of the same nominal size are fully interchangeable .
do not drill punch or drift holes to correct defects in manufacture .
replace members having improperly punched holes at contractor expense .
remove and replace damaged members or members with damaged or broken spelter at contractor expense .
meet the applicable treatment and handling requirements for bituminouscoated steel structural plate pipe and pipe arches under section num when handling bituminoustreated walls .
repair broken or damaged bituminous coating at contractor expense .
num mechanical rebar connectors furnish any type mechanical connector meeting a yield strength minimum of num of the reinforcement and be of a type commonly used and readily available .
splice epoxy coated reinforcement with epoxy coated mechanical connectors .
submit num copies of the product data sheet for the proposed type of connector with the specified performance criteria to the project manager prior to installation .
num metric plate substitution define the requirements for substituting standard inchsized steel plate for metric steel plate .
this applies to aashto m num grade num steel plate used in the following applications bridge rail prestressed concrete beams bridge guard angles bridge pier protection anchors and plates fixed shoe bearing devices this does not apply to aashto m num grades num through num .
show the metric plate thickness and add a table to the shop drawings similar to table num .
num edition reinforcing steel structural steel num hardware and miscellaneous structure items num table num steel plate substitutions plate thickness inch allowable substitute plate thickness mm  num num num  num or num num num  num  num or num  num  num or num  num num num num num num num or num num gauge astm anum sheet may also be substituted for numinch num mm shim plates num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe furnish ptfe resin in accordance with astm dnum and astm dnum requirements .
use ptfe sheets consisting of pure ptfe resin molded by pressure and heat and skived into sheets of numinch num mm thick .
finished sheets must conform to the properties listed in table num .
table num ptfe sheet properties astm test physical property requirement d num tensile strength num psi num mpa d num tensile elongation num furnish stainless steel sheets if applicable in accordance with astm anum or astm anum type num .
num reinforcing steel structural steel num edition hardware and miscellaneous structure items num num section num fencing materials num chain link fence num general meet aashto m num requirements as modified herein .
use one of the following fence fabrics as specified in the contract type num class c zinccoated steel type num aluminumcoated steel type num aluminum alloy zincnum aluminummischmetal alloy in accordance with astm bnum may be substituted for zinc coating hotdipped at a class num or num ozftnum num gmnum coating thickness as specified by astm fnum .
use zinccoated steel for all type num and type num fabric fence parts including posts rails gate frames expansion sleeves wire ties fabric ties hog rings tension wire miscellaneous fittings and hardware .
use aluminum alloy for these same type num fabric fence parts .
use either zinc coated steel or aluminum alloy for these type num fabric fence parts .
num fence fabric furnish fence fabric having numinch num mm openings and in accordance with aashto m num .
use numgauge wire for fabric num inches num mm high and under .
use numgauge wire for fabric num inches num mm high and over .
the fabric height is specified in the contract .
num posts rails and braces meet astm fnum and the contract length requirements .
furnish all posts with a watertight cap that fits securely over the outside post top and supports the top rail .
num truss rods furnish inch num mm truss rods as follows steel galvanized with dropforged turnbuckles or other approved type of adjustment .
aluminum with cast aluminum turnbuckles or other approved type of adjustment .
num fabric bands and stretcher bars furnish bands as follows steel a minimum inch num mm thick x numinch num mm wide .
aluminum a minimum inch num mm thick x inch num mm wide .
furnish aluminum or steel stretcher bars as follows a minimum inch num mm thick x inch num mm wide .
at least num inches num mm shorter than the fabric width used .
num tie wire furnish numgauge galvanized steel tie wire in accordance with aashto m num .
furnish num gauge class num galvanized steel hog ring fasteners in accordance with aashto m num .
furnish numgauge aluminum tie wire in accordance with astm bnum alloy num temper hnum .
furnish minimum numgauge aluminum hog ring fasteners in accordance with astm bnum alloy num .
num tension wire furnish numgauge galvanized coiled spring steel tension wire .
meet aashto m num class num galvanizing requirements .
num fencing materials num edition num furnish numgauge aluminum tension wire in accordance with astm bnum alloy num temper t num .
num gates furnish gates complete with all necessary hinges latch and dropbar locking device for the type of gate and gateposts specified .
weld in accordance with section num .
a .
steel gates .
construct gate frames from steel sections in accordance with astm fnum .
the gate frame corners may be welded or fastened and reinforced with galvanized malleableiron fittings designed for this use .
use chain link fabric for gate frames in accordance with subsection num and match the fabric used in the fence .
b .
aluminum gates .
construct gate frames from aluminum sections in accordance with astm fnum .
assemble the gates frames by welding .
use aluminum alloy cast hinges in accordance with astm bnum or bnum or made of malleable iron or steel and hotdip galvanized or mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm bnum class num .
make all latches stops and keepers of the aluminum alloy specified for hinges or use galvanized malleable iron or pressed steel .
use chain link fabric for the gate frame in accordance with subsection num and matching the fabric used in the fence .
num wire fence num woven wire furnish woven wire in accordance with aashto m num and either of table num designations .
table num woven wire requirements specification grade design number metallic coating aashto m num no .
num grade num num  type z class num or type za class num aashto m num no .
num grade num num type z class num or type za class num for use with type c fence .
provide a numinch num mm stay spacing .
match the fence height and mesh dimensions of the fence being replaced if not specified .
num barbed wire use numpoint num or numgauge barbed wire in accordance with aashto m num .
space barbs at a numinch nominal num mm or a numinch nominal num mm spacing .
provide the project manager certification that the wire is in accordance with aashto m num .
num brace wire use num or numgauge soft smooth wire .
num staples and nails use minimum numgauge ushaped numinch num mm long staples unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num tie wires use minimum numgauge galvanized tie wire .
commercial galvanized fasteners supplied with the wire may be used if approved by the project manager .
num edition fencing materials num num num metal fence stays use commercially made and fabricated metal fence stays from numgauge wire twisted to form a twowire unit .
num metal posts and assemblies provide metal fence posts and assemblies in accordance with aashto m num modified as follows section num and tables num and num of aashto m num apply to finished posts and assemblies after fabrication punching drilling and finish coating .
galvanize or paint posts braces and anchor plates .
meet aashto m num galvanizing requirements .
furnish nuts bolts fittings and other hardware in accordance with astm anum or bnum class num galvanizing .
paint following the paint manufacturers recommendations .
furnish fence posts and braces of the lengths shown in table num .
table num post lengths post type braces brace rails and panel posts line posts metal num feet num inch num m wood num feet num m num feet num m use tee channel u or y bar section line posts with corrugations knobs notches holes or studs placed to engage the fence line wires .
attach a steel anchor plate to each line post so that the anchor top is num to num inches num to num mm below ground line when the post is set to the specified depth .
num wood fence posts and brace rails a .
general .
make fence posts and brace rails from wellseasoned sound and straight grained western larch lodgepole pine ponderosa pine southern yellow pine or douglas fir .
remove all bark from the posts .
taper round posts to be driven from num to num inches num to num mm up from the bottom to a num inch num num mm point .
bevel the edges of post tops to produce a flat surface with a diameter num inch num num mm less than post diameter .
these taper lengths are included in the specified post lengths .
perform all machining before treatment .
furnish posts and rails num feet num m in length or less free of crooks and sweeps greater than inch num mm from the post centerline .
the maximum offset from centerline for posts and rails longer than num feet num m is  plus numinch num plus num mm per additional foot num mm of length .
the centerline is defined as a straight line from the center of the tip to the center of the butt .
treat round posts and rails meeting awpa standards for commodity specification b and use category numa .
supply round posts and rails meeting the awpa minimum penetration requirements specified for natural posts with a penetration of at least inch num mm .
posts and rails must have sufficient sapwood to provide the inch num mm minimum penetration .
treat the snums post in accordance with subsection num .
treat injuries cuts and holes in timber pile after treatment in accordance with subsection num .
b .
line posts .
furnish line posts and brace rails from a minimum numinch num mm diameter round or a minimum num x numinch num x num mm square sawn .
furnish corner end gate num fencing materials num edition num and pull posts from a minimum numinch num mm diameter round post or a num x numinch num x num mm square sawn post .
num metal gates furnish each gate complete with hinges latch and all other hardware used with the type of gate and gate post specified .
num gates for interstate fence use plaintop singledrive metal gates of tubular steel frame with wire fabric filler .
fit the gate to the opening between the gate posts of the approximate widths shown in the detailed drawings .
provide a centered steel upright brace for gates for openings of less than num feet num m two upright steel braces at third points for gates for openings of num feet num m or greater .
fill the metal gates with galvanized wire fabric securely fastened to the top bottom ends of the gate frame .
use fabric in accordance with subsection num class num or better .
the approximate weight of the gate frames less fabric must meet table num requirements .
table num approximate gate frame weights width of opening approximate wtnum num feet num m num pounds num kg num feet num m num pounds num kg num feet num m num pounds num kg num feet num m num pounds num kg num feet num m num pounds num kg notes num .
heavier gates will be permitted if they meet all other requirements .
num gates for farm fence furnish farm fence gates in accordance with the detailed drawings and contract .
num deadman or anchor furnish deadman and anchors in accordance with the detailed drawing .
num miscellaneous bolts nuts fittings hinges and all other metal parts for constructing fences and gates must be galvanized in accordance with astm specifications .
num section num miscellaneous materials num water furnish water for mixing and curing concrete in accordance with aashto m num num .
water will be tested in accordance with aashto t num .
known potable water may be used without testing .
use irrigation quality water for irrigating trees plants and seeded areas free of elements harmful to plant growth .
num hydrated lime furnish hydrated lime in accordance with aashto m num .
num chlorides a. magnesium chloride .
furnish liquid magnesium chloride in accordance with table num num .
products will be tested as received in accordance with mt num .
table num liquid magnesium chloride requirements requirement alkali chlorides num by mass nacl arsenic num mgkg assay num mgclnum by mass barium num mgkg cadmium num mgkg chromium nummgkg copper num mgkg cyanide num mgkg lead num mgkg magnesium hydroxide num by mass mgohnum mercury num mgkg phosphorous num mgkg selenium num mgkg settleable solids num sulfate num by mass sonum zinc num mgkg num miscellaneous materials num edition num b. calcium chloride .
num .
furnish liquid calcium chloride in accordance with table num .
products will be tested as received in accordance with mt num .
num .
furnish dry calcium chloride in accordance with table num and astm dnum type s. table num liquid calcium chloride requirements requirement alkali chlorides num by mass nacl arsenic num mgkg assay num caclnum by mass barium num mgkg cadmium num mgkg calcium hydroxide num by mass mgohnum chromium nummgkg copper num mgkg cyanide num mgkg lead num mgkg magnesium num by mass mgclnum mercury num mgkg phosphorous num mgkg selenium num mgkg settleable solids num zinc num mgkg num cement grout produce grout consisting of num part cement to num parts of sand thoroughly mixed with water to produce a uniform thick mortar .
use mortar within num minutes of adding water .
mortar can not be retempered .
use sand for mortar in accordance with subsection num and table num gradation .
table num mortar sand gradation requirements percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num edition miscellaneous materials num num num topsoil furnish topsoil meeting table num gradation requirements .
table num topsoil gradation requirements fraction particle size mm max .
of soil num mesh nummm fraction sand num num silt num num clay less than num num gravel larger than num max .
of total samplenum notes num .
a maximum of num is allowable .
any quantity exceeding num is not included in the basis for payment .
gradation is tested in accordance with aashto t num .
meet the following num .
soil ph between num and num or up to num if the exchangeable sodium is less than num num .
soil conductivity factor less than num and num .
organic content between num and num .
topsoil is sampled and tested in accordance with mt num .
num reserved num reserved num reclamation seed furnish all seed that meets and is labeled under montana seed law and meeting the contract requirements .
furnish seed originating from the north american continent above num degrees latitude .
make written request for waivers of the above requirements to the project manager who will work with the department agronomist .
do not furnish seed grown or originating from production fields outside of north america .
furnish seed free of prohibited noxious weed seed with restricted weed seed not exceeding montana seed law .
wet moldy or otherwise damaged seed will be rejected .
calculations of pure live seed may be made based on either a germination test or a tetrazolium test in addition to the purity analysis .
submit a purity analysis and germination test of the seed proposed for use .
a germination test must have been performed within num months of the seeding date .
apply seed on a pure live seed basis .
the quantity of pure live seed per num pounds num kg of seed is determined as follows pure live seed germination x purity x num bulk seed needed total lbs .
pure live seed required pure live seed x num submit a written notification of the seed source and the approximate date the seeding is planned to begin .
do not begin seeding until the germination and purity test results are known and a department seed blend report is furnished to the project manager .
store all seed under weatherproof cover until time of seeding .
seed bags exposed to rain or snow will be rejected .
num fertilizer furnish fertilizer in accordance with all applicable laws rules and regulations .
furnish the num miscellaneous materials num edition num product data sheet to the project manager upon delivery .
contaminated or damaged fertilizer will be rejected .
num mulch furnish mulch listed on the qpl and in accordance with the contract .
num vegetative mulch vegetative mulch is dried cereal grain or oilseed crop straw cornfield residue or grass hay with the majority of stems and leaves at least num inches num mm in length .
mulch will be rejected for any of the following reasons num .
chopped or ground mulch num .
mulch that is musty moldy rotted or contains noxious weed or grass seedbearing stalks num .
mulch containing stones dirt roots stumps and other foreign material or num .
harvested or stored for over num years .
num hydraulic mulch a .
wood fiber .
wood fiber hydraulic mulch is specially prepared wood fibers free of growth or germination inhibiting materials that forms a homogeneous slurry when combined with water tackifiers fertilizer and other specified additives and remains uniformly suspended under agitation .
the mulch may be colored with a watersoluble nontoxic dye to aide visual metering during application .
apply the mulch to produce a uniform matlike cover on the seeded ground .
at least num of the mulch fibers must average num inches num mm or longer with num or more retained on a clark fiber classifier nummesh screen .
b .
straw fiber .
straw fiber hydraulic mulch is specially manufactured and prepared straw stems that are packaged and commercially sold specifically as hydraulic mulch .
straw hydraulic mulch can be formulated as num straw or combined with other types of mulch and tackifer products during the manufacturing process .
the contract will specify the rate type and formulation of straw fiber hydraulic mulch to be used .
c. multifiber .
multifiber hydraulic mulches are composed of various types and percentages of natural fibers and tackifiers .
the contract will specify the type of multi fiber mulches allowed .
num sod furnish commercially manufactured sod that is a living vigorous growth of grass of the type and thickness specified .
sod that shows signs of stress from mishandling or lack of water will be rejected .
provide sod adapted to the general locality of the project having a dense root system is free of noxious weeds and other foreign substances harmful to the development and maintenance of the sod .
furnish a product data sheet to the project manager prior to delivery specifying the origin of the sod .
cut the sod when the grass length is approximately num inches num mm high but not exceeding num inches num mm .
ensure the sod is free of debris before cutting .
wet the sod to permit cutting rolling and hauling without crumbling or breaking .
water the sod using water and equipment free of contaminants from a municipal domestic or other source suitable for irrigation .
trucks previously used for application of salt solutions are prohibited for use as watering vessels unless approved by the project manager .
num edition miscellaneous materials num num num rolled erosion control products furnish erosion blankets listed on the qpl and in accordance with the contract .
furnish natural fiber netting consisting of woven num biodegradable natural fibers such as coir jute or sisal .
furnish blankets designed to stabilize and hold previously applied mulch or compost on slopes as well as newly constructed stream banks and slopes .
natural fiber netting is available in various fiber types strengths weights and meshopening sizes .
a .
short term blankets .
an erosion control blanket composed of processed natural fibers mechanically bound together with num biodegradable threading and natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix .
the fiber matrix can be composed of straw coir cotton wool curled wood or other approved product .
thread and netting material must be nonsynthetic generally of plied coir jute or cotton .
meet the requirements for type ii blankets in accordance with table num .
b .
long term blankets .
an erosion control blanket composed of one of the following materials num .
processed slow degrading natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound together between two slow degrading synthetic or natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix .
num .
an open weave textile composed of processed slow degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
meet the requirements for type iiib blanket in accordance with table num .
table num temporary rolled erosion control property type ii type iii type iv test method anum b c d anum b typical functional longevitynum months num num num na minimum tensile strengthnum lbsftnum kgmnum num num num num num num num num num num num num astm dnum maximum c factornum num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh astm dnum minimum permissible shear stressnum psf pa .num num .num num num num num num .num num num num num num astm dnum notes num .
obtain max c factor and allowable shear stress for mulch control nettings with the netting used in conjunction with preapplied mulch material .
num .
functional longevities are for guidance only .
actual functional longevities may vary based on site and climatic conditions .
num .
minimum average roll values machine direction .
num .
c factor calculated as ratio of soil loss from rolled erosion control product protected slope tested at specified or greater gradient vh to ratio of soil loss from unprotected control plot in largescale testing .
these performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using erosion control technology council ectc test method num .
num .
minimum shear stress the rolled erosion control product unvegetated can sustain without physical damage or excess erosion numinch num mm soil loss during a numminute flow event in largescale testing .
these performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using ectc test method num .
num .
the permissible shear stress levels established for each performance category are based on historical experience with products characterized by mannings roughness coefficients in the range of num to num .
num miscellaneous materials num edition num c. permanent turf reinforcement mat trm .
num .
synthetic fiber matrix .
furnish a web of mechanically bonded synthetic fibers that are entangled to form a strong and dimensionally stable mat .
place fibers between num or num highstrength biaxially oriented nets mechanically bound together by stitching with polyolefin thread .
the netting material must be resistant to biological chemical and ultraviolet degradation .
table num synthetic fiber trm property value test method matrix material num synthetic fibers minimum num ozydnum num gmnum na top bottom and center netting polypropylene polyethylene or nylon minimum num lbsnum ftnum num kgnum mnum na minimum tensile strength td num lbsft num knm astm dnum minimum tensile strength md num lbsft num knm astm dnum uv stability minimum tensile retention num astm dnum numhour exposure minimum thickness inches inch num mm astm dnum minimum shear stress minimum num lbsft .num knm astm dnum num .
natural fiber matrix .
furnish a natural fiber matrix constructed of two or three nets of heavyduty polypropylene polyethylene or nylon .
the internal matrix fiber is composed of a natural fiber such as curled wood straw or coconut .
table num natural fiber trm property value test method matrix material num biodegradable num strawnum coconut or num coconut fiber or num curled wood fiber .
minimum num lbsydnum .num kgmnum na top and bottom netting synthetic fiber minimum num lbsnum ftnum num kgnummnum na center net synthetic fiber minimum num lbsnum ftnum num kgnum mnum na minimum tensile strength td num lbslinear ft num knm astm dnum minimum tensile strength md num lbslinear ft num knm astm dnum uv stability minimum tensile retention num astm dnum numhour exposure minimum thickness num inches num mm astm dnum num compost compost is the soil amendment product resulting from the controlled decomposition of organic materials also known as feedstock material .
acceptable compost feedstock material consist of agricultural vegetative residuals leafyard trimmings manure domestic livestock num edition miscellaneous materials num num carcasses wood residue municipal biosolids sewage sludge or food waste .
if biosolids are used as a feedstock compliance with usepa num cfr part num is required .
furnish compost in accordance with table num .
table num compost physical and chemical properties property requirement methodnum particle size num by volume passing numinch num mm screen tmecc numb moisture num to num tmecc numa organic matter num minimum tmecc numa ph num to num tmecc numa cn ratio num to num tmecc numa inert material num tmecc numa maturity stable num using solvita test solvita test kit soluble salt concentration electrical conductivity num mmhoscem maximum tmecc numa notes num .
tmecc test methods for evaluating compost and composting provide a manufacturers certification in accordance with subsection num attesting that the material meets these specifications .
num miscellaneous materials num edition num num section num pavement marking materials num temporary striping tape furnish temporary striping tape that is numinch num mm wide retroreflective pressure sensitive tape specifically manufactured for use as pavement striping .
the tape must be available in white and yellow .
num temporary striping tabs furnish temporary striping tabs in accordance with the following num .
types i and ii l shaped extruded polyurethane at least num inches num mm wide by num inches num mm high with a reflectorized strip meeting requirement no .
num below attached horizontally across the top of the vertical portion of the tab an adhesive strip meeting requirement no .
num below a .
type i tabs white reflectorized tape on both sides with white bodies b .
type ii tabs yellow reflectorized tape on both sides with yellow bodies num .
reflective flexible sheeting meeting astm dnum type v or better num .
an adhesive strip at least inch num mm wide x inch num mm thick on the tabs underside and num .
a cover protecting the reflective strip that does not come off under traffic but is manually removable .
num temporary waterborne traffic paint furnish temporary waterborne traffic paint in accordance with table num .
table num temporary waterborne traffic paint composition test specification test method color x y y astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum antimony num mgkg mt num arsenic num mgkg cadmium num mgkg chromium num mgkg cobalt num mgkg lead num mgkg mercury num mgkg tin num mgkg num waterborne traffic paint furnish waterborne traffic paint in accordance with table num .
where the ntpep method is specified recorded ntpep results must be within the specifications shown .
num pavement marking materials num edition num table num waterborne traffic paint composition test specification method color x y y astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum durability wheel minimum of num at num months ntpep luminance white num at num months yellow num at num months ntpep viscosity krebs stormer k.u .
at num f num c num astm dnum density deviation maximum of num lbsgallon num gl from density target astm dnum contrast ratio num mt num dry no track num seconds ntpep freezethaw stability numku astm dnum static heat stability numku mt num bleeding ratio num minimum astm dnum skinning and lumps pass mt num settling pass mt num skinning pass mt num ntpep lab test verification must match ntpep ntpep and mt num antimony num mgkg mt num arsenic num mgkg cadmium num mgkg chromium num mgkg cobalt num mgkg lead num mgkg mercury num mgkg tin num mgkg num high durability waterborne traffic paint furnish high durability waterborne traffic paint in accordance with table num .
where the ntpep method is specified recorded ntpep results must be within the specifications shown .
num edition pavement marking materials num num table num high durability waterborne traffic paint composition test specification method color x y y astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum durability wheel minimum of num at num months ntpep luminance white num at num months yellow num at num months ntpep viscosity krebs stormer k.u .
at num f num c num astm dnum density deviation maximum of num lbsgallon num gl from density target astm dnum contrast ratio num mt num dry no track num minutes maximum ntpep freezethaw stability numku astm dnum static heat stability numku mt num bleeding ratio num minimum astm dnum skinning and lumps pass mt num settling pass mt num skinning pass mt num ntpep lab test verification must match ntpep ntpep and mt num antimony num mgkg mt num arsenic num mgkg cadmium num mgkg chromium num mgkg cobalt num mgkg lead num mgkg mercury num mgkg tin num mgkg num epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint furnish epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint in accordance with table num .
where the ntpep method is specified recorded ntpep results must be within the specifications shown .
num pavement marking materials num edition num table num epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint composition test specification method color x y y astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum durability wheel minimum of num at num months ntpep luminance white num at num months yellow num at num months ntpep dry no track num minutes maximum ntpep ntpep lab test verification must match ntpep ntpep and mt num antimony num mgkg mt num arsenic num mgkg cadmium num mgkg chromium num mgkg cobalt num mgkg lead num mgkg mercury num mgkg tin num mgkg num preformed plastic pavement marking material num composition requirements furnish preformed plastic pavement marking material consisting of plastics and plasticizers pigments and reflective glass beads combined and proportioned to meet the following num .
available in both yellow and white color num .
the total pigment in white marking material a minimum num by weight titanium dioxide num .
the total pigment in yellow marking material a minimum num by weight medium chrome yellow num .
marking material colors that match the federal standard highway color num a num for yellow num for white num .
nonyellowing white material num .
nonfading yellow material during the expected life of the materials and num .
having reflective glass beads in accordance with subsection num uniformly distributed throughout the entire material .
num adhesive requirements furnish material having a precoated pressuresensitive adhesive on the base to adhere to plant mix and pccp .
the adhesive must num .
be sufficiently free of tack so the material can be handled or repositioned on the pavement before being permanently fixed in position num .
mold to the pavement contours breaks faults under traffic at normal pavement temperatures num .
reseal itself so that under normal use it fuses with itself and previously applied markings of similar composition num .
capable of being inlaid in pavement at temperatures up to num f num c and num .
not lose its adhesive and reflective properties when exposed to water used in rolling operations .
num edition pavement marking materials num num num dimensional requirements furnish the pavement marking material in standard manufactured widths of numinch numinch numinch numinch and numinch num num num num and num mm .
furnish the material for words and symbols in precut configurations matching the shapes and dimensions in accordance with the detailed drawings .
furnish the pavement marking material in the thickness specified in the contract .
num physical requirements a. tensile strength .
furnish plastic material having a minimum tensile strength of num psi num kpa when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
the break resistance is based on an average of at least num samples tested at a temperature of num to num f num to num c using a jaw speed of numinch num mm per minute .
b .
plastic pull test .
a num x numinch num x num mm sample of the plastic material must support a dead weight of num pounds per num inch num kgmm of material thickness for at least num minutes at a temperature of num to num f num to num c. c. bend test .
at num f num c bend a num x numinch num x num mm sample over a numinch num mm diameter mandrel until the end faces are parallel and numinch num mm apart .
the sample must not show any fracture lines in the uppermost surface under unassisted visual inspection .
d. skid resistance .
the plastics surface friction properties must be at least num bpn when tested under astm enum .
e. reseal test .
the plastic must reseal itself without adhesives when tested as follows overlap two num x numinch num x num mm pieces facetoface forming a single num x numinch num x num mm piece with a num square inch num mmnum overlap in the center .
place the num x numinch num x num mm piece on a hard surface with a numgram weight resting uniformly on the entire overlap area and maintain at num to num f num to num c for num hours .
maintain the temperature within the specified range .
cool to room temperature .
the pieces must not separate without tearing .
f. reflectivity .
meet the reflective values listed in table num .
reflective values are measured on a num x numfoot num x num mm panel in accordance with the instrumental photometric measurements of retroreflective materials and retroflective devices federal test method standard num .
table num minimum sianum candelas per footcandle per square foot mnum plastic pavement marking material observation angle entrance angle white yellow num num num num num num num num num num num num notes num .
sia specific intensity per unit area num samples submit a numinch x numfoot num x num mm sample from each lot of material proposed for use on the project to the materials bureau for approval .
obtain approval before using in the work .
num certification submit the manufacturers certification in accordance with subsection num .
include evidence from the manufacturer that the material proposed for use in the work has performed num pavement marking materials num edition num successfully under similar climatic conditions and traffic usage .
this evidence of successful use is required for the product to be approved for use .
num reflective glass beads a .
general .
provide glass beads for reflectorizing traffic pavement markings that are spherical transparent have a smooth lustrous surface and in accordance with aashto m num except as modified below and the pavement marking manufacturers recommendations .
ensure the delivered beads are free from extraneous material and bead clumps easily break up while handling and distributing onto the stripe .
b. imperfections .
ensure the glass beads do not contain more than num irregularly shaped particles when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
c. color .
ensure the glass beads do not impart a noticeable daytime hue to white pavement markings .
d. chemical stability .
ensure the beads can withstand refluxing in distilled water in a soxhlet extractor for num hours without noticeable dulling of the surface luster and not more than num loss in weight .
e. gradation .
meet table num gradations tested in accordance with astm dnum .
table num reflective glass bead gradation percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size montana type num montana type num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num f. packaging and marking .
package glass beads in moistureproof containers marked to identify the contents manufacturer lot number batch number and net weight .
g. samples .
furnish a sample of the beads upon request .
the department will furnish the containers .
h. heavy metals .
ensure the glass beads contain no more than num ppm of lead or arsenic when tested under epa method numc .
the beads will be prepared by epa method num .
num section num traffic control devices num signs and channelizing devices meet the detailed drawings and mutcd requirements .
use rigid materials for sign backing .
flexible signs are not permitted .
adjust signs within specified distances to prevent obstruction from or to existing signs .
mount signs so they are vertical and stable .
posts must not extend more than num feet num mm above the top of signs .
construction signs may be horizontally hinged at the midpoint of the sign face provided the hinge gap does not exceed inch num mm and the sign legend is legible .
num construction sign support assemblies construct sign support assemblies from lightweight yielding material .
meet the following requirements a .
use wood members with a maximum num square inch num mmnum cross section for base construction and num square inch num mmnum cross section for uprights and braces .
provide wood members that are free of bark .
b .
use tubular metal members with a maximum num square inch num mmnum cross section .
c. use solid metal members with a maximum num square inch num mmnum cross section .
signs may be portable trailer mounted if num .
the weight of the trailer assembly does not exceed num pounds num kg num .
the axle frame support assembly and other structural members can not exceed the dimensions of the portable sign support assembly and num .
the trailer tire outside diameter does not exceed num inches num mm .
automotive and equipment axle assemblies can not be used for trailermounted sign supports .
num advance warning arrow panels furnish advance warning arrow panels arrow boards in accordance with part num of the mutcd equipped with at least num lamps .
use num x numinch num x num mm type b arrow boards on striping units and shadow vehicles .
use type c num x numinch num x num mm for all other applications .
equip the arrow board with a dimming device to automatically reduce the intensity of the flasher at night .
num warning lights equip all vehicles hauling units and mobile construction equipment operating within the project limits and operating on roadways used by the traveling public with an amber flashing or strobe light visible from all directions for at least num mile num km during daylight and clear weather conditions .
num advance warning signs illuminate the wnuma advance flagger ahead sign and the wnum advance traffic signal ahead sign to meet the following signs may be illuminated either internally or externally .
use num highpower amber leds .
mount leds to illuminate each corner of the sign with an additional led spaced equally between the corners .
all leds activate simultaneously with a flash rate of num to num times per minute .
leds must be visible a minimum of num feet upstream from the wnuma wnum during both daylight and nighttime use .
num traffic control devices num edition num power the leds using a generator solar panel or battery power or a combination of the three .
meet subsection num requirements for mounting portable sign support assemblies and the illumination power source .
num section num geotextiles num general physical requirements use geotextiles and thread used in joining geotextiles manufactured from fibers consisting of longchain polymers composed of at least num by weight of polyolefin or polyesters .
use geotextiles with fibers formed into a stable network such that the fibers or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other including selvages edges during shipping handling placement and in service .
use geotextile free from defects or tears .
a .
minimum average roll values .
all property values with the exception of apparent opening size aos represent marv in the weakest principal direction .
provide geotextiles whose average test results from any roll sampled in a lot for conformance or quality assurance testing meets or exceeds minimum values provided in this section .
b .
apparent opening size .
values for aos represent maximum average roll values .
acceptance will be based on astm dnum .
furnish geotextiles in accordance with the strength property requirements of table num and the aos permittivity and ultraviolet stability requirements of table num for separation geotextile table num for stabilization geotextile table num for subsurface drainage geotextile filter and table num for erosion control geotextile .
furnish temporary silt fence geotextile in accordance with table num .
the geotextile properties required for each class of survivability are dependent upon geotextile type i.e .
woven or nonwoven .
when sewn seams are used the strength of the sewn seams must be equal to or greater than num of the specified grab tensile strength .
table num e geotextile strength property requirements geotextile survivabilitynum moderate survivability high survivability property test methods units woven nonwoven woven nonwoven grab elongation astm dnum num num num num grab strength astm dnum lbs .
num num num num sewn seam strengthnum astm dnum lbs .
num num num num tear strength astm dnum lbs .
num num num num puncture strength astm dnum lbs .
num num num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size required property values for aos permittivity and uv stability are based on the geotextile applications .
refer to table num for separation geotextile table num for stabilization geotextile table num for subsurface drainage geotextile filter and table num num for erosion control geotextile .
permittivity astm dnum sec.num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum notes num .
all numeric values represent marv in the weaker principal direction .
num .
when sewn seams are required .
refer to subsection num for overlap requirements .
num geotextiles num edition num table num m geotextile strength property requirements geotextile survivabilitynum moderate survivability high survivability property test methods units woven nonwoven woven nonwoven grab elongation astm dnum num num num num grab strength astm dnum n num num num num sewn seam strengthnum astm dnum n num num num num tear strength astm dnum n num num num num puncture strength astm dnum n num num num num apparent opening size astm dnum mm required property values for aos permittivity and uv stability are based on the geotextile applications .
refer to table num for separation geotextile table num for stabilization geotextile table num for subsurface drainage geotextile filter and table num for erosion control geotextile .
permittivity astm dnum sec.num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum notes num .
all numeric values represent marv in the weaker principal direction .
num .
when sewn seams are required .
refer to subsection num for overlap requirements .
num separation geotextile provide geotextile in accordance with the strength requirements from table num for the level of survivability specified in the contract or special provisions .
provide geotextile in accordance with the permittivity apparent opening size and ultraviolet stability requirements of table num .
table num separation geotextile property requirements test methods units requirements geotextile survivability as specified from table num permittivitynum astm dnum sec.num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size mm no .
num num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum num after num hrs .
of exposure notes num .
minimum value .
permittivity of the geotextile must be greater than that required for the soil .
use greater value as specified in the contract or special provisions .
num stabilization geotextile do not use woven slit film geotextiles i.e .
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat tapelike character .
provide geotextile in accordance with the strength requirements for high survivability from table num .
provide geotextile in accordance with the permittivity apparent opening size and ultraviolet stability requirements of table num .
num edition geotextiles num num table num stabilization geotextile property requirementsnum test methods units requirements geotextile survivability high survivability from table num permittivitynum astm dnum sec.num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size mm no .
num num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum num after num hrs .
of exposure notes num .
do not use woven slit film geotextiles .
num .
minimum value .
permittivity of the geotextile must be greater than that required for the soil .
use greater value as specified in the contract or special provisions .
num subsurface drainage geotextile filter do not use woven slit film geotextiles i.e .
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat tapelike character .
provide geotextile in accordance with the strength requirements from table num for the level of survivability specified in the contract or special provisions .
provide geotextile in accordance with the permittivity apparent opening size and ultraviolet stability requirements of table num .
table num subsurface drainage geotextile filter property requirementsnum requirementsnum test methods units class a class b class c geotextile survivability as specified from table num permittivitynum astm dnum sec.num num num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size mm no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum num after num hrs .
of exposure notes num .
do not use woven slit film geotextiles .
num .
use class a subsurface drainage geotextile when the in situ soil has less than num fines gravel or sand .
use class b subsurface drainage geotextile when the in situ soil has num to num fines silty or clayey sand or gravel .
use class c subsurface drainage geotextile when the in situ soil has more than num fines silt or clay .
num .
minimum values .
permittivity of the geotextile must be greater than that required for the soil .
use greater values as specified in the contract or special provisions .
num permanent erosion control geotextile do not use woven slit film geotextiles i.e .
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat tapelike character .
provide geotextile in accordance with the strength requirements from table num for the level of survivability specified in the contract or special provisions .
provide geotextile in accordance with the permittivity apparent opening size and ultraviolet stability requirements of table num .
num geotextiles num edition num table num permanent erosion control geotextile property requirementsnum requirementsnum test methods units class a class b class c geotextile survivability as specified from table num permittivitynum astm dnum sec.num num num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size mm no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum num after num hrs .
of exposure notes num .
do not use woven slit film geotextiles .
num .
use class a permanent erosion control geotextile when the in situ soil has less than num fines gravel or sand .
use class b permanent erosion control geotextile when the in situ soil has num to num fines silty or clayey sand or gravel .
use class c permanent erosion control geotextile when the in situ soil has more than num fines silt or clay .
num .
minimum values .
permittivity of the geotextile must be greater than that required for the soil .
use greater values as specified in the contract or special provisions .
num temporary silt fence geotextile provide geotextile in accordance with table num .
table num temporary silt fence property requirements test methods units stabilized silt fencenum unstabilized silt fencenum grab strength machine direction astm dnum lb .
n num num num num grab strength xmachine direction astm dnum lb .
n num num num num permittivitynum astm dnum sec.num num num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve size mm no .
num num no .
num num ultraviolet stability retained strength astm dnum num after num hrs .
of exposure notes num .
unstabilized silt fence is supported with either wood or metal fence posts .
num .
stabilized silt fence is supported with metal fence posts and with woven wire backing .
num .
minimum values .
use greater values as specified in the contract or special provisions .
num section num concrete sealants num concrete curing materials num curing and protective coverings furnish protective cover materials for curing concrete in accordance with astm c num sheet materials for curing concrete excluding curing paper .
num burlap cloth furnish burlap cloth in accordance with aashto m num class num .
in lieu of the minimum weight mass specified ensure that a sample dried in an oven at a temperature of num to num f num to num c has a weight not less than num ounces per square yard num gmnum .
num liquid membraneforming concrete curing compounds furnish liquid membraneforming compounds for curing concrete in accordance with astm c num type numd clear or translucent and containing a fugitive dye or type num white pigmented .
num bridge deck sealants num silane sealer furnish a silane sealant listed on the qpl .
num bridge deck crack sealant a .
high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm bridge deck crack sealant .
furnish a low viscosity nonfuming hmwm resin conforming to table num and listed on the qpl .
table num properties of hmwm physical property requirements for hmwm resin viscosity num x num lbins num centipoises maximum brookfield model rvt viscometer no .
num spindle at num rpm specific gravity num minimum at num f num c tensile elongation num minimum astm dnum odor low vapor pressure num psi at num f num pa at num c maximum flash point num f num c minimum astm dnum solids content num performance properties of hmwm resin cure speed bulk cure less than num hours at num f num c surface cure less than num hours at num f num c less than num hours at application temperature gel time num min .
at application temperature num fl .
oz .
num ml sample b. epoxy bridge deck crack sealant .
furnish epoxy bridge deck crack sealant listed on the qpl .
c. deck sealant sand .
furnish silica or garnet sand containing less than num moisture and in accordance with table num .
num concrete sealants num edition num table num deck sealant sand gradations percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves sieve size percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num index acceptance of bituminous materials num commercial plant mix num concrete structures num modified concrete overlay num noncommercial plant mix num signs and traffic guide devices num acceptance final num items designated on a lot basis num quality incentive allowance num access breaks traffic control num access to contractors records num accessible pedestrian signals aps materials num acronyms and abbreviations num addenda num additives warm mix plant mix surfacing num administrative allowances subcontracting num admixtures hydraulic cement concrete num advance flagger ahead warning signs materials num advance warning arrow panels materials num aggregate and bituminous material application rates seal coat num aggregate production pccp num aggregate requirements bituminous mixtures num aggregate design requirements grade s mixtures num aggregate sampling and testing pccp num aggregate stockpiling methods surfacing aggregates num aggregate surfacing num aggregate surfacing construction bridge end backfill num compaction num curing num finishing num placing num pugmill mixing num restrictions num road mixing num surface preparation num surface smoothness num treatment num aggregate cement treated base num bank protection num bituminous surface treatment num concrete requirements num modified concrete overlay num plant mix pavement num surfacing requirements num treatment num air entraining agents num air quality num alignment for piles while driving num index num edition num alternate type or grade of bituminous materials num aluminum sign material num american legion fatality markers num antigraffiti coating permanent materials num application of bituminous material bituminous surface treatment num blotter material seal coat num cover aggregate bituminous surface treatment num emulsified asphalt tack coat num painting structure finishes num seal coat materials num appurtenance joints concrete plastic and fiber pipe num aquatic resource protection num archeological and historical findings protection of num asphalt cement plant mix surfacing num assembling steel steel structures num authority of the engineer num inspector num project manager num award of contract num award cancellation of num backfill concrete structures num manholes and inlets num metal bintype retaining walls num backfilling culverts storm drains sanitary sewers underpasses num bald and golden eagle protection act num bank protection riprap num bar reinforcing material requirements num barb wire material requirements num barricade permanent num batching mixing handling and sampling hydraulic cement concrete num bearing and anchorage devices num bearing and anchorage prestressed concrete members num bearing assembly anchor bolts materials num bearing devices num bearing devices ptfe num bid documents num bid expresstm num bid package contents of num bid proposals rejection of num bidding bid submission num determination of bid responsiveness num rejection of bid proposals num requirements num venue num billing cycle num binder aggregate surfacing num bintype retaining walls num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe pipe arches structural steel plate pipe num bituminous curbs num num edition index num bituminous material bituminous surface treatment num furnishing and applying num requirements num seal coat num tack coat num bituminous mixtures hamburg requirements num bituminous pavement pulverization compaction num mixing num pulverization num testing and acceptance num bituminous surface treatment num blasting num blasting professional num controlled num noise and debris control num operations num production num records num safety num survey num test section num blending materials aggregate surfacing num blending materials cement treated base num bolts and bolted connections steel structures num bolts and nuts specifications num bolts high tensile strength num bonding and grounding traffic signals and lighting num bonding steel prestressed concrete members num borrow excavation unclassified and special num borrow material requirements num brace wire fence materials num breakaway system signs and delineators num breakaways requirements num bridge deck crack sealing num bridge deck milling num bridge deck repair num bridge deck sealants materials num bridge end backfill aggregate requirements num aggregate surfacing construction num bridge survey num burner fuel restrictions plant mix surfacing num cable guardrail num cast in place curb and gutter num cattle guards num cement grout material requirements num cement hydraulic cement concrete num cement treated base num certification of compliance num chain link fence constructing num change orders num character of work significant changes in the num index num edition num character of workers num chlorides num chromium alloy steel castings num circular reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe num claims assignment of num decision on num notice of num submission of certified num cleaning up drilled shaft num final num steel structures num clear zone num clearing num clearing and grubbing num coaxial cable numohm num cofferdams backfilling num drawings and calculations num inspections num cold milling num cold weather concreting hydraulic cement concrete num precast concrete products num communication cable num compaction aggregate surfacing num bituminous pavement pulverization num cement treated base num installation of structural plate type culverts num moisture and density embankment num over geotextile separation stabilization num over geotextile subsurface drainage num plant mix surfacing num requirements embankment num rollers equipment use num compensation for altered quantities num completion bituminous surface treatment num component inspection num composite pull boxes lights and signals num composition and proportioning cement treated base num composition of concrete hydraulic cement concrete num composition of mixtures plant mix surfacing num compost mulch num compression joint seals miscellaneous structure items num concrete num concrete aggregates num barrier rail num classification num curing materials num drilled shaft num foundations lights and signals num num edition index num concrete continued manholes and inlets num ordinary finish num pipe num portland cement concrete pavement num posts guardrail num pressure pipe num prestressed concrete members num sealants num sidewalks num structures num concrete pavement joint fillers joint materials num concrete pull boxes lights and signals num concrete retaining walls num concrete slope protection num concrete surface finish prestressed concrete members num conductors and cable traffic signals and lighting num conductors lighting and signals num conduits and pull boxes num conduit and pull box requirements num conformity with plans and specifications num consent to contract provisions num consideration of proposals num constructing barbed wire and woven wire fences num constructing chain link fence num constructing joints concrete structures num plant mix surfacing num cement treated base num construction sign support assemblies traffic control devices num construction stakes lines and grades num contents of bid package num contract provisions consent to num contract provisions coordination of num contract time seal coat num contract award of num bond num execution and approval of num failure to execute num intent of num performance num contractor survey and layout num contractor furnished drawings and submittals num registration num responsibility for damage claims num responsibility for utility property and services num responsibility for work num submittals table num contractorfurnished sources num control cabinet pedestals traffic signals and lighting num controlled blasting num index num edition num cooperation between contractors num by contractor num with utilities num coordination of contract provisions num copper pipe num correcting spalls and cracks pccp num corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch culverts num aluminum pipe for underdrains num polyethylene drainage pipe num steel pipe and pipe arches num steel pipe for underdrains num cover aggregate seal coat num crack sealing blotter material num bridge deck num routing num sealant num critical path method cpm num crossing entering and using roadways num crushed aggregate course num crushed base course type a num crushed base course type b num crushed cover aggregate cover material num crushed cover aggregate excess seal coat num crushed top surfacing type a num crushed top surfacing type b num culvert excavation num removal num sealers num trench excavation num culvert storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses and underpasses num curbs and gutters num curing and cleaning bituminous surface treatment num curing and testing concrete precast concrete members num curing compound pccp num curing concrete hydraulic cement concrete num portland cement concrete pavement num precast concrete members num cement treated base num curing aggregate surfacing num cutting off steel or steel pipe piles num damage claims responsibility for num deadman or anchor fences num debarment num decision on claims num default of contractor num definitions num delay compensation num delays num deleted or terminated work num num edition index num delineators num density quality incentive allowance num department furnished survey and layout num depositing concrete underwater num design calculations and shop drawings signs delineators and guideposts num design of concrete mixtures num concrete mixtures prestressed members num detours num plant mix surfacing num detectable warning devices sidewalks num detector loop shielded cable traffic signals num determination of calendar day contracts num completion date contracts num excusable noncompensable and compensable delays num working day contracts num detours num diesel fuel used on the project num differing site conditions num digout excavation and embankment num digout subex and replacement material num disposal of unsuitable or excess material excavation and embankment num disposal clearing and grubbing num domestic materials num dowel bars and sleeves pccp num dozers num drain aggregate num drainage chute concrete num drainage structure castings num drawings and submittals contractor furnished num drilled shafts num drilled shafts obstructions num sloughing and caving num testing and acceptance num tolerances num driving posts guardrail posts num driving steel piles num ductile iron water pipe num dust control traffic control num earth embankment num elastomeric bearing devices num embankment at structures num embankment over swampy areas num embankment protectors num embankment requirements num enclosures prestressed concrete members num endangered species act num engineer authority of num environmental protection num epoxy coated reinforcing bars requirements num equipment aggregate surfacing num index num edition num equipment continued bituminous surface treatment num bridge deck milling num bridge deck repair num cold milling num lists and drawings traffic signals and lighting num modified concrete overlay num pavement markings num pile driving num plant mix surfacing num portland cement concrete pavement num rental rate guidelines num use num equitable adjustment num erection steel bridge railing num erection steel structures num erosion and sediment control measures num erosion blankets num erosion control geotextile permanent num erosion control plan water pollution control num escrow bid documents num estimate final process num evaluation and repair of rain damaged concrete pccp num examination of documents and site of work num excavating and backfilling traffic signals and lighting work num excavation and embankment num excavation appurtenant structures num cattle guards num drilled shaft num embankment num manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets num muck num pipe foundation num requirements num trench num existing bridge and structure removal num existing bridge and structure removal aquatic resource protection num expansion joint filler and joint sealing material pccp num extensions contract time num extra work num fabrication and erection signs delineators and guideposts num fabrication prestressed concrete members num reinforcing bars num steel structures num failure to complete on time num failure to properly maintain roadway or structure num falsework concrete structures num steel structures num federalaid participation num feed system plant mix surfacing num fence num num edition index num fence fabric num preparation num snow fence num fertilizer num fiber reinforced pads bearing plates prestressed concrete members num structures num field laboratory and equipment num field test traffic signals and lighting num field welding steel structures num final tensioning of steel prestressed concrete members num final acceptance num cleaning up num project finalization num walk through process num finish grade control num finish on exposed surfaces precast concrete products num finishing aggregate surfacing num class a and b repair num concrete structures num portland cement treated base num flagging operations traffic control num flared end terminal sections and tee risers for concrete pipe num flasher traffic signals num flexible delineators num flexible delineator materials num flexible joint sealers num flow rate meter plant mix surfacing num fly ash num force account basis work performed num foreign material domestic material num forest protection num form removal precast concrete products num forms and forming precast concrete products num forms concrete structures num prestressed concrete members num foundation and bedding material structures num foundation concrete signs num foundation preparation culverts sewers drains etc .
num foundations and forms num foundations concrete structures num retaining walls num traffic signals and lighting num fuel price adjustment num furnish piles num furnishing rightofway num galvanized metal miscellaneous metals num gaskets concrete plastic and fiber pipe num index num edition num gaskets continued culverts storm drains sanitary sewers underpasses num joint materials num metal pipe num gates fence num road closure num general storm water permit num geotechnical logging drilled shafts num geotextiles classification num permanent num permanent erosion control num requirements num sampling num separation stabilization num silt fence num source approval num subsurface drainage num gravel shoulder and traffic num grout num grouted riprap num grubbing num guardrail and concrete barrier rail num guardrail end terminal section widening num reset guardrail items num revise guardrail items num hamburg wheel track testing num hamburg requirements bituminous mixtures num handlaid riprap num handling and placing reinforcement pccp num handling and storage of materials num handling transporting and storage precast concrete products num hardware guardrail and guideposts num hardware signs num haul road repair public roadways num hazardous materials discovery and removal of num high density polyethylene pipe num high durability waterborne traffic paint num high tensile strength bolts miscellaneous hardware num high tensile strength bolts steel structures num high float emulsions num holes in piling num hydrated lime num hydraulic cement concrete num hydraulic mulch num incising treated timber num inspection component num light and signal standards num piles num plant num signs num num edition index num inspection continued treated and untreated timber and timber piles num water pollution control num work num inspectors authority and duties of num installation csl tubes drilled shafts num culverts storm drains sanitary sewers stockpasses underpasses num date tags and route markers num expansion and contraction joints concrete structures num posts guardrail num insurance requirements all contracts num general num railroad num third party beneficiary clause num utility property and services num integral curb pccp num irrigation facilities and headwalls num irrigation water maintenance of num issuance of proposals num joint materials num joints bridge approach slabs num joints pccp num jointventure bids num latex admixture modified concrete overlays num laws rules and regulations to be observed num layout of pavement markings num legal rights no waiver of num liability for cerclacecra claims num lighting and signal materials num lightweight concrete guardrail posts num limitation of operations num limitations on grading operations num livestock and property protection of num load restrictions num loading and application temperatures bituminous materials num loading of piers and abutments num location and inspection of repair areas num loop detector shielded cable num loop detector traffic signals num loops traffic signals and lighting num luminaire highway lighting num luminaire standards and posts num mailboxes num maintenance of bmps num constructed roadway excavation and embankment work num detours num existing pavement culverts num existing pavement remove and relay culvert num irrigation water num cement treated base num signals num index num edition num maintenance of continued sod num surface bituminous prime and tack coat num traffic and detours num traffic during work suspensions num work num maintenance stockpile payment num major item significant changes in the character of work num mandatory material sources num manholes combination manholes and inlets and inlets num marking and shipping steel structure elements num mast arms signals and luminaires num master blasting and safety plan num material and property rights num material sources contractorfurnished num local num mandatory num mix designs and testing of num prospected num reclamation requirements num material test methods precedence num material departmentfurnished num disposal of excess num domestic requirements num materials source bituminous materials num materials accepted by certification num accepted by department testing num certification of compliance num found in the work rights in and use of num guaranty num handling and storage num plant inspection num unacceptable num use of department property num materials requirements aggregate surfacing num aggregate treatment num bearing devices num bituminous material num bituminous pavement pulverization num bituminous surface treatment num bituminous tack coat num bridge deck repair num bridge survey num cattle guards num concrete sidewalks num concrete structures num conduits and pullboxes num cpm num crack sealing num culverts storm drains sewers stockpasses num num edition index num materials requirements continued curbs and gutters num detectable warning devices num drilled shafts num fences num finish grade control num geotextiles num guardrail and concrete barrier rail num hydraulic cement concrete num irrigation facilities and headwalls num mailboxes num manholes and inlets num metal water service lines num modified concrete overlay num pavement marking application num piling num plant mix pavement num portland cement concrete pavement num portland cement treated base num precast concrete products num prestressed concrete members num reinforcing steel num retaining walls num riprap and slope and bank protection num roadside revegetation num seal coat num signs and delineators num steel bridge railing num steel structures num stemming blasting num stockpiled surfacing aggregate num structure finishes num traffic control num traffic signals and lighting num welding num measurement and payment aggregate num aggregate treatment num aluminum and plywood num asphalt cement plant mix num bank protection num bedding and foundation num bituminous material num bituminous material seal coat num bituminous material surface treatment num blasting consultant num blotter material num box beam guardrail num box beam guardrail terminal section num breakaway system num bridge approach section num bridge deck milling num bridge end backfill num bridge railing num index num edition num measurement and payment continued bridge survey num cable guardrail num cable guardrail terminal section num cables num casing num cattle guard new num cattle guard reset num cement concrete pavement num cement treated base num class a and b deck repair num clearing and grubbing num cold milling num commercial plant mix surfacing num compaction num composting num concrete num concrete barrier rail num concrete barrier rail terminal section num concrete barrier rail transition num concrete barrier rail reset num concrete drainage chute num concrete slope protection num concrete drilled shaft num condition seedbed surface num conductors num conduit and pull boxes num conical driving point pile num controller cabinet pedestals num controllers num cover type num and num num cover aggregate num cpm schedule num crack sealing num crosshole sonic logging tubes and testing num crushed aggregate course num culvert remove num curb and gutter num curb markings pavement marking application num curing seal num cutting shoe pile num deadman fence num delineator type and design num detectable warning devices type num detector loop amplifiers num detector loops num detour construct maintain and remove num dozer num dozer operation fence num drill and socket pile num drill presplitting holes num drilled shaft num drive pile num driving point pile num num edition index num measurement and payment continued dynamic load test num elastomeric bearing device ptfe num elastomeric bearing devices num embankment in place num embankment protector num emergency preemption systems num emulsified asphalt ssnum num epoxy traffic paint num erosion control num excavation num excavation water lines num facilities reset num fertilizing num final sweep and broom num finish grade control num flagging num furnish pile num gates num geotextile filter subsurface drainage num granular bedding num grouted riprap num guardrail end terminal section widening num handlaid and random riprap num hydrated lime num impact attenuators num integral curb and gutter num interim pavement markings num irrigation facilities num luminaire assemblies num lump sum traffic control num mailbox num manhole manhole and inlet and inlets num manholes num median concrete curb num metal sign post num metal guardrail num modified concrete overlay num motor grader num mulch num nested sections guardrail num new fence num optional terminal sections num overheight detector num panels fence num pavement markings line control num pavement markings removal num pavement pulverization num pedestrian push buttons num pedestrian signals num permanent barricade num photoelectric controls num pilot car operation num plant mix surfacing num index num edition num measurement and payment continued plastic markings preformed plastic num portland cement cement treated base num prebore pile num precast concrete bridge members num precast concrete curb num precast concrete median barrier rail num precast member num preparation fence num prestress member num pull box num pull boxes traffic signals and lighting num raise guardrail num redrive service pile pile num redrive test pile pile num reinforcing steel num relay pipe culvert num remove and reset existing pole num remove and reset fence num remove concrete barrier rail num remove fence num remove guardrail num remove signs num replace signs num reset signs num retaining wall metal num retaining walls num reuse sign face num road closure gate assembly num roadway obliteration num rumble strip num sandgravel cushion num seal coat num seeding num separation stabilization geotextile num service and control assemblies num sheet aluminum overlay num shoring and cribs num shoulder gravel num sidewalk concrete num signal standards num silt fence num slotted drain num sodding num soil retention blanket num splice pile num standards traffic signals num static load test pile num stiffened sections guardrail num stockpile aggregate num structural steel num structure excavation type i and ii num structure finishes num structures num num edition index num measurement and payment continued structures and obstructions remove num temporary casing num temporary erosion and sediment control num temporary pavement markings traffic control num temporary striping quantities num test trailer num timber sign post num topsoil revegetation num topsoil embankment num traffic gravel num traffic signals num traffic signals and lighting num transverse deck grooving num treated timber poles num type and size num units traffic control num water service line num words and symbols num measurement of quantities num mechanical rebar connectors num medium curing liquid asphalts num metal beam guardrail erection num metal bin type retaining walls num metal fence stays num metal gates fences num metal pipe num metal posts and assemblies fence num metal shoes piles num metal water service lines num methods and equipment prosecution and progress num metric plate substitution num migratory bird treaty act num mill and shop inspection num milling pavement num miscellaneous materials num miscellaneous work num misfits steel structures num mix designs plant mix surfacing num mix designs testing of material sources num mixing pccp num mixing cement treated base num mobilization payment num mobilization smp contracts payment num modified concrete overlay num moisture and density requirements excavation and embankment num motor graders num muck excavation num mulch num mulching num nested guardrail sections num no waiver of legal rights num noise pollution num notice of claim num index num edition num notice to proceed num noxious weed control num obliterate roadway num obstructions drilled shaft num opening to traffic concrete structures num portland cement concrete pavement num sections of project num optimized gradations for concrete num optimized gradation requirements num optional terminal sections num overhead structures signs num overheight detector materials num traffic signals and lighting num overpayments num paint coating systems for structures num paint coating systems structure finish num painting cattle guards num curbs num steel bridge railing num steel piles and steel pipe pile num steel structures num structure finishes num paints and enamels num paints signs num partial payments num patented devices materials and processes num pavement marking application num pavement marking materials num pavement markings concrete curbs num layout num removal num final num interim num temporary num pavement repair plant mix surfacing num pavement thickness deficiency num pay unit rounding num payment extra work num partial num stockpiled material num subcontractor num termination for public convenience num pedestrian push buttons materials num pedestrian push buttons traffic signals num perforated concrete pipe num performance graded asphalt binder pgab num num permanent casing drilled shafts num permanent control measures num permanent pollution control measures num num edition index num permanent turf reinforcement mat num permits licenses and taxes num permits construction dewatering num floodplain num general storm water num section num rivers and harbors act num section num nationwide and individual num shortterm turbidity standard num authorization num spa num notification num tribal num personal liability of public officials num photoelectric controls traffic signals and lighting num pigments vehicles and thinners num pile bearing resistance num pile driving aids and accessories num pile driving equipment num piles steel pipe piles num piling num pilot car operations num pin connections steel structures num pins and rollers miscellaneous structure items num pipe concrete plastic and fiber pipe num joints num pvc gravity sewer and drain pipe num pvc pressure water pipe num pipes conduits and ducts num placing and fastening reinforcing steel num placing and finishing concrete concrete pavement num placing concrete bases for cattle guards num concrete structures num hydraulic cement concrete num prestressed concrete members num placing aggregate surfacing num anchor bolts concrete structures num anchor bolts steel structures num cattle guards num posts by excavation and backfill wood and concrete guardrail posts num prestressed concrete members num plans and specifications conformity with num plant and animal protection num plant inspection num plant mix surfacing num plant mix surfacing additives for warm mix num aggregate num asphalt cement num burner fuel restrictions num compaction num composition of mixtures num constructing joints num index num edition num plant mix surfacing continued design of num equipment num feed system num flow rate meter num grade s specifications num mix designs num pavement repair num production monitor recorder num quality incentive allowance num recycled asphalt pavement num safety requirements num spreading and finishing num surface tolerances num tack coat num test procedures num volumetric properties quality incentive allowance num plastic conduit electrical num conduit lighting and signal materials num pipe num waterstops num plywood sign materials num poles and posts treated and untreated timber num pollution control air quality num noise pollution num structure finishes num water pollution control num porous concrete pipe num portland cement concrete pavement num post tensioning prestressed concrete members num posts fence num posts rails and braces fence materials num powder coating prequalification and certification num precast concrete curbs num precast concrete products num precast prestressed deck sections num precoated galvanized steel culverts and underdrains num preconstruction conference num preformed plastic pavement marking material num preparation of embankment foundations num prepaving conference pccp num prequalification steel fabricators num presplitting rock slopes num prestress steel prestressed concrete members num prestressed concrete members num prestressing equipment prestressed concrete members num prestressing steel num pretensioning prestressed concrete members num price reduction factors num product data sheet num production blasting num production monitor recorder plant mix surfacing num num edition index num profilograph pccp num project finalization num project manager authority and duties of num project schedules num property and landscape protection and restoration num proposal guaranty num proposal guaranty release of num proposals consideration of num delivery and public opening of num issuance of num rejection of num withdrawal of num prosecution of work num prospected sources num protection and curing cement treated base num protection and restoration of property and landscape num protection of aquatic resources num archeological and historical findings num concrete from rain num concrete pccp num livestock and property num material reinforcing steel num traffic and highway structures bituminous surface treatment num traffic and highway structures seal coat num ptfe bearings bearing devices num ptfe sheets num public safety and convenience num public works contract num pugmill mixing aggregate surfacing num pull boxes and manholes num pumping water from cofferdams num purpose and prosecution of work zone traffic control num pvc gravity sewer and drain pipe num pvc pressure water pipe num qualified products list qpl num quality assurance num quality control steel structures num quality incentive allowance acceptance num plant mix surfacing num quantities of work in the proposal num radio antennas lighting and signal material num radio antennas traffic signals and lighting num railroad insurance requirements num railway highway provisions num raise guardrail num reclamation requirements num reclamation seed num recycled asphalt pavement plant mix surfacing num reflective glass beads pavement markings num reinforced concrete arch culvert storm drain and sewer pipe num reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe num index num edition num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforcing steel num reinforcing steel bridge deck repair num drilled shaft num manholes and inlets num material guaranty and random sampling num miscellaneous structure items num portland cement concrete pavement num precast concrete products num prestressed concrete members num structural steel hardware num reject material aggregate surfacing num rejections steel structures num rejects excess fines num relaying culverts num release of bid documents num removal of and salvage of structure num bridges and major drainage structures num concrete bridge deck repair num detours num forms and falsework concrete structures num minor drainage structures num pavement concrete and masonry num structures and obstructions num unacceptable and unauthorized work num remove and relay pipe culvert num and reset fence num guardrail num reset and adjust facilities num signs num removing and replacing improvements traffic signals and lighting num removing excess moisture excavation and embankment num replace reuse sign face and reset num replacing removed pavement cold milling num resetting cattle guards num responsibility of contractor and surety num restoring surfaces opened by permit num restrictions aggregate surfacing num retaining walls num retroreflective sheeting sign materials num ride specification num riprap slope and bank protection num construction requirements num materials requirements num road mixing aggregate surfacing num roadside revegetation num roadway or structure failure to properly maintain num rock embankment num rock excavated below grade num rolled erosion control products num num edition index num rollers requirements num rolling bituminous surface treatment num rolling seal coats num rubber waterstops num rumble strips num safety requirements plant mix surfacing num safety blasting num salvage of pavement millings num salvaging and reinstalling electrical equipment num samples tests and cited specifications num sampling handling batching and mixing precast concrete products num sampling testing and acceptance aggregate surfacing num sampling testing and acceptance seal coat num sampling aggregates pccp num sampling bituminous materials num sampling geotextiles num sandgravel cushion requirements num scaling rock slopes num schedule of liquidated damages num schedule project num scope of payment num seal coat num seamless steel pipe num section num rivers and harbors act permit num section num nationwide and individual permits num seeding fertilizing and mulching num seeding temporary erosion control num service and control assembly lighting and signal materials num service and control assembly traffic signals and lighting num sheet aluminum overlay sign materials num sheet aluminum sign materials num sheet copper water stops num shipment and storage geotextiles num shipping bituminous materials num shoring and cribs structure excavation num shoring culvert and trench excavation num shortterm turbidity standard num authorization num sidewalk concrete num finish num removal num sign fabrication num sign posts num signal cable lighting and signals num signal standards type num num and num num signal standards type num luminaire standards num significant changes in the character of the work num signing materials num signs and channelizing devices traffic control devices num signs and delineators num silane sealer concrete structures num silt fence num slipformed concrete curb and gutter num sloping and finishing excavation and embankment num index num edition num slotted corrugated steel pipe num sloughing and caving drilled shafts num sod num sodding num source of supply num spa num notification num span wire mounted signals traffic signals and lighting num spill prevention and waste disposal num splicing piles num splicing reinforcing steel num spreading and finishing plant mix surfacing num staples and nails fence materials num steel and aluminum gates fencing num steel beams and fittings guardrail num bridge railing num castings highway bridges num components structure finish num conduit construction requirements num conduit lighting and signals num pipe piles num posts guardrail and guideposts num reinforcing num rods and bolts prestressed concrete members num structures num water pipe num stiffened guardrail sections num stockpile smp num stockpiled surfacing aggregate num storage and handling of materials steel structures num storage and transportation of prestressed concrete members num storage of materials hydraulic cement concrete num storm drain manhole and trunkline connections num straightening bent material steel structures num street excavation num structural steel plate pipe and pipe arches num precast concrete products num prestress concrete members num requirements num tubing num structural timber and lumber num structure excavation num structure finishes num structure tolerances num subcontracting num subcontractor payments num subexcavation num subgrade and forms concrete sidewalks num subgrade preparation cement treated base num submission of bid documentation num submission of certified claims num submittals bridge deck repair num num edition index num submittals continued detours num drilled shafts num modified concrete overlay num steel structures num structure finishes num welding num surface conditions weather limitations and paving dates plant mix pavement num surface preparation modified concrete overlay num pavement marking num seal coat num structure finishes num surface smoothness and thickness requirements ctb num surface smoothness aggregate surfacing num surface test pccp num surface tolerances plant mix surfacing num survey tolerances finish grade control num suspensions of work ordered by the engineer num sweeping and brooming seal coat num table of contractor submittals num tack num tack coat plant mix surfacing num temporary facilities num temporary casing drilled shafts num control measures num erosion seeding num facilities aquatic resource protection num fence num striping tabs num striping tape num waterborne traffic paint num tension wire fencing num termination for public convenience num test procedures plant mix surfacing num test trailers transport and set up num testing and acceptance bituminous materials num concrete num drilled shaft num portland cement treated base num testing of bituminous materials num third party beneficiary clause num tie bars pccp num tie wire fencing num tolerances drilled shaft num structure num topsoil num topsoil salvaging and placing num top soiling num traffic and detours maintenance for num traffic and pedestrian signals traffic signals and lighting num index num edition num traffic and pedestrian signals materials num traffic control devices materials num traffic control cold milling num conference num device location and installation num dropoff areas num paving and milling operations num plan num requirements num reviews num seal coat operations num striping operations num units num traffic paint epoxy or other polymeric num high durability waterborne num traffic signals and lighting num transfer of prestress prestressed concrete members num transporting concrete hydraulic cement concrete num pccp num treated timber and lumber num treated timber poles class num lighting and signals num treated wood posts for sign poles num treatment of structure foundation materials structure excavation num trench excavation num tribal permits num truss rods fencing num unacceptable and unauthorized work removal of num unclassified channel excavation num unclassified excavation num underground storage tanks discovery of num unit price or lump sum basis measurement and payment num use of explosives num use of trimmed material cement treated base num utilities cooperation with num utility property and services insurance requirements num value engineering proposals num vegetative mulch num warning lights traffic control devices num warranty seal coat num water pollution control aquatic preservation num erosion and sediment control measures num inspections num permanent control measures num regulations num temporary control measures num water dust control num hydraulic cement concrete num requirements num waterborne traffic paint num num edition index num watering equipment num weather and night limitations pccp num weather limitations hydraulic cement concrete num cement treated base num structure finishes num tack coat num weighing equipment general num welded stud shear connectors miscellaneous structure hardware num welded stud shear connectors steel structures num welding electrodes miscellaneous structure hardware num general num qualifications num steel lighting and signals num wire and wire mesh miscellaneous structure hardware num wire protection lighting and signals num wire rope and connecting hardware guardrail num withdrawal of proposals num wood fence posts and brace rails fence material num wood posts and blockouts guardrail num wood treatment guardrail and guideposts num work suspensions maintenance for traffic num work inspection of num work removal of unacceptable and unauthorized num workmanship and tolerances prestressed concrete members num woven wire fence num index num edition num num tables num measurement abbreviations num num contract items evaluation elements num num table of price reduction factors num num maximum allowable variance and divergence num num unit cost num num ride incentive reduction table num num districtarea phone numbers num num number of mix designs and tests furnished at no cost num num subcontract requirements num num schedule of liquidated damages num num rounding criteria num num subcontracting administrative allowances num num mobilization payments num num items subject to fuel price adjustment num num compaction requirements num num seismograph tolerances num num temporary erosion control lump sum progress payments num num surface smoothness num num shoulder gravel gradation requirements num num pay factors for ctb num num table of pay factors num num epa specification used oil fuel requirements num num minimum lift thickness num num maximum allowable variance and divergence num num price adjustments due to line deviations num num schedule of tolerances num num recommended application temperatures for bituminous materials num num crack sealant specifications num num contract unit price adjustments num num concrete pavement thickness deficiency num num water requirements num num concrete classification num num concrete requirements num num clsm gradations num num concrete strength pay factors num num air content pay factors num num concrete permeability pay factors coulombs num num concrete permeability pay factors kcm num num pay factors for concrete num num tolerances for prestressed concrete members num num minimum bending radii num num minimum bar embedment num num weights of standard sizes of reinforcing bars num num bolt length determination num num bolt substitutions num num finish coat paint color num num structure tolerances num num minimum dry film thickness num num traffic control requirements for hauling units num lane roadways num num c factors for dropoffs on the outside of horizontal curves num num average daily traffic adjustment factor num num traffic control device based on spacing factor num tables num edition num num traffic control speed limits in construction zones num num traffic control rates based on category and device type num num traffic control lump sum progress payments num num materials required for sign work num num limits on deleterious material in fine aggregate num num table of gradations fine aggregate for concrete num num limits on deleterious substances in coarse aggregate num num table of gradations course aggregate for concrete num num optimized gradation requirements num num table of gradations selected surfacing num num table of gradations sand surfacing num num table of gradations crushed base course type a num num table of gradations crushed base course type b num num table of gradations crushed top surfacing type a num num table of gradations crushed top surfacing type b num num table of gradations cover material num num table of gradations aggregate for cement treated base num num aggregate requirements num num grade s mixture design and production requirements num num grade s aggregate design requirements num num hamburg wheel track requirements num num grade s specifications num num table of gradations bedding material num num table of gradations filter material num num table of gradations random riprap num num size requirements bank protection num num table of gradations drain aggregate num num digout and subex replacement material crusher reject num num table of gradations bridge end backfill num num basis for acceptance of bituminous materials num num specification for performance graded asphalt binder num num latex or polymer modified crsnum emulsified asphalt num num specifications for medium curing liquid asphalts num num specifications for high float emulsions num num single post mounting num num timber pole top diameter limits num num astm retro reflective sheeting requirements num num properties and test methods finished rubber waterstop num num properties and test methods finished plastic waterstop num num aluminum epoxy paint composition num num epoxy paint for pipe pile requirements num num enamel paint requirements num num zinc phosphate paint requirements num num structures intermediate coat requirements num num structures finish coat requirements num num certified test results num num heavy hex nuts num num steel plate substitutions num num ptfe sheet properties num num woven wire requirements num num post lengths num num approximate gate frame weights num num liquid magnesium chloride requirements num num liquid calcium chloride requirements num num edition tables num num mortar sand gradation requirements num num topsoil gradation requirements num num temporary rolled erosion control num num synthetic fiber trm num num natural fiber trm num num compost physical and chemical properties num num temporary waterborne traffic paint composition num num waterborne traffic paint composition num num high durability waterborne traffic paint composition num num epoxy or other polymeric traffic paint composition num num minimum sia plastic pavement marking material num num reflective glass bead gradation num num e geotextile strength property requirements num num m geotextile strength property requirements num num separation geotextile property requirements num num stabilization geotextile property requirements num num subsurface drainage geotextile filter property requirements num num permanent erosion control geotextile property requirements num num temporary silt fence property requirements num num properties of hmwm num num deck sealant sand gradations num tables num edition num num num for copies of the num standard specifications for road and bridge construction write montana department of transportation contract plans bureau num prospect avenue po box num helena mt num the num edition is available in two formats num inch by num inch bound and loose leaf three ring binder num num inch by num inch binder included .
price num add num shipping and handling if mailed make checks payable to state of montana department of transportation mdt attempts to provide reasonable accomodations for any known disability that may interfere with a person participating in any service program or activity of the department .
alternative accessible formats of this document will be provided upon request .
for further information call num num voice or num num tty or num tty .
num copies of this public document were published at an estimated cost of num per copy for a total cost of num which includes num for printing and num for distribution .
