new jersey department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction num sussex passaic bergen morris essex hudson union warren hunterdon somerset mercer middlesex monmouth ocean burlington camden atlantic gloucester salem cumberland cape may north south central i table of contents division num general provisions num section num general information num num introduction num num abbreviations num num termsnum num inquiries regarding the project num section num bidding requirements and conditionsnum num qualification to bid num num bidder registration and downloading of the proposal documents num num revisions before submitting a bid num num examination of contract and project limits num num interpretation of quantities in the proposalnum num if and where directednum num preparation of the bidnum num balanced bidsnum num proposal bond num num submission of bidsnum num withdrawal of bidsnum num public opening of bidsnum num consideration of bidsnum num irregular bidsnum num disqualification of biddersnum num rejection of all bidsnum section num award and execution of contractnum num award of contract num num cancellation of awardnum num release of proposal bondnum num execution of the contractnum num escrow of bid documentsnum num failure to execute contract num num acquisition of documentsnum section num scope of work num num intentnum num value engineeringnum num purpose and scope num num conditionsnum num submittals num num final documents num num paymentnum num changes to the contractnum num authority to make changes num num protests to change ordersnum num types of changesnum num contractual notice num num unrecoverable costs num num unacceptable cost calculation methods num num tracking costs num num force accountnum num delay damages num section num control of work num num authority of the departmentnum num re num num inspectionnum ii num responsibilities of the contractornum num labor and equipmentnum num superintendentnum num subcontracted worknum num fabricators and suppliersnum num conformity with contractnum num plans and specifications num num working drawingsnum num cooperation with othersnum num cooperation with utilitiesnum num working in the vicinity of utilities num num work performed by utilitiesnum num environmental protection num num load restrictionsnum num use of explosives num section num control of materialnum num source of supply and quality requirementsnum num departmentfurnished materialnum num foreign materialsnum num materials questionnairenum num materials inspections tests and samples num num plant inspection num num certification of compliancenum num unacceptable materialnum num substitutes for proprietary items num section num legal relationsnum num legal jurisdiction num num applicable law num num permits licenses and approvals num num sovereign immunitynum num discrimination in employment on public worksnum num affirmative action disadvantaged business enterprises or emerging small business enterprise num num new jersey contractual liability actnum num limitations of liabilitynum num personal liability of public officials num num assignmentnum num non waivernum num independent contractor num num nonthird party beneficiary clause num num risks assumed by the contractornum num the contractual claim resolution process num num satisfying the notice requirementsnum num stepsnum num litigation of claims by the contractornum num patented devices materials and processesnum num taxesnum num recovery of monies by the statenum section num prosecution and completion num num subcontractingnum num commencement of worknum num daily communicationsnum num work site and storagenum num sanitary and safety provisions num num sanitary num num safety programnum num night operationsnum iii num traffic controlnum num interference num num changes to the traffic control plan tcpnum num lane occupancy chargesnum num maintenance within the project limitsnum num contract timenum num modifications to contract timenum num extensions to contract timenum num reductions to contract time num num rightofway restrictionsnum num suspension of worknum num default and termination of contractors right to proceednum num termination of contract num num for convenience num num for cause num num partial acceptancenum num interim completion num num substantial completionnum num completion and acceptancenum num liquidated damagesnum num warranties num section num measurement and paymentnum num measurement of quantitiesnum num scope of paymentnum num payment for force accountnum num payment for delay damages num num estimates num num materials payments and storagenum num bonds posted in lieu of retainagesnum num asbuilt quantitiesnum num audits num num contractors compliance with n.j.s.a .
num et seqnum num final payment and claimsnum num ethics standards and conflicts of interestnum division num contract requirements num section num performance bond and payment bondnum num description num num materialsnum num procedurenum num performance bond and payment bond num num measurement and paymentnum section num insurance num num description num num materialsnum num procedurenum num owners and contractors protective liability insurancenum num railroad protective liability insurancenum num pollution liability insurancenum num measurement and paymentnum section num progress schedule num num description num num materialsnum iv num procedurenum num cpm progress schedulenum num cpm progress schedule updatesnum num bar chart progress schedule and updatesnum num measurement and paymentnum section num mobilization num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num procedurenum num mobilizationnum num measurement and paymentnum section num construction field office num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num procedurenum num field office num num field office maintenancenum num telephone servicenum num measurement and paymentnum section num materials field laboratory and curing facility num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num procedurenum num materials field laboratorynum num materials field laboratory maintenance num num curing facility num num curing facility maintenancenum num nuclear density gauge num num flexural beam testing equipmentnum num concrete compression testing equipmentnum num measurement and paymentnum section num construction layout and monumentsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num procedurenum num construction layoutnum num monument num num monument boxnum num measurement and paymentnum section num soil erosion and sediment control and water quality controlnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num environmental managernum num sesc measuresnum num erosion control sediment removalnum num measurement and paymentnum section num traffic controlnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num procedurenum num traffic control coordinator num num traffic control devicesnum num removable black line masking tape num v num temporary pavement markersnum num temporary pavement marking tapenum num temporary traffic stripes and temporary traffic markings num num hma patch num num traffic direction num num emergency towing service num num measurement and paymentnum section num price adjustments num num description num num materialsnum num procedurenum num fuel price adjustmentnum num asphalt price adjustment num num measurement and paymentnum section num final cleanupnum num description num num materialsnum num procedurenum num final cleanupnum num measurement and paymentnum division num earthwork num section num clearing site num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num clearing sitenum num clearing site bridge and clearing site structurenum num temporary shieldingnum num removing underground storage tanksnum num monitoring wellsnum num sealing abandoned wellsnum num demolition num num asbestos removalnum num disposal of removed materials and debrisnum num measurement and paymentnum section num excavation num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num strippingnum num excavating test pitsnum num excavating unclassified material num num excavating regulated materialnum num excavating acid producing soil aps num num removing pavement num num reuse or disposal of excess materialnum num disposal of regulated materialnum num disposal of regulated material hazardousnum num measurement and paymentnum section num embankmentnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum vi num constructionnum num constructing embankmentnum num placing and compacting methodsnum num measurement and paymentnum division num subbase and base courses num section num subbase num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num subbase num num measurement and paymentnum section num aggregate base coursenum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num aggregate base coursenum num measurement and paymentnum section num asphaltstabilized drainage course num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num asphaltstabilized drainage course num num measurement and paymentnum section num concrete base course num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num concrete base course num num measurement and paymentnum section num rubblizing concrete pavementnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num rubblizingnum num measurement and paymentnum division num pavements num section num hot mix asphalt hma courses num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num vii num construction num num preparing existing pavement num num tack coat and prime coat num num hma courses num num sawcutting and sealing of joints in hma overlaysnum num core samples num num measurement and paymentnum section num hma friction coursenum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num installing ogfc and mogfcnum num measurement and paymentnum section num ultrathin friction course num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num ultrathin friction coursenum num measurement and paymentnum section num stone matrix asphalt sma num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num smanum num measurement and paymentnum section num concrete surface course num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num underlayer preparation num num concrete surface coursenum num core samples num num diamond grinding num num measurement and paymentnum division num concrete pavement rehabilitation num section num concrete slab stabilizationnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num pozzolan groutnum num highdensity polyurethane groutnum num deflection testingnum num measurement and paymentnum viii section num partial depth concrete pavement repair num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num partial depth concrete pavement repairnum num measurement and paymentnum section num full depth concrete pavement repairnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num full depth repair using concrete num num full depth repair using hma num num measurement and paymentnum section num retrofit dowel barsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num retrofit dowel bars num num measurement and paymentnum section num diamond grinding existing concrete pavement num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num diamond grinding existing concrete pavement num num measurement and paymentnum section num sealing existing joints in concrete pavementnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num sealing existing joints in concrete pavement num num measurement and paymentnum division num bridges and structures num section num sheeting and cofferdamsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num temporary sheetingnum num permanent sheetingnum num temporary cofferdams num num permanent cofferdamsnum num measurement and paymentnum ix section num load bearing piles num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num furnishing pile driving equipment num num preboring holesnum num driving piles num num splicing piles num num pile shoesnum num measurement and paymentnum section num drilled shaft foundationsnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num installation plannum num demonstration drilled shaft installation num num load testsnum num crosshole sonic logging csl num num core drilling of drilled shaft concretenum num constructing drilled shaftsnum num measurement and paymentnum section num structural concrete num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num reinforcement steelnum num constructing concretenum num epoxy waterproofingnum num measurement and paymentnum section num precast and prestressed structural concretenum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num prestressed concrete structures num num precast concrete culverts num num precast concrete arch structuresnum num measurement and paymentnum section num structural steelnum num description num num materialsnum num construction num num structural steelnum num bearings num num shear connectors num num steel pedestrian bridgesnum num steel grid flooringnum num repair galvanizing num num measurement and paymentnum x section num concrete bridge deck and approachesnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num joint assembliesnum num constructing bridge decks num num date panel num num concrete bridge sidewalknum num concrete parapet and barrier curbnum num numbar open steel parapet num num bridge approach num num measurement and paymentnum section num bridge drainagenum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num inlet frames grates and scuppersnum num steel alloy pipenum num measurement and paymentnum section num bridge railing and fence num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num bridge railingnum num chainlink fence for bridge num num measurement and paymentnum section num timber structuresnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num timber structuresnum num sheeting and walesnum num method of measurementnum section num bulkhead fender and dolphin systemsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num bulkhead fender and dolphin systems num num measurement and paymentnum section num sign support structures num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num sign structures num num measurement and paymentnum section num retaining wallsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num xi num construction num num proprietary retaining wallsnum num castinplace retaining walls num num measurement and paymentnum section num temporary structures num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num temporary structuresnum num measurement and paymentnum division num structure rehabilitation num section num bridge deck rehabilitation num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num repair of concrete decknum num scarification num num measurement and paymentnum section num pressure injection sealingnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num pressure injection sealingnum num measurement and paymentnum section num pneumatically applied mortarnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num pneumatically applied mortarnum num measurement and paymentnum section num painting existing bridgesnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num pollution control systemnum num cleaning and painting num num testing if and where directednum num measurement and paymentnum division num miscellaneous construction num section num pipenum num description num num materialsnum xii num constructionnum num installing pipenum num installing pipe using alternate methods num num underdrains and subbase outlet drainsnum num video inspection of pipenum num deflection inspection of hdpe pipenum num cleaning existing pipenum num measurement and paymentnum section num drainage structures num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num culverts and headwallsnum num inlets and manholes num num setting castings resetting castings and reconstructing inlets and manholes num num converting inlets into manholesnum num extension frames and ringsnum num manhole covers and bicycle safe gratesnum num curb piecesnum num cleaning drainage structuresnum num measurement and paymentnum section num slope and channel protectionnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num concrete slope guttersnum num concrete slope protectionnum num riprap stone slope or channel protectionnum num rock backfill num num measurement and paymentnum section num gabion wallsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num gabion wallsnum num measurement and paymentnum section num fence num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num chainlink fencenum num gatesnum num repairing chainlink fence num num temporary chainlink fence num num measurement and paymentnum section num sidewalks driveways and islandsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num xiii num construction num num hma sidewalks driveways and islandsnum num concrete sidewalks driveways and islandsnum num detectable warning surfacesnum num measurement and paymentnum section num curbnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num concrete barrier curbnum num concrete vertical curb and concrete sloping curb num num concrete barrier curb dowellednum num concrete vertical curb and concrete sloping curb dowellednum num granite curbnum num reset granite curbnum num hma curb num num measurement and paymentnum section num nonvegetative surfaces num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num nonvegetative surface hmanum num colorcoated nonvegetative surface hma num num measurement and paymentnum section num beam guide rail num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num beam guide railnum num rub rail num num terminals and anchoragesnum num beam guide rail blockoutsnum num reset beam guide railnum num removal of beam guide rail num num measurement and paymentnum section num traffic stripes traffic markings and rumble stripsnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num longlife traffic stripesnum num thermoplastic traffic markings num num raised pavement markers rpmnum num removal of rpmsnum num removal and replacement of rpm lensesnum num ground mounted flexible delineatorsnum num rumble stripsnum num removal of traffic stripes and markingsnum num measurement and paymentnum xiv section num crash cushionsnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num inertial barrier system num num crash cushionnum num measurement and paymentnum section num signs num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num regulatory and warning signs and type ga u post support guide signsnum num type ga breakaway and nonbreakaway support guide signs num num type go and type gox guide sign panelsnum num measurement and paymentnum division num utilities num section num waternum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num water pipenum num water pipe bridgenum num water service connectionnum num fire hydrant num num relocate fire hydrant num num reset fire hydrant num num reset water valve boxnum num water asbuilt plan num num measurement and paymentnum section num sanitary sewersnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num sewer pipenum num sanitary sewer pipe bridgenum num sanitary sewer pipe liningnum num sanitary sewer service connectionsnum num sanitary sewer manhole num num reconstruct sanitary sewer manhole num num reset sanitary sewer manholenum num video inspection of sewer num num sewer asbuilt plannum num measurement and paymentnum section num gasnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num gas mainnum num installing gas mains on bridges num num gas service connection num num reset gas valve boxes num num gas asbuilt plannum num measurement and paymentnum xv division num electrical num section num general itemsnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num existing systemsnum num rigid metallic conduit earth num num rigid metallic conduit roadwaynum num rigid metallic conduit exposed num num rigid nonmetallic conduit num num flexible metallic conduit num num flexible nonmetallic conduitnum num junction box num num metal junction boxesnum num junction box foundation num num junction box frame and covernum num foundationsnum num cable racknum num meter cabinetnum num cable and wirenum num measurement and paymentnum section num traffic signalsnum num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num controller num num standardsnum num traffic signal mast armnum num traffic signal cablenum num traffic signal headnum num pedestrian signal head num num push buttonnum num image detectornum num loop detector num num loop detector cable num num temporary and interim traffic signal systemsnum num controller turn onnum num measurement and paymentnum section num highway lighting num num description num num materialsnum num materials num num equipmentnum num construction num num lighting standardnum num lighting mast armnum num luminairenum num sign lightingnum num underdeck lighting num num tower lighting num num temporary highway lighting systemnum xvi num measurement and paymentnum section num intelligent transportation systems its num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num materialsnum num equipment num num constructionnum num general system gsnum num camera surveillance system cssnum num fiber optic cable num num controlled traffic signal system ctssnum num travel time systems ttsnum num road weather information system rwisnum num dynamic message system dms num num weigh in motion system wims num num traffic volume system tvsnum num measurement and paymentnum division num landscaping num section num selective vegetation removalnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num selective thinningnum num selective clearing num num measurement and paymentnum section num trimming and removing treesnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num trimming existing trees num num removing existing treesnum num measurement and paymentnum section num preparation of existing soilnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num preparing existing soilnum num measurement and paymentnum section num topsoilingnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num topsoiling num num measurement and paymentnum section num turf repair stripnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum num constructionnum num turf repair strip num num measurement and paymentnum section num fertilizing and seedingnum num descriptionnum num materialsnum xvii num construction num num turf seedingnum num wildflower seeding num num measurement and paymentnum section num topsoil stabilizationnum num description num num materialsnum num construction num num installing topsoil stabilization mattingnum num measurement and paymentnum section num soddingnum num description num num materialsnum num construction num num placing sod num num measurement and paymentnum section num mulchingnum num description num num materialsnum num construction num num straw mulchingnum num fiber mulchingnum num mulching plants num num measurement and paymentnum section num mowing num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num mowing seeded areas num num mowing existing turfnum num measurement and paymentnum section num planting num num description num num materialsnum num construction num num planting num num plant establishment period num num measurement and paymentnum division num materials num section num aggregatesnum num sourcenum num stockpiles num num coarse aggregate num num broken stonenum num washed gravelnum num blast furnace slagnum num aggregates for hmanum num coarse aggregatenum num fine aggregatenum num mineral filler num num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap num num crushed recycled container glass crcgnum num ground bituminous shingle material gbsm num num remediated petroleum contaminated soil aggregate rpcsanum xviii num aggregates for concrete mortar and groutnum num coarse aggregatenum num fine aggregatenum num lightweight aggregatenum num gritnum num riprap stonesnum num gabion basket stonenum num densegraded aggregate dga num num virgin num num recycled concrete aggregate rca num num virgin and rap mixturenum num soil aggregate num section num asphaltnum num bituminous materialsnum num asphalt binder num num cutback asphalts num num emulsified asphalts num num polymer modified tack coatnum num hot mix asphalt hma num num mix designations num num composition of mixtures num num mix designnum num sampling and testingnum num opengraded friction course ogfc and modified opengraded friction course mogfcnum num composition of mixtures num num mix designnum num sampling and testingnum num ultrathin hmanum num composition of mixturenum num mix designnum num sampling and testingnum num stone matrix asphalt smanum num composition of mixturenum num mix designnum num sampling and testingnum num asphaltstabilized drainage course asdcnum num compositionnum num mix designnum num sampling and testingnum section num concretenum num cementnum num concrete admixturesnum num airentraining admixturesnum num chemical admixturesnum num mineral admixtures num num viscosity modifying admixture num num corrosion inhibitor admixturenum num concretenum num compositionnum num mix design and verificationnum num mixing for centralplant and transit mixingnum num mixing on the projectnum num control and acceptance testing requirements num num tablesnum xix num pavement repair mixes class v and e num num compositionnum num mix design and verificationnum num mixingnum num control and acceptance testing requirements num num high performance concrete hpcnum num compositionnum num mix design and verificationnum num mixingnum num control and acceptance testing requirements num num selfconsolidating concrete scc num num scc for drilled shafts num num scc for precast concretenum num quicksetting patch materialsnum num mortar and groutnum num mortar num num grout num num grout for undersealing of concrete pavement num num controlled low strength material clsm num num curing materialsnum num burlap clothnum num liquid membraneforming compoundnum num white polyethylene sheeting num section num precast and prestressed concretenum num nonstructural precast concrete num num component materialsnum num fabrication num num curing num num removing forms and finishingnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance requirements num num precast concrete retaining walls num num component materialsnum num fabrication num num curing num num form removal and finishingnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance requirements num num structural precast concrete num num component materialsnum num fabrication num num curing num num removing forms and finishingnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance requirements num num prestressed concretenum num component materialsnum num fabrication num num curing num num removing forms and finishingnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control quality assurance and acceptance requirementsnum section num reinforcement metals num num reinforcement steel num num reinforcement barsnum num spiral reinforcement num xx num welded wire reinforcementnum num structural shapes plates and bars num num dowels num num prestressing and posttensioning reinforcementnum num hightensilestrength numwire prestressing strand num num hightensile strength alloy barsnum num posttensioning reinforcementnum num reinforcement for concrete pavementnum num tie bars and joint tiesnum num tie boltsnum num dowel barsnum num rebar coupling devicesnum section num structural steelnum num structural steel materialsnum num steel piles num num steel casings for drilled shaftsnum num structural steel fabrication num num aisc certification num num fabricationnum num cleaning and coatingnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance num num sign structures fabricationnum num fabricationnum num shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance num num cleaning and painting of structural steel in the shopnum num painting materials num num surface preparation num num conditions for painting num num paint applicationnum num number of coats and film thicknessnum num stenciling num num additional handling requirements for painted members num num quality control and acceptance num num numbar open steel parapetnum section num bearing assembliesnum num structural bearing assembliesnum num general requirementsnum num typesnum num marking packaging shipping and handlingnum num quality control and acceptance num num reinforced elastomeric bearing assembliesnum num bearing padsnum section num bolts and bolting materialnum num steel bolting materials num num bolts num num nuts and washersnum num anchor bolts num num adhesive anchor bolt systemsnum num highstrength steel bolting materials num num material requirementsnum num sampling and testing requirements for bolt assembliesnum num test reports and certificationnum num shipping and handlingnum num direct tension indicators dti num xxi num stainless steel bolting materialsnum num aluminum alloy bolting materialsnum section num drainagenum num pipe bedding num num class a beddingnum num class b beddingnum num class c beddingnum num class d beddingnum num pipenum num reinforced concrete pipe num num hdpe pipenum num plastic drainage pipe num num corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe and pipe arches num num corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe num num corrugated steel pipe and pipe archesnum num steel alloy pipe for bridge storm drainsnum num ductile iron water pipe num num castings and components for drainage structures num section num masonry units num num clay or shale bricknum num concrete block for inlets and manholes num num concrete bricknum num stone curbnum num stone facing for pier shafts num num stone paving block num section num signs sign supports and delineatorsnum num signsnum num materials num num fabrication num num packaging storing and shipping num num acceptance inspection num num sign supportsnum num steel u post sign supportsnum num breakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs num num nonbreakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs num num timber sign supports num num mounting materials for overhead bridgemounted and cantilever signs num num flexible delineatorsnum section num paints coatings traffic stripes and traffic markingsnum num paints and stainsnum num structural steel paintnum num aluminum paintnum num coal tar epoxy paintnum num concrete stainnum num coatingsnum num galvanizing zinc coatingnum num epoxy waterproofingnum num asphalt waterproofingnum num coating for nonvegetative surfacenum num permanent traffic stripes and markingsnum num epoxy traffic stripesnum num thermoplastic traffic markings num num raised pavement markers rpmnum num temporary traffic stripes and markings num num latex paint num num removable pavement marking tape num xxii num temporary pavement markersnum section num guide rail fence and railing num num beam guide rail num num rail elementnum num end treatments num num posts and blockouts num num rub rail num num miscellaneous hardwarenum num fencenum num chainlink fencenum num caution fencenum num snow fencenum num bridge railingnum num steel railingnum num aluminum railingnum section num joint materials num num preformed joint fillernum num joint sealer num num polymerized joint adhesive num num joint assembliesnum num preformed elastomeric compression type num num strip seal expansion glandular typenum num modularnum section num timber and timber treatmentnum num sawn timber posts timber spacers and routed timber spacersnum num round timber piling num num dimension lumber for sheet piling num num dimension lumber timber and decking for structuresnum num timber treatmentnum num timber connectors and hardwarenum section num fiberglass composite materials num num fiberglass reinforced plastic lumbernum num fiberglass reinforced plastic pilesnum num fiberglassconcrete composite piles num section num landscaping materials num num topsoilnum num soil additives num num composted sewerage sludgenum num compost num num fertilizernum num pulverized limestone num num seed mixturesnum num grass seed mixturesnum num wildflower seed mixturenum num shipment and certificationnum num mulchnum num straw num num wood cellulose fibernum num shredded wood and wood chipnum num shredded hardwood bark num num stonenum num gravelnum num tackifiersnum num topsoil stabilization matting num num type num matnum num type num mat erosion control mulch blanketnum xxiii num type num mat turf reinforcement mat trmnum num type num mat mechanically bonded fiber matrix mbfm num num sodnum num plant materialsnum num miscellaneous landscape materialsnum num disinfectantnum num antidesiccantnum num herbicides num section num electrical materials num num conduit and fittings num num cable and wirenum num loop detector leadnum num loop wire num num multiple lighting and service wirenum num traffic signal cablenum num bonding and grounding materials num num cable connectorsnum num resin splicing kitsnum num electrical tapenum num cable racksnum num cast boxes and fittingsnum num cabinetsnum num panel boards and circuit breakersnum num photoelectric controls num num pedestals poles transformer bases and mast bracket armsnum num tower polesnum num lampsnum section num miscellaneousnum num geotextilesnum num sediment control bag num num hay and straw num num gabion wire basketsnum num geomembrane linernum num waterstopsnum num epoxy bonding compound num num water num num sodium chloride rock salt num num sleevesnum num epoxy injection materialnum num polyethylene sheeting num num floating turbidity barrier num num detectable warning surfacenum division num equipment num section num traffic control equipment num num flashing arrow board num num portable variable message signnum num traffic control truck with mounted crash cushionsnum section num compaction equipmentnum num pneumatictired compactornum num dynamic compactornum num steelwheel roller num num padfoot rollernum section num hma site equipmentnum num materials transfer vehicle mtvnum num hma curb machinenum xxiv num hma pavernum num ultrathin lift paver num num hma compactor num num vibratory drum compactornum num bituminous material distributornum num sealer application systemnum section num pile driving equipment num num impact hammer num num vibratory hammernum num leads and followersnum section num concrete site equipment num num pavement forms num num spreading and finishing machine num num spreading and finishing machine for concrete bridge decksnum num vibratornum num slipform pavernum num slipform extrusion machinenum num epoxy resin injection equipment num section num concrete pavement rehabilitation equipmentnum num breakernum num seating equipmentnum num grout pumping unit num num mixer num num injection devicenum num lift monitoring equipmentnum num deflection testing equipmentnum num grinding machinenum num scarification equipment num section num traffic striping equipment num num epoxy striping unitnum num thermoplastic applicator num num traffic stripe and marking removal equipment num num rumble strip cutting machinenum section num miscellaneous equipment num num milling machine num num straightedgenum num mechanical sweepernum num pavement sawnum num air compressornum num hotair lancenum section num hma plant equipmentnum num hma plantnum num hma trucksnum section num concrete plant and mixing equipmentnum num batching plantnum num concrete trucksnum num mobile mixernum num smallbatch mixernum section num precast and prestressed concrete plant equipment num num precast plant num num prestressed plantnum num mes officenum xxv njdot test methods num njdot anum mortarmaking properties of fine aggregatenum njdot anum determining percentage of mica in fine aggregatenum njdot anum petrographic analysis to determine lithological composition of coarse aggregate num njdot anum determining percent of adherent fines present in coarse aggregatenum njdot anum scratch hardness test for coarse aggregate particlesnum njdot anum determining gradation of densegraded aggregate containing rapnum njdot bnum falling head permeability test for asphaltstabilized drainage coursenum njdot bnum sampling hma mixturesnum njdot bnum selecting cores for maximum specific gravity testing in air voids determination num njdot bnum measuring thickness of hma cores num njdot bnum determining composition of hma mixture using hot bin sample analysis num njdot bnum determining percent of air voids in opengraded hma num njdot bnum determining optimum asphalt content for opengraded friction course ogfc num njdot bnum determining job mix formula for modified opengraded friction course mixes num njdot bnum determining asphalt content for mogfc courses by aggregate surface areanum njdot cnum determining yield of concrete produced by continuousmixingtype truck mixersnum njdot cnum quicksetting patch materials num njdot cnum calcium nitrite presence in plastic concretenum njdot cnum slump flow test and visual stability index testnum njdot cnum static segregation of hardened selfconsolidating concrete cylindersnum njdot rnum operating inertial profiler systems for evaluating pavement profilesnum njdot snum rotationalcapacity test on long bolts in tension calibrator num njdot snum rotationalcapacity test on bolts too short to fit tension calibrator num njdot snum veryifying direct tension indicators dti num njdot st statistical tables num num division num general provisions section num general information num introduction the num standard specifications for road and bridge construction are written to the bidder before award and to the contractor after award .
sentences that are written as commands are directed to the contractor .
for example a requirement to construct a cofferdam would be expressed as construct cofferdams to ensure the stability of the excavation and to keep the excavation free of water rather than the contractor shall construct cofferdams to ensure the stability of the excavation and to keep the excavation free of water .
titles and headings of sections and subsections are for convenience and do not bear on the meaning of the text .
whenever any section subsection subpart or subheading is amended in the special provisions by such terms as changed to deleted or added it is construed to mean that it amends that section subsection subpart or subheading of the standard specifications .
when a publication is specified or referenced if no issue or effective date for the publication is specified use the issue or version of the publication that is current at the opening of bids .
num abbreviations the following abbreviations are used in the contract aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute aisc american institute of steel construction inc. aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standards institute api american petroleum institute arema american railway engineering and maintenanceofway association asce american society of civil engineers astm astm american society for testing and materials international awpa american wood protection association aws american welding society awwa american water works association ciap construction industry advancement program of new jersey crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute dbe disadvantaged business enterprise esbe emerging small business enterprise eei edison electric institute epa united states environmental protection agency fedstd federal standard fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards general services administration hdpe highdensity polyethylene hma hot mix asphalt hpc high performance concrete icea insulated cable engineers association inc. iso international organization for standardization ite institute of transportation engineers its intelligent transportation systems msds material safety data sheet mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nchrp national cooperative highway research program num nec national electric code nema national electrical manufacturers association nist national institute of standards and technology n.j.a.c .
new jersey administrative code n.j.s.a .
new jersey statutes annotated njaci new jersey chapter american concrete institute njdep new jersey department of environmental protection noaa national oceanic and atmospheric administration njdot new jersey department of transportation npca national precast concrete association ntcip national transportation communications for its protocol osha occupational safety and health administration pci precastprestressed concrete institute pvc polyvinyl chloride qpl qualified products list rap reclaimed asphalt pavement row rightofway sbe small business enterprise sesc soil erosion and sediment control si international system of units sspc society of protective coatings ul underwriters laboratories usace united states army corps of engineers uscg united states coast guard num terms when the following terms are used in the contract the meaning is as follows .
if the term is capitalized it is capitalized in the specifications .
acceptance .
the written acceptance by the department of the work .
acceptance testing .
testing conducted by the department to measure the degree of compliance to the contract .
actual cost .
the computed cost using calculations provided in num. addendum .
a contract revision or response to a contractor inquiry issued after advertisement and before the opening of bids .
approval .
the departments written notification that a submission or portion of work is believed to be in conformance with the contract .
asbuilt quantity .
the quantity of a completed item eligible for payment .
authorized funding amount .
the amount of funds authorized by the department for the contract .
bridge .
a structure other than a culvert including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length measured along the center of the structure of more than num feet between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
structure dimensions are defined as follows num. bridge length .
the length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing from back to back of backwalls of abutments if present otherwise end to end of the bridge floor but in no case less than the total clear opening of the structure .
num. bridge width .
the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or in the case of multiple height of curbs between the bottoms of the lower risers or if curbs are not used between inner faces of parapet or railing .
num change order .
a written order issued by the department to the contractor after execution of the contract authorizing one or more of the following num .
changes in the work .
num .
modifications in the basis of payment .
num .
modifications to contract time .
completion .
when all of the following have occurred num .
the work has been satisfactorily completed in all respects according to the contract .
num .
the project is ready for use by the department as required by the contract .
num .
the contractor has satisfactorily executed and delivered to the re all documents certificates and proofs of compliance required by the contract including the notice of completion .
construction operations .
physical construction of work done in the performance of the contract within the project limits .
does not include offsite mobilization procurement and offsite storage of materials and plants engineering performance bond and payment bond surveys working drawings offsite field offices schedules certificates forms or documents .
contract .
the written integrated agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties including but not limited to the performance of the work and the basis of payment .
the contract includes the advertisement proposal certification as to publication and notice of advertisement for proposal bid appointment of agent by nonresident contractors resolution of award of contract executed form of contract performance and payment bonds specifications plans rightofway plans permits boring logs pavement core records addenda change orders and field orders all of which are to be treated as one instrument whether or not set forth at length in the form of contract .
other information mailed or otherwise made available to the prospective bidders before the opening of bids is not part of the contract unless specified as such .
contract time .
the number of working days allowed to complete the work for a milestone or the date by which work must be completed as provided in the contract and as modified by change order .
when interim completion and completion requirements are specified as a specific date instead of the number of working days achieve interim completion or completion on or before that date .
contractor .
the individual firm partnership corporation or any acceptable combination thereof contracting with the department for performance of the contract .
for the purpose of carrying out the contract it also means the contractors representative .
day .
every day shown on the calendar .
department .
the department of transportation of the state of new jersey as created by law acting through duly authorized representatives such representatives acting within the scope of the particular duties delegated to them .
department laboratory .
the main testing laboratory of the department at num lower ferry road p.o .
box num trenton new jersey num or such other laboratory as the department may designate .
estimate .
progress payment made to the contractor by the department .
extra work .
new work and quantity adjustments to items that are not the result of asbuilt measurement or calculation .
field order .
written direction signed by the re requiring action by the contractor .
highway street or road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the row see figure num. holiday .
a legal holiday as defined by n.j.s.a .
num. inspector .
the departments authorized representative assigned to inspect the work for conformance to the contract .
interim completion .
a milestone other than completion of work requiring completion by a specified date or within a specified time .
num item .
a specifically described portion of work for which there is a unit or lump sum price .
items described in the specifications are designated in all capital letters .
me .
the departments manager of the bureau of materials or the departments regional materials engineer and their designated representatives .
land surveyor .
a person who is legally authorized to practice land surveying in new jersey according to the provisions of n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
manufacturers recommendations .
recommendations and instructions by the manufacturer including but not limited to the construction requirements drawings plans and material requirements .
new work .
work directed by the department that is not covered under an existing item or combination of items in the contract .
items established to provide payment modifications as specified in the contract such as damages bonuses and penalties are not new work .
others .
an individual or a legal entity other than the contractor the surety or an individual or a legal entity in a contractual relationship with the contractor or the surety .
for example the term others may include the department a utility or another contractor on the project .
pavement structure .
the combination of pavement base courses and when specified a subbase course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed see figure num .
these various courses are defined as follows num. pavement .
one or more layers of specified material of designed thickness at the top of the pavement structure .
num. base course .
one or more layers of specified material of designed thickness placed on the subgrade or subbase .
num. subbase .
one or more layers of specified material of designed thickness placed on the subgrade .
plan .
the contractors proposed methods of performing work including but not limited to materials equipment personnel and schedules .
plans .
the advertised plans as amended by addenda and change of plan .
this includes the version of the standard details specified on the key sheet .
professional engineer .
a person licensed to practice engineering in the state of new jersey .
project .
the specific section of highway or other public improvement constructed under the contract .
the project may include work performed by others .
project limits .
the project limits are shown on the key sheet and modified as follows num .
the areas of construction operations and areas used by the contractor to perform the work .
if only a portion of a lane or shoulder of a road is being constructed the project limits include all lanes and shoulders of the roadway .
num .
where only one direction of a road is being constructed and the road is divided by a median island or barrier curb the projects limits include all of the lanes in that direction and the median .
otherwise the project limits include all lanes in both directions .
num .
the longitudinal project limits include all safety devices and signs excluding signs greater than num feet outside the project limits shown on the key sheet .
num .
areas within the row provided for the contractors use .
proposal .
the schedule of items and estimate of the various quantities and kinds of work to be performed for which bid prices are invited .
the proposal also includes the location and description of the project and the date and time of the opening of bids .
qualified products list qpl .
a list of specific qualified products maintained by the department for use in the work .
the complete qpl is available at the following website httpwww.state.nj.ustransportationengmaterialsqualified re .
the departments field representative having direct supervision of the administration of the contract .
num rightofway row .
the land property or interest therein acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes or construction of a public improvement see figure num .
rightofway plans .
the most current revisions of the general property parcel maps and entire tract maps approved for use in setting the existing and proposed row including setting out or laying out the various easements within which items are to be constructed or used to enable construction .
specifications .
the compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of prescribed work contained in the standard specifications special provisions and electrical materials specifications as modified by addenda .
state .
the state of new jersey .
subcontractor .
an individual firm partnership corporation or any acceptable combination thereof to which the contractor subcontracts part of the work pursuant to num. subgrade .
the surface of the roadbed upon which the first layer of the pavement structure is constructed see figure num .
substantial completion .
when all work is complete with the exception of landscaping items listed in num removal of sesc measures final cleanup and repair of unacceptable work provided the re has determined that num .
the project is safe and convenient for use by the public .
num .
failure to complete work and repairs excepted above will not result in the deterioration of other completed work .
num .
the value of the remaining landscaping work removal of sesc measures repairs and final cleanup is less than num percent of the total adjusted contract price .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative responsible for and in charge of the work and is authorized by the contractor to receive all communications from the department .
surety .
the individual partnership or corporation other than the contractor that has provided a proposal bond a performance bond or a payment bond .
testing agency .
a privatelyowned facility capable of testing and evaluating component parts or the whole for certification of the composition or construction of the material or product .
the testing agency must be an aashto accredited laboratory for each field of accreditation and type of material to be tested .
total adjusted contract price .
the total contract price as it is adjusted through the issuance of change orders and the calculation of asbuilt quantities .
total contract price .
the correctly determined summation of lump sum bids and products of all quantities for items shown in the proposal multiplied by the unit prices bid .
traveled way .
the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes see figure num .
utility .
the company agency or other entity that provides services including but not limited to electric water gas sewer fiber optic communications and railroad and the department with regard to its its and electrical facilities .
utility .
the rails lines facilities or systems owned by utilities .
work .
labor services materials equipment tools transportation supplies and incidentals necessary or convenient for completion by the contractor of the construction described in the contract and the carrying out of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract wholly or any portion thereof on the contractor .
work .
particular elements items or portions of the work .
working day .
any day exclusive of num .
saturdays sundays and holidays .
num .
days on which the contractor is specifically required by the contract to suspend construction operations .
num .
days on which the contractor is prevented by any conditions beyond the control of the contractor and adverse to the current controlling operation or operations as determined by the re from proceeding with at least num percent of the normal labor and equipment force engaged on such operation or operations for at least num percent of the total daily time being currently spent on the controlling operation or operations for all shifts .
num working drawings .
stress sheets shop drawings catalogue cuts calculations diagrams illustrations schedules performance charts brochures and other supplementary plans or similar data prepared by the contractor or subcontractors manufacturers suppliers or distributors .
the contractor is required to submit working drawings as specified in num for approval or certification .
num inquiries regarding the project submit inquiries regarding discrepancies errors or omissions or concerns regarding the intent or meaning of the contract to the department as follows num .
before award of contract .
submit inquiries by email directly to the contact provided in the special provisions .
include the following with each inquiry num .
name of the bidder .
num .
telephone number fax number email address and contact person .
num .
specifics of the inquiry including anticipated results .
the deadline for submitting inquiries is num noon num days before the opening of bids .
the department will investigate the information provided in the inquiry and if the department determines that a change or response is necessary the department will issue an addendum .
requests for postponement of bids will not receive a response .
the department will issue an addendum postponing bids if warranted .
num .
after award of contract .
submit inquiries to the re through the office specified in the special provisions .
num highway street or road roadway shoulder sidewalk traveled way subgrade r.o.w .
line r.o.w .
line figure num roadbed pavement structure shoulder pavement base course subbase num section num bidding requirements and conditions num qualification to bid the bidder is an individual firm or corporation submitting a bid for the advertised work .
the department will not accept bids from bidders who fail to meet all of the following criteria num .
the bidder has been prequalified according to regulations covering the classification of prospective bidders as required by n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num .
before delivery of the bid the bidder has disclosed ownership as required by n.j.s.a .
num .
num .
at the time the bid is delivered the bidder has an effective maximum and project ratings of not less than the amount of its bid .
num .
if the bidder is a corporation not incorporated in the state the bidder has been authorized to do business in the state as required by n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
num .
for wholly state funded projects the bidder is in compliance with n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
num .
for wholly state funded projects the bidder has a valid business registration with the division of revenue in the new jersey department of treasury as required by n.j.s.a .
num .
num .
for wholly state funded projects the bidder has a valid current registration with the new jersey department of labor division of wage and hour compliance as required by public works contractor registration act n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num bidder registration and downloading of the proposal documents this contract is being bid by use of an electronic bidding process .
electronic bidding information is available on the departments website .
registration and a subscription fee are required to access the proposal documents .
the bidder shall download the bidding software .
when installing the bid program the bidder enters its vendor code assigned by the department .
the bidder shall not alter or in any way or change the software .
the bidder shall download all proposal documents from the departments website .
the department assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in the downloaded proposal documents except as specifically provided for in the contract .
the bidder shall direct questions or problems with downloading or using the electronic files to the contacts identified on the website .
num revisions before submitting a bid the department will only issue written graphic or electronic information to clarify correct or change the proposal documents contract or bidding notices as addenda posted on the website before the opening of bids .
it is the obligation of the bidder to check the departments website for addenda .
the department will not post addenda less than num hours before the time set for the opening of bids with the exception of addenda postponing the opening of bids .
the bidder shall acknowledge all addenda posted through the departments website before the opening of bids .
the department will not accept the bid if the bidder has not acknowledged all addenda posted .
certain addenda contain amendments .
amendments require revisions to the schedule of items to be bid .
the bidder shall ensure that the schedule of items to be bid submitted contains all applicable amendments .
the department has the right to reject bids that do not contain all applicable amendments to the schedule of items to be bid .
num examination of contract and project limits the bidder shall carefully examine the contract and the project limits of the proposed project before submitting a bid .
the bidder shall provide written notice to the contact specified in num of the special provisions at least num hours in advance of any visits to the project limits .
the bidder shall ensure that staff visiting the project limits have proper identification .
if conditions of the project limits are inconsistent with the contract or there are discrepancies conflicts errors omissions or ambiguities within the contract the bidder shall immediately notify the department as specified in num .
the bidder shall evaluate subsurface conditions to determine how these conditions may affect the methods and cost and time of construction .
the bidder shall evaluate with respect to possible material sources the quality and quantity of material available applicable regulatory requirements and the type and extent of processing that may be required to produce material conforming to the requirements of the contract .
it is understood and agreed that the bidder num has considered in its bid all of the permanent and temporary utilities in their present new or relocated positions to the extent required by the contract and as revealed by its own investigations .
it is also understood and agreed that the bidder is aware that a utilitys service demands field conditions and emergencies may affect the utilitys ability to comply with the proposed schedules for utility work .
items num through num below are not a part of the contract and are made available for information only .
the boring logs and pavement cores are part of the contract but any reports or interpretations of them are provided for information only .
the department makes no representation warranty or guarantee expressed or implied by making reports or interpretations available .
it is the bidders responsibility to obtain the following information num .
evaluation of subsurface and surface conditions .
the bidder may inspect the records of the departments subsurface investigation through the departments engineering documents unit num parkway avenue p.o .
box num trenton nj num .
this investigation is not a substitute for the bidders own evaluation or judgment in preparing a bid .
the bidder should not rely on any estimates or quantities included in these investigations .
the conditions indicated by such investigations or records thereof and as shown by the crosssections in the plans may not be representative of those existing throughout such areas .
the bidder may encounter materials other than or in proportions different from those indicated .
the soil and rock descriptions shown on the boring logs are determined by a visual inspection of samples from the various explorations unless otherwise noted .
the department may make these samples available for nondestructive examination .
the observed water levels and other water conditions indicated on the boring logs are as recorded at the time of the exploration .
these levels and other conditions may vary considerably with time according to the prevailing climate rainfall and other factors .
if a generalized soil profile is described in the text it is intended to convey trends in subsurface conditions .
the boundaries between strata are approximate and idealized and have been developed by interpretations of widely spaced explorations and samples .
the bidder is charged with knowledge of the states physical geography and geology and in performing its project limit evaluation is fully aware of the available publications on that subject matter .
num .
utility agreements .
in addition to what is specified in num the bidder may inspect or request the utility agreements modifications and orders relating to the contract through the departments division of project management num parkway avenue p.o .
box num trenton nj num .
the bidder shall obtain information regarding existing utilities proposed construction of utilities or relocation of utilities through the respective utility .
num .
existing plans and asbuilts .
the department will provide a list of existing structures within the project on the plans .
the department will list the existing plans and asbuilts used in the development of the contract in the special provisions .
the bidder may inspect asbuilt plans of departmentowned facilities or order copies upon written request through the engineering documents unit .
contour maps may be available for some projects .
bidders may inspect such maps or the bidder may obtain copies for their use upon written request to the engineering documents unit .
the bidder shall obtain plans of municipalityowned or countyowned facilities through the municipality or county .
the bidder shall verify information obtained from the existing documents with regard to its application to bidding and performing the contract .
submission of a bid is confirmation that the bidder has made an independent evaluation and examination and is fully aware of the requirements of the contract including all restrictions .
further the bidder warrants that the bid prices include all costs to complete the work .
num interpretation of quantities in the proposal the quantities appearing in the proposal are estimates .
the department has a right to increase or decrease the quantities of work or has the right to eliminate items in their entirety at its sole discretion .
the department will pay only for the quantities of work completed as specified in the contract .
num if and where directed the proposal may include items for which the department has designated quantities as if and where directed .
the estimated quantities set out in the proposal for if and where directed quantities are presented for the purpose of num obtaining a representative bid price but are not indicative of the departments intent regarding incorporation into the project .
the re has the right to direct the contractor to perform work using if and where directed quantities .
num preparation of the bid the bid is the completed proposal documents that are submitted by the bidder to the department at the time for the opening of bids .
the bidder shall submit a bid produced from the software that was downloaded from the departments electronic bidding website .
the bidder shall include all addenda in the bid .
the bidder shall specify a price in numerals for each item .
the bidder shall insert the price in the box provided for the lump sum item under the column designated as amounts .
for unit price items the bidder shall insert the per unit price under the column designated unit price in the appropriate box at the location provided therefore .
when the bidder intends to bid zero num for an item the bidder shall insert a num in the unit price and amounts columns for unit price items or in the amounts column for lump sum items .
where no numeral is provided by the bidder in either the unit price or the amount columns for one or more items or where no figure is provided in the amount column for one or more lump sum items the department will consider the amount bid to be zero num for that item .
when the proposal contains alternate items the bidder shall insert only the unit price and amount for the lowest priced alternate item .
when alternate items in the proposal have a lump sum pay quantity the bidder shall insert only the amount for the lowest priced alternate item .
the bidder shall construct the alternate item for which a price has been provided .
when the proposal contains groups of alternate items the bidder shall insert only the unit price and amount for each item within the lowest priced alternate group .
the bidder shall construct the alternate group of items for which a price has been provided .
the only entries permitted in the bid are the unit or lump sum prices for items to be bid .
the software will perform all extensions of the unit or lump sum prices and calculate the total bid amounts .
the bidder shall check the bid before submission using the software .
the bidder shall select tools and then select check bid and ensure that there are no errors before submitting the electronic bid .
for bids submitted by joint ventures select tools from the software menu and mark the electronic bid as joint bid .
the bidder may print a completed bid for its records after completing the bid .
num balanced bids the bidder shall reflect in the bid price for each item the cost the bidder anticipates incurring for the performance of that item together with a proportional share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead and costs to perform work for which no item is provided .
num proposal bond the proposal bond guarantees execution of the contract by the bidder receiving award .
with the bid submission the bidder shall complete the electronic bond form .
the proposal bond must be satisfactory to the department and for a sum of num percent of the total bid amount .
the bidder shall ensure that the proposal bond is properly completed and furnished by a surety authorized to do business in the state as are listed in the current us treasury department circular num as of the date for opening of bids for the particular contract and are authorized to issue bonds in at least the amount of the proposal bond .
the bidder shall ensure that the proposal bond has a power of attorney executed by the surety .
the power of attorney shall set forth the limits of authority of the attorneyinfact who has signed the bond on behalf of the surety to bind the company and shall further certify that such power is in full force and effect as of the date of the bond .
the department will not accept proposal bonds that do not comply in all respects with the provisions of n.j.a.c .
num numd and that are not substantiated by a valid power of attorney executed by the surety .
num submission of bids once the bidder has completed its bid and made all desired changes the bidder shall submit the electronically signed bid via the internet using the appropriate software .
an authorized representative of the bidder is required to digitally sign num the bid .
information regarding digital signatures is available on the departments website .
the department may reject internet bids that are not digitally signed by the authorized representative of the bidder with an approved digital signature .
the bidder shall ensure delivery of its bid with all required components and attachments including but not limited to the following num .
schedule of items .
num .
updated financial statement form dcnumb .
num .
proposal electronic bidding file with bidders certification .
num .
for wholly state funded contracts acknowledgement of compliance with the registrations specified in num .
num .
for wholly state funded contracts acknowledgement of compliance with n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
num .
proposal bond form .
num .
other related documents as specified in the contract .
when the bidder submits bids for num or more contracts that the department will open on the same day the bidder may submit a single updated financial statement instead of a separate statement for each contract .
the bidder is solely responsible for any and all errors and for timely submission of the bid all components thereof and all attachments thereto through the electronic bidding system the department assumes no responsibility for any claim arising from the failure of any bidder or of the electronic delivery system to cause any bid bid component or attachment to not be delivered to the department on or before the time set for the opening of bids .
num withdrawal of bids a bidder may withdraw a bid after it has been submitted to the department provided the request for such withdrawal is received by the department on the request for withdrawal of bids form in writing or by fax before the time set for bid opening .
the bidder may obtain the departments request for withdrawal of bids form from the electronic bidding website .
num public opening of bids the department will open and read bids publicly at the time and place indicated in the advertisement or such other time and place as established by addenda .
the department invites bidders their authorized agents and other interested parties to be present .
num consideration of bids the department reviews bids for conformity with the contract and compares bids on the basis of the correctly determined summation of the correctly determined products of all the quantities for items shown in the bid multiplied by the unit prices bid together with the sums bid for lump sum items .
the department will make the total bid amount for all bids available .
num irregular bids the department will consider a bid irregular and will reject it if the department determines that the bid contains a material defect .
num disqualification of bidders the department will disqualify a bidder and reject a bid submitted by that bidder if the bidder is determined by the department to lack responsibility .
factors demonstrating a lack of responsibility include but are not be limited to num .
evidence of collusion among bidders .
num .
uncompleted work which in the opinion of the department might hinder or prevent completion of additional work if awarded .
num .
failure to satisfy the preaward requirements for dbe or esbe as specified in the special provisions for federally funded contracts .
num .
failure to satisfy the preaward requirements for sbe as specified in the special provisions for wholly state funded contracts .
num num .
submission of a materially unbalanced bid .
a materially unbalanced bid is a bid where there is a reasonable doubt that award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid which is structured on the basis of nominal prices for some work and inflated prices for other work will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
num .
lack of competency or lack of adequate machinery plant or other equipment .
num .
unsatisfactory performance on previous or current contracts .
num .
questionable moral integrity as determined by the attorney general of new jersey or the department .
num .
any other outward actions or lack of action that demonstrates the bidder is not responsible .
num .
disqualification suspension or debarment of an individual firm partnership corporation or any combination as required by n.j.s.a .
num .
num rejection of all bids the department has the right to reject all bids when the department deems it advisable to do so in the best interest of the state or public .
section num award and execution of contract num award of contract the department will award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid conforms in all respects to the requirements set forth in the contract .
the department will award the contract based on the total contract price .
the department will award the contract or reject all bids within num state business days after the bids are received .
the department may conditionally award the contract pending the approval of the federal government another state governmental body or private party .
if the department does not award the contract or conditionally award the contract within num state business days all bidders have the right to withdraw their bids .
however the department with the agreement of the lowest responsible bidder the second lowest responsible bidder or both bidders may extend the time that the department may make an award or conditional award by mutual consent .
at the time of award or conditional award if the bidder is not a resident of the state such bidder shall appoint on the form provided by the department a proper agent located in the state on whom service of process can be made in the event of litigation of any type arising under the contract or as a result of performance of the contract .
said agency shall remain in effect during the performance of the contract and for num years following acceptance .
the award or conditional award is not binding upon the department until the department has executed the contract .
no person shall perform any work in furtherance of the contract until notified that the contract has been executed and then only as specified in num .
the term state business day as used in this subsection is synonymous with the term working day as used in n.j.s.a .
num and n.j.s.a .
num and is any day exclusive of saturdays sundays state recognized legal holidays and such other holidays or state office closings as declared by the state .
num cancellation of award the department reserves the right to cancel an award or conditional award at any time before the execution of said contract by all parties without incurring any liability of any kind .
num release of proposal bond the department will release all proposal bonds except those of the num lowest bidders within num days after opening of bids .
the department will release the proposal bond of the lowest and next lowest bidders when the contract and performance bond and payment bond have been executed and delivered as specified in num or if not executed when other disposition of the matter has been made by the department .
num num execution of the contract within num days of the date of award or conditional award the bidder shall properly and duly execute the contract and deliver to the department the following num .
if escrowing bid documents the custody agreement as specified in num .
num .
performance bond and payment bond as specified in num .
num .
request for authorization form for the new jersey pollutant discharge elimination system numgnum construction activity stormwater general permit njgnum when required as shown on the plans .
num .
proof of the registrations specified in num for the department of treasury and the department of labor .
num .
for wholly state funded projects all completed certificationdisclosure forms for compliance with n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
num .
if the case of nonresident bidders the completed form regarding appointment of agent for compliance with n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
if the contract is not executed by the department within num days following receipt from the successful bidder of the signed contract and the performance bond and payment bond the successful bidder may withdraw its bid without penalty .
where the bidder chooses not to withdraw its bid before the department executes the contract the bidder shall be deemed to have waived any claim for additional payment or for an extension of time .
the contract does not become effective until it has been fully executed by all parties .
num escrow of bid documents a .
purpose .
the bid documents are the supporting information calculations quotes and other information used to prepare the bid .
the department may use the contractors bid documents to negotiate changes and claims if they are escrowed and a signed custody agreement is provided .
the information contained in the bid documents does not modify the terms and conditions of the contract .
if the contractor fails to escrow bid documents within the time specified in num the department will not make payment for a disproportionate allocation of costs for work for which no item is provided in the contract as specified in num in the renegotiation of costs of items when there is a major decrease in quantity as specified in num .
b. stipulations and acknowledgements .
escrowed bid documents are the property of the contractor and are not public records .
if a third party requests a copy of the escrowed bid documents the contractor and not the department must take the legal steps needed to defend the confidentiality of the escrowed bid .
c. form and contents .
the department will consider escrowed bid documents reliable only if information is provided for all items and the total cost shown in the bid documents for each item equals the bid price for the item .
the contractor may submit escrowed bid documents in its usual costestimating format .
it is not the intent of the department to cause the contractor to expend additional effort in preparing its bid .
d. custody .
escrow bid documents in sealed boxes with a custody agent and provide a copy of the fully executed custody agreement provided by the department .
include with the custody agreement a certification that the escrowed bid documents have not been modified corrected or otherwise revised in any manner after the opening of bids .
the department may access the escrowed bid documents with the contractors written authorization .
after acceptance and upon request from the contractor the department will provide a release for the bid documents provided that there are no pending claims .
num failure to execute contract failure on the part of the bidder to whom the contract has been awarded to execute the contract as specified in num in the manner and within the time specified is just cause for annulment of the award or conditional award and for the exclusion of the bidder from bidding on subsequent projects for such period as the department deems appropriate .
if the award is annulled the proposal bond as specified in num is forfeited and the department has the right to recover under the terms and provisions of the proposal bond .
the department has the right to award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder or to readvertise and construct the work under the contract or otherwise as the department decides in its sole discretion .
num the successful bidder may file with the department a written notice signed by the bidder or the bidders authorized representative stating that the bidder refuses to execute the contract .
the filing of such notice has the same force and effect as the failure of the bidder to execute the contract and furnish a performance bond and payment bond within the time specified in num .
num acquisition of documents after the award additional sets of the plans or additional copies of the special provisions are available to subscribers through the departments website or upon request to the departments engineering documents unit at a charge according to the department rate .
section num scope of work num intent the intent of the contract is for the contractor to construct the work to be functionally complete and aesthetically acceptable .
perform work that may be reasonably inferred from the contract as being required to produce the intended result under the items of the contract .
perform the work using the best construction practices and provide materials and workmanship of the first quality to meet the contract requirements .
perform the work to ensure the least possible obstruction to traffic while adhering to the highest safety standards and with the least inconvenience to local residents and the general public .
num value engineering num purpose and scope the intent of value engineering ve is to promote contractor innovation for which the department will share with the contractor num percent of the value of cost savings generated as a result of a department approved ve proposal .
the department will only consider ve proposals that produce a cost savings to the department without in the sole judgment of the department impairing essential functions or characteristics of the project .
essential functions that can not be adversely impacted include but are not limited to safety service life economy of operation ease of maintenance environmental compliance and desired appearance .
the department will not consider ve proposals that change the projects original design criteria merely eliminate work are based on an unknown factor do not show a cost savings or extend contract time .
num conditions the department will consider ve proposals only after award of the contract and only in accordance with the following terms and conditions num .
in the event that the department rejects a ve proposal during any step of the process the contractor is required to complete the work as specified in the contract .
the contractor recognizes that the department has the right to reject ve proposals and can not base its bid on the anticipated approval of a ve proposal .
num .
all ve proposals approved or not approved by the department for use in the contract apply only to the ongoing contract or contracts referenced in the ve proposal .
the ve proposals shall become the property of the department and shall contain no restrictions imposed by the contractor on their use or disclosure .
the department will have the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary to use the ve proposal .
the department retains the right to use any accepted ve proposal or part thereof on any other or subsequent project without any obligation to the contractor .
this provision is not intended to deny rights provided by law with respect to patented materials or processes .
num .
if the department already has under consideration certain revisions to the contract that are subsequently incorporated in a ve proposal the department will reject the contractors ve proposal and has the right to proceed with such revisions without obligation to the contractor .
num num .
the re will determine whether a ve proposal qualifies for consideration and evaluation by the department including whether the savings generated by the ve proposal are sufficient to warrant review and processing .
the department may still reject a final ve proposal after approval of the initial ve proposal .
num .
the re has the right to reject all or any portion of work performed according to an approved ve proposal if the re determines that results do not meet the requirements of the ve proposal or the contract .
the re has the right to direct the removal of such rejected work and require the contractor to proceed according to the original contract .
if the contractor is directed to proceed according to the original contract the department will not make payment for the rejected work performed under the ve proposal or for its removal .
the contractor is responsible for the consequential costs arising from the rejected work to complete the work as proposed under the original contract including the cost to others .
num .
the contractor may only submit ve proposals based on items scheduled to be performed by the contractor .
the department will not consider anticipated cost savings based on revisions to utility relocations or other work to be performed by others .
the contractor is responsible to obtain the concurrence of utilities property owners governing bodies and agencies for any work affected by the ve proposal .
the department has the right to reject ve proposals that may increase the time or cost of work done by others .
num .
in calculating the value of cost savings the department has the right to disregard the contract bid prices if such prices do not represent the value of the work to be performed or to be deleted and has the right to calculate the savings based on reasonable costs for such work .
num .
ensure that ve proposals are designed according to the department design manuals and other department standards for the proposed work .
num .
if additional information is needed to evaluate ve proposals provide this information in the department specified time period otherwise the department will reject the ve proposal .
additional information may include where design changes are proposed results of field investigations and surveys design computations and field change sheets .
num .
the department will not deduct the departments costs for review and processing of the ve proposal from the cost savings .
num .
the department will not make payment for the contractors costs for development and submission of the ve proposal .
the contractor waives its right to claim for costs or delays incurred due to the departments review or rejection of a ve proposal .
these costs include but are not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits or increased material or labor costs resulting from delays in the review of such ve proposal .
num .
the department will not use the value of cost savings for additional vehicle operating and delay costs incurred by the traveling public compared to normal operating conditions resulting from the establishment of construction maintenance or rehabilitation work zones road user costs or for costs to oversee the project construction engineering costs .
num .
the contractor may submit ve proposals for an approved subcontractor provided that payment is made by the department to the contractor and that the terms of the payment to the subcontractor are satisfactorily negotiated and accepted before the proposal is submitted to the department .
submit revised agreements as specified in num .
subcontractors may only submit a ve proposal through the contractor .
num submittals the contractor may submit ve proposals electronically .
with electronic submissions submit the appropriate attachments and a printed copy .
if the initial ve proposal is only submitted in printed form provide at least num sets of documents .
if the final ve proposal is only submitted in printed form the department will designate the required number of sets of documents .
submit initial and final ve proposals as follows num .
initial ve proposal .
submit to the re an initial ve proposal outlining the general technical concepts associated with the ve proposal and the estimated savings that will result .
the department will review the initial ve proposal and if found to be conceptually acceptable will grant approval to submit a final ve proposal .
a finding of conceptual acceptability of the initial proposal in no way obligates the department to approve the final ve proposal .
num num .
final ve proposal .
the department will consider a final ve proposal only after the approval of the initial ve proposal .
with each final ve proposal submit at a minimum to the re the following information num .
a statement that the final ve proposal is submitted as a ve proposal with a reference to the approval of the initial ve proposal .
num .
a description of the differences between the existing contract requirements and the proposed change and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each .
document the effects on safety service life economy of operations ease of maintenance environmental requirements and desired appearance .
num .
complete plans specifications and calculations showing the proposed changes relative to the original contract features and requirements .
ensure that plans and engineering calculations are signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
num .
a complete cost analysis indicating the final estimated costs and quantities to be replaced by the ve proposal the new costs and quantities generated by the final ve proposal and the cost effects of the proposed changes on operational maintenance and other considerations .
num .
an evaluation of the effect the final ve proposal has on contract time including a revised schedule and a time impact evaluation as specified in num.c .
num .
a description of any previous use or testing of the final ve proposal on another department project or elsewhere and the conditions and results .
if the final ve proposal was previously submitted on another department project indicate the date the project and the action taken by the department .
num .
a letter of concurrence to the ve proposal from others that are affected .
num .
the specific date that the change order adopting the final ve proposal must be executed to obtain the maximum cost reduction .
ensure that this date allows the department ample time usually a minimum of num days for review and processing a change order .
if the department finds that there is insufficient time available for review and processing it has the right to reject the final ve proposal solely on such basis .
if the department fails to respond to the final ve proposal by the date specified the contractor shall consider the final ve proposal rejected and shall make no claim against the department as a result thereof .
num .
additional information requested by the department .
num final documents if the final ve proposal is approved submit working drawings for approval .
the department will designate the number of sets to be submitted .
num payment if the ve proposal is approved the department will issue a change order incorporating the ve proposal and establishing payment for the cost savings .
the department will make payment to the contractor for num percent of the cost savings from the ve proposal .
it is understood that the payment includes all costs resulting as a consequence of the change including but not limited to quantity increases to items and unanticipated work or expenses arising out of the change .
num changes to the contract num authority to make changes the department has the right to make changes to the work at any time including altering the contract altering the requirements of an item increasing or decreasing the quantities of any item or deleting any item .
such changes neither invalidate the contract nor release the surety .
the contractor agrees to perform the work as changed .
the contractor may request changes to the contract .
the department will direct changes using a written field order or change order as follows num .
field orders .
the re has the right to unilaterally direct contractor performance with a written field order .
upon receipt of a field order proceed as directed by the field order .
a field order will state whether the num directions provided by the field order are eligible for payment or modification of contract time .
the department will provide such payment or modification to contract time in a subsequent change order .
num .
change orders .
the department will modify the contract with a change order .
the department has the right to unilaterally make the following changes make minor increases or decreases in quantity modify contract time as specified in num direct new work to be performed on a force account basis and establish payment modifications for damages credits bonuses and penalties provided for in the contract .
for changes that require the contractors assent the re will negotiate the terms of the change and the department will offer a change order .
if the contractor accepts the offer the contractor will sign the change order whereupon the department may approve and issue the change order .
by signing a change order the contractor agrees that the change order constitutes the full extent of the agreement between the department and the contractor including the full extent of payment and modified contract time for the work and for any effects upon all and any part of the work and supersedes any prior written or oral agreement between the parties .
additionally the contractor acknowledges the sufficiency and propriety of the consideration for the work detailed in the change order and understands that the agreement is binding .
upon receipt of an approved change order proceed as directed by the change order .
do not deviate from the requirements of the contract unless and until a field order is issued by the re or a change order is approved by the department .
notwithstanding the issuance of a field order or change order do not expend or cause to be expended any sum in excess of the contracts current authorized funding amount .
the department will notify the contractor when the authorized funding amount for the contract has been modified .
any expenditure by the contractor that exceeds the contracts authorized funding amount is at the contractors risk and the contractor waives any right to recover from the department any sum in excess of the amount appropriated .
num protests to change orders if the contractor disagrees with any terms or conditions set forth in a change order submit a written protest to the department within num days after the date of receipt of the change order .
a protest is notice that the terms and conditions for proposed work are not in accordance with the contract quantity adjustments are incorrect or that the modification for contract time is incorrect .
a protest is not a substitute for notice as specified in num .
providing a protest within num days after the date of the receipt of a change order may not meet the requirements of num or n.j.s.a num and the department will not make payment for the costs of a claim if recovery is barred by other provisions in the contract .
in the protest list the points of disagreement and if possible the specification references quantities and costs involved .
ensure that the protest is a specific detailed statement of the points of disagreement .
the department will reject general protests .
if the department rejects a protest for being a general protest provide a specific detailed statement within num days of such rejection .
if an acceptable written protest is not submitted within num days after the date of receipt of the change order or within num days of the initial rejection the department will make payment and modify contract time as set forth in the change order .
such payment is full payment for all work included or required by the change order and is conclusive as to any contract time modifications provided for therein or in establishing that no contract time modification was warranted .
for change orders that require the contractors assent if the department processes the change order within num days of receiving the contractors signature the contractor is barred from protesting the approved change order .
protest does not relieve the contractor from the obligation to proceed with work directed by an approved change order .
num types of changes the department will address all changes under one or a combination of the following types num .
quantity increases and decreases .
the department has the right to increase or decrease the quantities of work to be performed .
if the quantity of an item is cumulatively increased or decreased by num percent or less num from the proposal quantity the department will consider the quantity adjustment to be a minor change in quantity .
if the quantity of an item is cumulatively increased or decreased by more than num percent from the proposal quantity the department will consider the quantity adjustment a major change in quantity .
for the purpose of this subsection the term proposal quantity is the quantity indicated in the proposal less the quantities designated on the plans as if and where directed .
for minor changes in quantity the department will make payment for the quantity of the item performed at the bid price for the item .
for major increases in quantity the department or the contractor may request to renegotiate the price for the quantity in excess of num percent of the proposal quantity .
for items that are measured by unit the department will not renegotiate a price for a fraction of a unit rather a unit is eligible for renegotiation if it causes the quantity to be in excess of num percent of the proposal quantity .
if a mutual agreement can not be reached on a renegotiated price the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
for major decreases in quantity the department or the contractor may request to renegotiate the price for the quantity of work performed .
if a mutual agreement can not be reached on a renegotiated price the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
however the department will not make payment in an amount that exceeds num percent of the value of the bid price multiplied by the proposal quantity .
the department will consider making payment for costs attributed to a disproportionate allocation of costs for work for which no item is provided in the contract if the contractor has escrowed its bid documents as specified in num .
the department will not make payment for lost anticipated profits .
if the cost c is less than num the department will not make a modification and will make payment for the quantity of the item performed at the bid price .
calculate c as follows c q pb pr where c cost .
pb bid price .
pr renegotiated price .
q quantity of work performed at the renegotiated price .
if a change results in a major change in quantity and results in a renegotiated price for the quantity in excess of num percent from the proposal quantity the re will determine the locations of which work is to be performed at the renegotiated price and which locations of work is performed at the bid price .
for subsequent increases in quantities perform the work at the renegotiated price .
however if the quantities of subsequent increases exceed num percent of the proposal quantity and num percent of the adjusted quantity for the item at the renegotiated price either party may request to rerenegotiate the price for the excess quantity .
when the locations of the work to be performed at a renegotiated price are established subsequent decreases in quantities of work at the bid price will not affect the quantity of work at the renegotiated price .
deleted work is work deleted from the contract by decreasing the quantity of an item except the provisions for deleted work do not apply to quantities designated as if and where directed .
if the department deletes work from the contract immediately cancel orders for materials for that item .
if the contractor has ordered acceptable material for work deleted from the contract before the date the re notified the contractor that the work was deleted and the material can not be returned to the vendor the department will make payment based on the cost of the material as evidenced by paid invoices .
in that event the department becomes the owner of the material and the contractor will deliver the material to a location as directed by the re .
the department will only make payment for material that meets the requirements of the contract .
if the contractor has ordered acceptable material for work deleted from the contract before the date the re notified the contractor that the work was deleted the material is returnable to the vendor and the re directs the material be returned the contractor shall return the material .
the department will make payment for actual vendor charges for returning and restocking the material .
num for deleted work the department will make payment for material costs and vendor restocking charges as specified in num except that the department will not apply profit and the total payment may not exceed the bid price multiplied by the deleted quantity .
if the department directs the material to be delivered to a designated location the department will make payment for the associated handling and delivery costs .
if a price for these handling and delivery costs can not be agreed upon the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
when the entire quantity of an item is designated if and where directed and is increased by more than num percent of the proposal quantity the department or the contractor may request to renegotiate payment for the quantity in excess of num percent of the proposal quantity .
if a mutual agreement for a renegotiated price can not be achieved the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
when the entire quantity of an item is designated if and where directed and is decreased by any amount the department will make payment for work performed at the rate of the bid price .
when the entire quantity of an item is designated if and where directed and is deleted the department will not make a modification and will not make payment for the quantity of the item performed at the bid price .
num .
new work .
when requested by the re submit to the re a detailed cost proposal for performance of new work .
if a price for a new work can not be mutually agreed upon the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
num .
changes in the character of work .
a change in the character of work is a change that causes the work to substantially differ in kind or nature from the original proposed construction .
the department may make payment for a change in the character of work whether the change directly causes a change in the character of the work or causes other work to become significantly different in character .
efficiencies or inefficiencies resulting from minor increases or decreases in quantities of work are not a change in the character of work .
if a change in the character of the work results in a decreased cost to perform the work the re will revise the price to reflect this reduced cost .
for changes in the character of work the department will base the modification on the difference between what the actual cost to perform the work of the item or portion thereof involved would have been if there were no change and the actual cost of performing the work or portion of work as changed .
the modification shall only apply to the portion of the work for an item actually affected by the change .
if a modification can not be reached by agreement the department will make payment by force account as specified in num .
specific changes in character of work have the following requirements a .
differing site condition .
a condition is considered to be a type num differing site condition when a subsurface or latent physical condition at the site differs materially from those specified in the contract .
a condition is considered to be a type num differing site condition when unusual conditions are encountered that differ materially from those ordinarily encountered or is generally recognized as inherent in the work that could not have been reasonably anticipated from the prebid examination as specified in num or from the preparation of the bid as specified in num .
the department will make payment for increased costs resulting from a type num or type num differing site condition as a change in the character of work however the department will not consider payment for a differing site condition unless the resulting change in cost exceeds the amounts as specified in table num .
if the change in cost exceeds these amounts the department will base the modification on the total cost of the change .
the department will not deduct the amounts shown in table num from the cost of the change .
if the same differing site condition is encountered subsequently the department will consider the cumulative total value towards meeting the requirements of table num .
table num total contract price cost of change up to num num over num num num b .
constructive acceleration .
the department will make payment for costs resulting from constructive acceleration as a change in the character of work if there was an excusable compensable delay for which the department improperly rejected the contractors notice requesting an extension of contract time and for which the contractor incurred additional costs .
payment for constructive acceleration may not exceed the cost of liquidated damages saved by the actions of constructive acceleration .
the department will not make payment for claims for constructive acceleration if the contractor fails to have an approved progress schedule as specified in num .
before constructively accelerating provide the re with a plan detailing the methods and activities of the constructive acceleration .
include how the plan accelerates the work relative to the current approved progress schedule .
do not deviate from the submitted plan without providing the re with a revised plan .
c. inefficiencies .
if the source of the loss of productivity can not be isolated and priced separately the department will consider making payment for inefficiency costs based on a measured mile analysis comparing the productivity of work impacted by a change to the productivity of similar work under unimpacted conditions .
if the source of the inefficiency is working out of the scheduled sequence use the current approved progress schedule to show that the work was performed outofsequence .
d. delays .
the department will modify contract time as specified in num .
the department will make payment for delay damages resulting from excusable compensable delays as specified in num .
num contractual notice it is the responsibility of all parties to promptly provide written notice to the other party when circumstances are believed to constitute a change to the contract .
immediately provide written notice to the re of any circumstances that are believed to be a change to the contract .
if notice is not provided on contractual notice form dcnum include the following in the initial written notice num .
a statement that this is a notice of a change .
num .
the date when the circumstances believed to be a change were discovered .
num .
a detailed and specific statement describing the nature and circumstances of the change .
num .
if the change will or could affect costs to the department .
num .
if the change will or could affect contract time as specified in num.c .
the department will not modify the contract for work performed or for expenses incurred due to a change before the date notification is provided to the re .
the contractor waives its right to file a claim for costs incurred before providing notice to the re .
following submission of written notice diligently continue with the unaffected work to the maximum extent possible .
if a type num or type num differing site condition is encountered do not disturb the existing site condition until directed by the re .
within num days after receipt of each written notice the re will respond in writing with one of the following num .
reject the notice for providing insufficient information .
the department will not accept general notices .
the re may request resubmission of the notice with additional information .
if the department rejects the written notice for insufficient information the department will deem the contractor to have not provided notice even if the re issues directions based on the information provided .
num .
reject the notice because the contractor failed to submit the notice within the specified time frames of n.j.s.a num or num .
num .
acknowledge that notice has been provided and state that the department has not determined whether the circumstances constitute a change that may be eligible for additional payment or time or both .
if necessary the re may direct the mode of further performance .
the re may require the contractor to submit additional information within a specified time period .
num .
acknowledge that notice has been provided and confirm that the circumstances constitute a change that may be eligible for additional payment or time or both .
if necessary the re may direct the mode of further num performance .
the re may require the contractor to submit additional information within a specified time period .
num unrecoverable costs for all changes the department will not make payment or modify contract time for the following num loss of anticipated profits .
num .
consequential damages .
num .
expense related to claim preparation and submission including but not limited to attorneys fees and expenses consultants fees and expenses and litigation expenses .
num .
interest .
num .
reimbursement for home office overhead in excess of that provided by the contract .
num unacceptable cost calculation methods the contractor has the burden of substantially proving entitlement to and quantifying its costs .
the department will not make payment for costs calculated using the following methods num total cost method .
method based on calculating costs as the difference between the contractors bid for the work from the contractors calculation of costs for the work .
num .
modified total cost method .
method based on calculating damages as the difference between the contractors bid for a portion of the work and the contractors calculation of cost for that portion of the work .
num .
productivity factors .
costs for inefficiency based on industry productivity factors such as those provided by the mechanical contractors association of america mcaa factors affecting labor productivity .
num .
eichleay formula .
eichleay and other formulas or approaches to calculating home office overhead costs due to delay other than as specified in num .
num tracking costs for all work directed to be paid for by force account and for all costs for which the contractor will pursue reimbursement through a claim track and maintain complete records to provide a clear distinction between the costs for that work and the costs of other operations .
on a daily basis submit for review by the re a daily work report for the work involved in the force account or claim signed by the contractors authorized representative .
for days with multiple shifts of work submit a separate report at the completion of each shift .
provide the following in the daily or shift work report num .
for labor provide the name classification date daily hours and whether the hours are straight time or overtime for each worker and foreperson .
num .
for equipment provide the description dates daily hours worked daily hours idle and whether each unit of equipment or component thereof is rented or contractorowned .
num .
for materials provide the description quantities delivered and placed and whether the materials were for temporary use or permanent construction .
num .
indicate the description of work associated with the force account or claim performed for that day or shift .
if there are separate instances of work being tracked provide separate daily or shift reports for each instance .
submit in writing to the re for review before using special equipment materials or labor .
the department will not make payment for costs that the contractor fails to document as required in the daily work report .
num force account payment made for the work directed to be performed by force account represents full payment for that work .
upon request submit to the re a detailed cost estimate of the work to be paid by force account using the electronic format provided by the department .
submit daily or shift reports for force account costs as specified in num .
for work directed to be paid for by force account and when approved by the re in the daily or shift reports the department will make payment for the following num num .
direct labor .
the department will make payment for all necessary direct labor and the supervising foreperson of the specific operation whether the employer is the contractor or subcontractor based on the gross rate of wage paid to the employee as shown in its certified payrolls for each and every hour that said labor and foreperson are actively engaged in such work .
for specific extraordinary operations the department may allow supervising or other special types of employees which would usually be considered as overhead to be considered direct labor but only for that time allowed by the re .
submit justification in writing for the res approval before using such employees .
num .
labor fringe benefits .
the department will make payment for the cost of benefits paid by the contractor on direct labor costs allowed under num to or on behalf of workers when required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
num .
indirect labor costs .
the department will make payment for the cost of fica workers compensation insurance federal and state unemployment insurance and other payroll taxes paid by the contractor on direct labor costs allowed under num .
num .
insurance .
the department will make payment for the actual increased cost of insurance necessarily and directly resulting from the force account work as evidenced by certified documentation of insurance rates and premiums .
num .
materials .
the department will make payment for the cost of materials and shipping charges as evidenced by paid invoices except as follows num .
if a cash or trade discount is offered by the actual supplier or available to the purchaser credit the department notwithstanding the fact that such discount may not have been taken .
num .
if materials are procured by the purchaser by any method that is not a direct purchase from and a direct billing by the actual supplier to such purchaser the cost of such materials is the price paid to the actual supplier as determined by the re plus the costs if any incurred in the handling of such materials .
num .
if in the opinion of the re the cost of such materials is excessive then the department will limit the cost of such materials to the prevailing market price for such materials as are available in the quantities concerned delivered to the project limits and deducting any discounts as specified in num .
num .
for materials not incorporated into the permanent construction the department will deduct the reasonable salvage value of the material after the performance of the work .
the department will only allow sales tax on materials that are not permanent and do not qualify for an exemption under the sales and use tax act .
the department reserves the right to furnish materials and the department will not make payment for costs and markup on such materials .
num .
extraordinary expenses .
the department will make payment for permit and disposal fees if approved before incurring the cost and evidenced by paid invoices .
if the cost is in the opinion of the re excessive then the department will limit the payment for such expenses to reasonable costs as available in the prevailing market .
num .
equipment .
the department will make payment for contractorowned or rented equipment required for the force account work .
the department will not provide payment for equipment that is determined to be unsuitable by the re for the force account work or that is inoperable due to breakdown or during periods of repair .
in the event the contractor proposes to use equipment of a higher cost than that suitable for the work the department will make payment at the rate applicable to the suitable equipment .
the department will make payment for contractorowned or rented equipment as follows a. contractorowned equipment .
for equipment owned directly by the contractor or by entities that are divisions affiliates subsidiaries or in any other way related to the contractor or its parent company submit in writing to the re for approval the type of equipment and proposed cost before starting the work .
the department will make payment for equipment rental operating and idle time costs based on num the calculated cost .
the department will determine the calculated cost using the rental rate blue book blue book published by equipment watch as follows num .
the department will calculate the rental hourly rates by dividing the monthly rate by num .
the department will not use weekly daily or hourly rates .
the department will apply rental hourly rates for every hour the equipment is in active use except that for any numday period the department will limit the total amount paid for each piece of equipment to a maximum of num percent of the monthly rate .
num .
the department will apply the operating cost rate for every hour the equipment is active .
num .
the department will apply the rental and operating rates that are current on the first day that the equipment is in use for the force account work throughout the next num months that the force account is in progress .
the department will apply updated rates for every following num month period the force account is in progress .
submit to the re documentation establishing the blue book rates for the equipment proposed and the age of the equipment .
the department will adjust rates for each nummonth period thereafter .
num .
the department will not permit area adjustments .
the department will adjust rental rates for equipment age adjustments according to the rate adjustment tables .
num .
the department will not make payment for idle time for equipment required for only portions of the force account work except where the equipment has been held on the work site on a standby basis at the request of the re and but for this request would have left the work site .
portions of the work include hours when the equipment is inactive within a working day .
for the idle time for each piece of equipment the department will make payment at onehalf the rate established as specified in num.a.num .
idle time is limited to the contractors normal working hours .
idle time is further limited to a maximum of eight hours a day and a maximum of num hours in a numday period .
the payment established is full payment for all equipment costs including the cost of fuel oil lubrication supplies attachments repairs and maintenance of any kind depreciation storage and all incidentals .
furthermore the payment established above is also full payment for all costs including labor and equipment for transporting equipment to on and away from the work site .
if a rate is not established in the blue book for a particular piece of equipment the re will establish a rate for that piece of equipment that is consistent with its cost and use in the industry .
b .
rented equipment .
in the event that the contractor does not own a specific type of equipment and must obtain it by rental submit in writing to the re for approval the need to rent the equipment and the rental rate for that equipment before using it on the work .
the department will make payment for the rental of the equipment as specified in the rental agreements and as evidenced by paid invoices for the time that the equipment is used to accomplish the work plus the cost of moving the equipment to on and away from the work site .
num .
profit .
the department will make payment for profit at the rate of num percent applied on the following num .
total direct labor cost as specified in num .
num .
total labor fringe benefit costs as specified in num .
num .
total material cost as specified in num excluding transportation shipping handling and taxes .
num .
overhead .
the department will make payment for overhead at the rate of num percent applied on the following num .
total direct labor cost as specified in num except for the direct labor cost of any extraordinary supervisory or special employees .
num .
total labor fringe benefit costs as specified in num .
num .
total material cost as specified in num excluding transportation shipping handling and taxes .
num the above num percent allowance is full compensation for the contractors field and home office overhead including but not limited to the following num .
salaries and expenses of executive officers supervising officers or supervising employees except as provided for specific extraordinary operations under num .
num .
salaries and expenses of clerical and administrative employees .
num .
charges for minor equipment such as small tools including shovels picks axes saws bars sledges lanterns jacks cables pails wrenches and other miscellaneous supplies and services and equipment consumed during operations such as saw blades drill bits and milling teeth .
num .
costs for preparing documents and records including reproduction and mailing costs .
num .
subcontractors .
the department will make payment for work performed by subcontractors in the same manner as for the contractor as specified in num .
the department will make payment for markup on subcontracted work at the rate of num percent applied on the total amount of all costs for subcontracted force account work .
the markup on subcontracted work may not exceed num .
num delay damages if the department grants an extension of contract time for excusable compensable delays as specified in num beyond the completion time requirements specified in num the department will make payment for the following num .
nonproductive activity .
the department will make payment for the following nonproductive activities a .
direct labor .
for all necessary nonproductive labor and supervising forepersons of specific operations who must remain on the project during such periods of delay due to collective bargaining contracts or other reasons approved by the re and can not be assigned to other work not affected the department will make payment at the prevailing rate of wage as shown in its certified payrolls .
this includes the necessary labor required for maintenance within the project limits maintenance of traffic control devices maintenance of sesc measures and similar activities resulting from the delay and approved by the re .
this rate is inclusive of all employee contributions to taxes insurance and other benefits .
b .
labor fringe benefits .
the department will make payment for the costs for benefits paid by the contractor on direct labor costs allowed under num.a to or on behalf of workers when required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
c. indirect labor .
the department will make payment for the costs for fica workers compensation insurance federal and state unemployment insurance and other payroll taxes paid by the contractor on direct labor costs allowed under num.a .
d. insurance .
the department will make payment for the actual increased cost for insurance necessarily and directly resulting from the delay as evidenced by certified insurance rates and premiums .
e. equipment .
if as the result of the delay equipment can not be used for any active work and is directed by the re to remain on the work site during the delay the department will make payment as specified in num.a.num .
if as the result of the delay equipment can not be used for any active work and the re determines that it is not necessary for the equipment to remain on the work site the department will make payment for labor and equipment costs to remove the equipment and to return it to the work site at the end of the delay period .
if equipment is required for additional maintenance within the project limits maintenance of traffic control devices maintenance of sesc measures and similar activities resulting from the delay and approved by the re the department will make payment as specified in num. f. contractors field office .
if the contractor has a field office dedicated for the project and if the extension of time is for more than one month the department will make payment for the costs to maintain the contractors field office as evidenced by paid invoices .
these costs may include property rent or leases trailer rentals utility and sanitation services and fixed monthly telephone services required for a field office directly established for the project .
num g. profit .
the department will not make payment for profit .
h. overhead .
the department will make payment for overhead at a rate of num percent of the sum of labor and labor fringe benefits .
this is full payment for all field and home office overhead and general superintendence .
num .
labor escalation .
if as the result of the delay an activity which had a planned latefinish date occurring before a labor rate increase date is required to start after the labor rate increase date the department will make payment for the following a .
increased direct labor .
for all necessary nonsalaried labor and supervising forepersons of the specific activity the department will make payment for the difference between the gross rate of wage paid to the employee as shown in its certified payrolls and the gross rate of wage for the planned period of performance for each and every hour that the employee was actively engaged in such work .
b .
increased labor fringe benefits .
the department will make payment for the increased costs for benefits paid by the contractor on direct labor costs allowed in num.a to or on behalf of workers when required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
c. increased indirect labor costs .
the department will make payment for the costs for fica workers compensation insurance federal and state unemployment insurance and other payroll taxes paid by the contractor on increased direct labor costs allowed under num.a .
d. profit .
the department will make payment for profit at the rate of num percent applied on the following num .
total direct labor cost as specified in num.a .
num .
total labor fringe benefit costs as specified in num.b .
e. overhead .
the department will not make payment for overhead for labor escalation costs .
provide the re with the following documentation for all labor escalation costs num .
a breakdown of costs by item activity and date detailing the labor classification and hours for each .
num .
for each activity an analysis demonstrating that the entire activity was forced to be performed when labor costs were higher than the labor rates in effect on the planned late finish date .
num .
collective bargaining agreement information detailing the increase in direct wages and fringe benefits .
num .
material escalation and storage .
if the delay forces the contractor to purchase material when material costs are higher than the cost of material would have been for the planned latefinish dates of an activity using the material or if the contractor incurs additional storage costs as a result of the delay provide the re with the following documentation num .
a breakdown of costs by item activity and date the material cost was incurred .
num .
cost basis for the material at the time of an activitys late start date as evidenced from documented vendor quotes .
num .
the cost of materials and transportation charges as evidenced by paid invoices .
num .
an analysis demonstrating that the activity or portions of the activity were forced to be performed when material costs were higher than those that were in effect on the planned latefinish date .
for such material escalation and storage the department will make payment as follows a .
increased material costs .
the department will make payment for the difference between the costs of materials as specified in num and the cost of such materials that were available for the planned latestart to latefinish dates of an activity using the material .
however the cost of unacceptable material and cost increases for fuel and asphalt are not eligible for payment .
furthermore the department will not make payment for quantities in excess of the amount necessary for construction except where lesser quantities can not be economically purchased and the excess has no significant reuse value .
if the cost basis of materials is in the opinion of the re excessive the department will establish the cost of the materials from market prices .
num b .
increased storage costs .
obtain the res approval before storing materials .
the department will make payment for additional storage costs as evidenced by certified vendor quotes detailing the terms of the storage agreement and paid invoices .
c. profit .
the department will make payment for profit at the rate of num percent applied on the following num .
total increased material costs as specified in num.a .
num .
total increased storage costs as specified in num.b .
d. overhead .
the department will make payment for overhead at the rate of num percent applied on the following num .
total increased material costs as specified in num.a .
num .
total increased storage costs as specified in num.b .
from the total value of delay damages when the total adjusted contract price cost is greater than the total contract price the department will deduct the amount of num percent applied to the difference between the total adjusted contract price and the total contract price .
if this deduction is greater than the total value of delay damages the department will not deduct the difference from the contractor .
section num control of work num authority of the department num re the re has the authority to direct work and the contractor has an obligation to proceed as directed .
the re has the authority to reject work that is not in conformance with the contract and direct its removal and replacement .
if the contractor fails to promptly remove or replace defective work as directed by the re the re has the authority to direct others to remove or replace the work .
the department has the right to recover costs incurred for such removal and replacement from the contractor .
unless otherwise specified send correspondence with the department to the re .
where correspondence is specified to be directed to persons other than the re send a copy to the re .
ensure that correspondence complies with the following num .
assign every correspondence sent to the department a unique correspondence serial number in the subject line numbered sequentially beginning with contractor correspondence no .
num .
num .
if the correspondence includes a request for information or asks for an interpretation of the contract also assign a unique rfi serial number in the subject line numbered sequentially beginning with rfinum .
num .
if the correspondence constitutes a notice of change as specified in num assign a unique change notice serial number in the subject line numbered sequentially beginning with change notice no .
num .
for subsequent correspondence referring to a change notice or to the events that are the subject of a previous change notice refer in the subject line to the original change notice number .
the re will decide questions that arise concerning the following num .
quality and acceptability of the work .
num .
progress of the work .
num .
interpretation of the contract .
num .
modifications to the contract .
num .
the percentage for partial payments made in estimates as specified in num .
the re has the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part and to suspend estimates as specified in num for failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public for failure to carry out provisions of the contract or for failure to comply with re direction .
the re also has the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part for unsuitable weather for conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or portion of the work or for any other condition or reason deemed to be in the interest of the public .
num num inspection inspectors employed or contracted by the department are authorized to inspect work .
inspection may extend to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector is not authorized to waive the provisions of or modify the contract .
the inspector is not authorized to act as foreman or perform other duties that are the responsibility of the contractor .
the inspector has the authority to reject work subject to confirmation by the re .
each part or detail of the work is subject to inspection by the department .
if the department determines that work requires special inspection testing or approval not specified in the contract the department will perform such inspection testing or approval .
if an agency or entity financially participates in the contract or has jurisdiction over portions of the work the agency or entity also has the right to inspect the work .
such financial participation or inspection does not make an agency or entity a party to the contract .
provide safe access for inspection to all parts of the work .
provide the necessary assistance including but not limited to traffic control lighting and scaffolding in order to allow a complete and detailed inspection .
when the department is within the project limits the department is an invitee of the contractor .
at any time before acceptance the re has the right to direct the contractor to expose specified portions of the finished work .
if the exposed work is unacceptable correct the work and restore the exposed area .
also if subsequent work prevents inspection of the previous work the re has the right to direct the contractor to remove and replace the subsequent work .
the department will not make payment for exposing correcting or restoring work or removing and replacing nonconforming work and any subsequent work that was required to be removed .
the department will make payment and may modify contract time for exposing the work and restoring the area as extra work if all of the following conditions are met num .
the exposed work was acceptable as specified in the contract .
num .
the daily communications as specified in num were given to the department reasonably before the exposed work was originally performed .
num .
the work was not covered by subsequent work if the re directed that such subsequent work not be performed .
the contractor is responsible for carrying out the provisions of the contract at all times and for control of the quality of the work regardless of whether an authorized inspector is present or not .
neither the observations of the re in the administration of the contract nor inspections tests or approvals relieve the contractor from its obligation to perform the work in accordance with the contract .
num responsibilities of the contractor num labor and equipment provide labor and equipment sufficient to prosecute the work as specified in the contract to completion .
ensure that the labor and equipment used to prosecute the work do not cause damage to public or private property .
provide labor and equipment as follows num .
labor .
employ workers that have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the work assigned to them .
do not engage or employ current department employees or workers that would cause the worker to be in violation of n.j.s.a .
numdnum .
upon written direction by the re the contractor will remove contractor employees or subcontractor employees who in the opinion of the re are not performing the work in a proper or skillful manner or are intemperate disorderly or create a hostile environment .
do not allow the removed employee to be re employed to perform any portion of the work without written approval by the re .
num .
equipment .
provide equipment of sufficient size and mechanical condition to meet the requirements of the contract .
ensure that each piece of equipment has an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
do not provide equipment that is owned or operated by firms or individuals suspended or debarred by the department or included in the state of new jersey consolidated debarment report as maintained by the num department of the treasury division of building and construction bureau of contractor prequalification or in the federal governments general services administration document titled list of parties excluded from federal procurement and nonprocurement programs gsa list .
equip construction equipment powered by an internal combustion engine with a properly maintained muffler .
fit airpowered equipment with pneumatic exhaust silencers .
ensure air compressors meet epa noise emission standards .
do not operate stationary equipment powered by an internal combustion engine within num feet of noise sensitive sites without portable noise barriers placed between the equipment and the noise sensitive sites .
noise sensitive sites include but are not limited to residential buildings motels hotels schools churches hospitals nursing homes libraries and public recreation areas .
whenever automaticallycontrolled equipment is specified and a breakdown or malfunction of the automatic controls occur the contractor may operate the equipment manually for the remainder of the day provided such operation produces results that comply with the contract .
repair or replace the equipment so that it is controlled automatically before starting construction operations the next day .
num superintendent provide a competent englishspeaking superintendent and alternate who are experienced in the type of construction being performed and are capable of reading and understanding the contract .
ensure that the superintendent and alternate have the authority to represent the contractor .
ensure that the superintendent and the alternate have the authority to execute orders or direction from the re without delay and to promptly supply materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as necessary .
ensure that the superintendent gives the work the constant attention necessary to ensure its successful prosecution .
ensure that the superintendent cooperates with the re the department inspectors and others .
ensure that the superintendent or the alternate is present at the work site at all times while the work is in progress .
the re has the right to suspend the work if the superintendent or the alternate is not present at the work site .
the department will not modify contract time or make payment for such suspensions .
num subcontracted work consent of the department to allow work to be subcontracted as specified in num does not relieve the contractor of its responsibility for the work nor does it relieve the surety of its obligations under the bond .
the contractor is responsible for the work of subcontractors .
ensure that the work performed by subcontractors conforms to the contract .
the departments consent to subcontract any part of the work shall not be construed as approval of the subcontract or its terms but only as approval of the contractors request to subcontract to its chosen subcontractor .
num fabricators and suppliers if the contractor is not the owner of the place where fabrication preparation or manufacture is in progress the owner thereof is deemed to be the agent of the contractor .
num conformity with contract the contract is comprised of complementary documents that together describe the requirements of the project .
requirements occurring in one are as binding as though occurring in all .
keep one set of plans special provisions addenda change of plan right of way plans standard specifications and standard details within the project limits at all times .
in the event the contractor discovers a discrepancy error omission or ambiguity in the contract or if the contractor has any doubt or question as to the intent or meaning of the contract the contractor must immediately notify the re as specified in num .
do not take advantage of a discrepancy error omission or ambiguity in the contract .
the department will promptly make in writing interpretations or corrections if necessary .
the contractor is not relieved of the obligation to complete work because of a discrepancy error omission or ambiguity .
do not make changes to the work without written direction from the department .
if the re determines that work is not in conformance with the contract or re direction remove and replace the work .
the contractor may request re approval to perform corrective action rather than remove and replace nonconforming num work .
submit a plan detailing a proposed method of performing corrective action to the re for approval .
approval of a corrective action plan does not relieve the contractor from providing work that is in conformance with the contract .
the department will not make payment or modify contract time to correct or replace nonconforming work .
if the re identifies work that while not in full conformance with the contract is reasonably acceptable the re will determine if the work may remain in place .
the re and the contractor will negotiate an appropriate reduction in the contract price .
if the department loses federal funding for the nonconforming work on the basis of permitting nonconforming work to remain the department will not pay for the work permitted to remain in place .
if an appropriate modification can not be negotiated remove and replace or otherwise correct the work .
processing an estimate or making payment as specified in num does not imply or establish that the work is in conformance with the contract .
num plans and specifications perform work in conformity with the lines grades crosssections dimensions material requirements and to the tolerances specified in the contract .
whenever a slope is indicated in the specifications it is given in horizontal to vertical dimensions .
the horizontal is indicated with an h and the vertical is indicated with a v. in case of discrepancy calculated dimensions will govern over scaled dimensions plans will govern over specifications department issued documents will govern over contractorsubmitted documents row plans will govern over plans when setting monuments special provisions will govern over standard specifications and projectspecific plans will govern over standard details .
num working drawings when working drawings are specified submit methods of construction material designations design calculations catalogue cuts illustrations schedules performance charts brochures and other information necessary to construct the work as specified in the contract .
do not submit working drawings that are repetitious or duplicative of items specified or detailed within the contract or that change the plans or specifications .
ensure that working drawing submissions also conform to the department design manuals and other department standards for the proposed work .
after award the department will provide additional formatting information the number of copies required and the designated design unit to which the contractor shall submit working drawings .
submit working drawings on num numinch sheets or num numinch sheets .
submit design calculations required for the working drawings on num numinch paper .
submit num copies of the working drawings to the designated design unit for review with a copy of the transmittal letter to the re .
for railroadcarrying structures submit num additional copies to the designated design unit .
submit an additional copy for each outside testing agency or authority involved in the project .
for num numinch sheets locate the title block in the lower righthand corner of each sheet .
for num numinch sheets provide a cover sheet with the title block .
do not include the title block on subsequent num numinch sheets .
include in the title block the following minimum information num .
route and section or contract number .
num .
name of bridgestructure on structural drawings only num .
municipality and county .
num .
contractors name .
num .
fabricators name if applicable .
num .
data processing number and federal project number if applicable .
num .
title of drawing .
num .
sheet number .
for num numinch sheets include a revision block located to the left and adjacent to the title block and a block for an embossed professional engineers seal on each sheet .
for num numinch sheets include a revision block and a block for an embossed professional engineers seal on the cover sheet .
do not include the revision block and the block for an embossed professional engineers seal on subsequent num numinch sheets .
for num numinch sheets include the structure number shown on the plans for each structure in the upper righthand corner of each sheet .
for num numinch sheets include the structure number shown on the plans for each structure on the cover sheet .
num review sign and submit working drawings in an orderly sequence so as not to delay the work or the work performed by others .
by submitting working drawings for review and approval the contractor certifies that it has verified all field measurements and that all dimensions shown conform to the contract .
the contractor further certifies that catalog numbers field construction criteria materials and other criteria have been coordinated with the requirements of the contract and the work for each submitted working drawing .
working drawing notes regarding materials do not satisfy the requirements for materials approval as specified in num .
the certification or approval of working drawings does not constitute an approval of any materials noted .
the departments certification or approval of working drawings signifies only that the drawings are in general conformance with the contract .
the departments certification or approval of working drawings does not relieve the contractor from responsibility for errors and omissions in the working drawings and their correction .
submit working drawings for certification or approval as specified in table num .
this list is not all inclusive .
table num num working drawing submission category certified approved temporary shielding mechanically stabilized earth mse walls catalog cuts prefabricated modular walls structural steel fabrication catalog cuts related to landscape items erection plans precast concrete arch structures stayinplace forms precast concrete box culverts elastomeric bearings pads change of prestressed concrete strand patterns reinforced elastomeric bearings change in structural steel details precast prestressed concrete beams and piles fabrication temporary sheeting and cofferdams expansion deck joint assembly systems demolition plans bridge drainage high load multirotational hlmr bearings bridge railing and fencing anchorage system isolation bearings sign legends modular expansion joint assembly electrical items not prequalified composite piles sign support structures its system drawings including block diagrams breakaway and nonbreakaway tubular ga sign support posts value engineering plans machinery and electrical items for movable bridges other work shown on the plans as conceptual temporary structures when removal leaves behind a permanent addition to a structure submit working drawings for certification and approval as follows num .
certified working drawings .
for working drawings requiring certification include num blank blocks directly above the title block .
designate one block for design unit certification and designate the other block for the contractors approval stamp .
the department will require num days for review and certification or rejection and return of certified working drawings .
the designated design unit upon receipt of working drawings submitted for certification will review the working drawing for conformance with the contract .
the designated design unit may certify compliance conditionally certify compliance with notation or comment or reject working drawings as submitted .
the designated design unit will sign and stamp the submitted working drawings as follows num .
certified for certification without condition .
num .
certified as noted for conditional certification .
num .
revise and resubmit for rejection or noncertification .
for submitted working drawings that are stamped revise and resubmit the designated design unit will return the submitted working drawings directly to the contractor with a copy to the re .
make the required revisions corrections and additions and otherwise comply with the directions of the designated design unit .
ensure that revisions corrections additions and other changes that were not directed are num emphasized on the working drawings .
promptly resubmit the specified number of copies to the designated design unit .
only resubmit the sheets stamped revise and resubmit and other sheets that are revised with corrections additions and other changes that were not directed .
do not perform work or order materials relating to the submitted working drawings before the designated design unit stamps the working drawings certified or certified as noted .
for the working drawings stamped certified as noted submit to the re the revised working drawings incorporating or satisfying the conditions of the certification in the designated design units notes or comments .
ensure that the revised working drawings are submitted to the re within num days of receipt of the conditional certification .
num .
approved working drawings .
for working drawings requiring approval include num blank blocks directly above the title block .
designate one block for design unit recommendation for approval designate the second block for the departments approval and designate the third block for the contractors approval stamp .
the department will require num days for review and approval or rejection and return of working drawings .
the designated design unit upon receipt of working drawing submitted for approval will review the working drawing for conformance with the contract and the design concept of the project .
the designated design unit may recommend approval to the department or may reject working drawings as submitted .
the designated design unit will sign and stamp the submitted working drawings as follows num .
recommended for approval for submission to the department .
num .
revise and resubmit for rejection or nonapproval .
when the designated design unit signs and stamps the working drawings recommended for approval the designated design unit will submit the working drawing to the department for approval .
the department will sign and stamp the submitted working drawings as follows num .
approved for approval .
num .
revise and resubmit for rejection or nonapproval .
for submitted working drawings that are stamped revise and resubmit the designated design unit or department will return the submitted working drawings directly to the contractor with a copy to the re .
make the required revisions corrections and additions and otherwise comply with the directions of the designated design unit or department .
ensure that revisions corrections additions and other changes that were not directed are emphasized on the working drawings .
promptly resubmit the specified number of copies to the designated design unit .
only resubmit the sheets stamped revise and resubmit and other sheets that are revised with corrections additions and other changes that were not directed .
do not perform work or order materials relating to the submitted working drawings before the department stamps the working drawings approved .
after the submitted working drawings have been stamped certified certified as noted or approved submit the final drawings on nummil minimum polyester film to the re at least num days before completion .
also submit the specified number of copies on bond .
ensure that lines and lettering are opaque and of sufficient height and width so that legible num numinch reductions may be made .
include the contractors approval stamp containing the word approved and the contractors original signature and date .
do not deviate from the approved certified or conditionally certified working drawings without obtaining prior written approval from the re .
ensure future revisions to the original tracing have the date within the approval stamp updated with each revision to verify that the revision was reviewed and approved by the contractor .
num cooperation with others at any time during the contract the department has the right to procure permit and have work performed by others on or near the project .
the department will provide available information for work to be performed by others .
conduct work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress of the work being performed by others .
the contractor assumes the positive obligation of cooperating with and coordinating its activities with the work done by others .
if there is a difference of opinion regarding the rights of the contractor and others doing work the re will decide the rights of the various parties involved .
num num cooperation with utilities num working in the vicinity of utilities a .
initial notice .
for the utilities specified in the special provisions at least num days before beginning construction operations submit notice to each utility with a copy to the re that includes the following num .
name and location of the project .
num .
name and contact information of the contractor and superintendent .
num .
portion of the approved preliminary schedule or baseline schedule that affects the utility .
if the work requires or causes the contractor to enter railroad row obtain the regulations from the railroad including fouling parameters before beginning construction operations .
b .
locating existing facilities .
before performing construction operations obtain the location of utilities and department electrical and its facilities as follows num .
notify the states one call system num to obtain the location of public utilities .
num .
for the departments fiber optic network submit a traffic operations markout form to the traffic operations location specified in the special provisions .
obtain and complete the form as specified on the departments website .
the department will complete the markout within num days after traffic operations receives the form .
provide the re a copy of the form and maintain the markout until construction operations in the vicinity of the departments fiber optic network are completed .
num .
for the departments electrical facilities and other its facilities obtain the asbuilt information as specified in num and contact the department as specified in the special provisions .
at least num days before excavating test pits as specified in num to determine utility locations contact each affected utility .
c. protection of utilities .
if required by the utility provide the required advance notice before beginning the work within the vicinity of the utility .
if utilities need to be supported or protected submit a plan to the utility for approval that includes the method of support or protection to provide for uninterrupted service .
at least num days before beginning the work provide a copy of the plan and the utilitys approval to the re .
protect and support utilities according to the approved plan .
protect and support existing department electrical and its facilities and ensure that there is no interruption of service .
at least num days before beginning the work submit a plan to the re for approval showing the method of support and protection .
when high voltage lines are within the project limits comply with n.j.s.a .
num to n.j.s.a .
num num cfr num and n.j.a.c .
num .
obtain written approval from the department of labor office of safety compliance and the respective utilities for construction operations that do not provide the minimum clearances under these regulations .
before beginning work within the railroad row or on railroad facilities obtain the railroads written approval for access the method of construction and the schedule of the work .
provide a copy of the submittal and approval to the re .
if the contractor wants to use crossings other than those indicated in the contract obtain written approval from the railroad .
at least num days before beginning the work provide the re with a copy of the approval .
when working in proximity of the railroad do not interfere with the continuity of railroad operations .
the department will provide the estimated railroad train schedules in the special provisions .
ensure that construction operations do not affect the tracks appurtenances and other property of the railroad .
do not store or operate equipment or material within the fouling distance of railroad facilities without written approval from the railroad .
provide the re a copy of the approval at least num days before beginning the work .
d. access .
provide utilities or their agents access to their facilities at all times including the opportunity to monitor the work .
e. damage .
if the contractor damages a utility including service connections the contractor shall immediately notify the affected utility and the re .
num num work performed by utilities the contractor is responsible for coordinating work performed by utilities and is responsible for delays and costs resulting from failure to coordinate .
provide a written request to each utility in the time specified for the advance notice requirements specified in the special provisions .
include the following num .
name and location of the project .
num .
name and contact information of the contractor and superintendent .
num .
portion of the approved preliminary schedule or baseline schedule that affects the utility .
provide a copy of the notice and response to the re .
where utilities jointly use poles or duct banks the utilities will perform the work sequentially .
ensure that the work site is in a condition that allows the utility to perform its work at the scheduled time .
if the contractor fails to provide the work site at the scheduled time the contractor is responsible for the resulting delays and costs to the project .
if the contractor causes the utility to incur additional costs or delays the utility without prior written approval of the re the contractor is responsible for these costs and delays .
the department has the right to recover the cost of damages from the contractor .
immediately notify the re of failure by the utility to respond or complete its work as specified in the special provisions .
num environmental protection perform the work in compliance with environmental requirements of the contract and the terms and conditions of permits grants licenses authorizations certifications and other approvals procured for the work .
maintain a copy of departmentobtained permits grants licenses authorizations certifications and other approvals within the project limits .
keep a copy of contractorobtained permits grants licenses authorizations certifications and other approvals for the work within the project limits .
obtain all permits grants licenses authorizations and other approvals for offsite disposal storage and borrow locations .
these may include but are not limited to wetlands floodplains regulated waste threatened and endangered species and historic properties archeological sites historic buildings and historic districts .
conduct the studies required to obtain the necessary environmental clearances permits grants licenses authorizations and other approvals for offsite disposal storage and borrow locations .
provide the re a copy of all of the permits grants licenses authorizations and other approvals .
the departments authority to certify sesc plans does not include offproject borrow pits disposal sites or storage areas that the contractor uses or establishes to accomplish the work of the project .
if the land disturbance for off project work is num square yards or greater provide the re with a copy of the sesc plan certified by the soil conservation district according to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
do not use treated timber products in shellfish areas and other environmentally sensitive areas such as but not limited to essential fish habitat endangered or threatened species habitat category one waters troutassociated waters and wetlands .
use nonpolluting materials such as fiberglass composites in these areas .
before using treated timber products in areas other than those specified in the contract obtain the departments approval .
take the necessary precautions to prevent pollution caused by construction operations of land air waterbodies wetlands and groundwater within and beyond project limits .
employ methods and controls to minimize noise caused by construction operations .
before beginning construction operations ensure that sesc methods are in place and functioning as specified in num .
also comply with the following num .
historical and archeological sites .
ensure that locations eligible for or listed on the state or national registers of historic places are not used for disposing storing or obtaining borrow excavation .
for information about historical places consult the new jersey department of environmental protection historic preservation office website at www.state.nj.usdephponumidentifynrsr.htm .
when prehistoric or historic artifacts or remains are encountered immediately cease construction operations in that area and notify the re .
do not resume construction operations until the department provides direction .
num num .
forests .
when performing work within or adjacent to state or national forests or parks comply with the regulations of the state fire warden state division of parks and forestry or other authority having jurisdiction .
take reasonable precautions to prevent forest fires caused by construction operations and also other precautions requested by forestry officials .
if a wild fire occurs immediately notify a forestry official and the re of the location and extent of the fire .
num .
navigable waters .
if work is required over on or adjacent to navigable waters do not interfere with the free navigation of the waterways and ensure that the existing navigable depths are not reduced except as allowed by permits issued for the project .
before beginning work in or over a navigable waterway for which a coast guard permit has been issued notify the coast guard and other agencies specified by permit condition .
num .
hazardous material .
if evidence of hazardous material not specified in the contract is discovered immediately cease construction operations and notify the re .
do not resume construction operations in that area until the department provides direction .
num load restrictions do not haul equipment or loads whose weight may damage structures roadways or construction .
the re may limit hauling of materials over the pavement structure .
when hauling outside of the project limits do not exceed legal load limits unless a permit is obtained from the new jersey motor vehicle commission .
if the contractor is provided a certified weigh ticket by the material supplier submit a copy of the certified weigh ticket to the re .
if a certified weigh ticket is not provided by the material supplier and when the contractor will haul more than num cubic yards of material for that item to or from the project limits submit to the re a list of the trucks to be used for the operation .
include the certified tare weight of the truck license plate number and the motor vehicle classification .
at least num days before starting hauling provide the re notice when hauling will begin .
provide to the re a certified weigh ticket indicating the gross weight for the first load for each truck .
if the re finds that trucks are in violation of the legal weight limits under n.j.s.a .
num the re has the right to reject that load of material .
the re has the right to suspend the work for repeated violations until the condition is corrected .
num use of explosives when using explosives conform to n.j.s.a .
numanum et seq .
and n.j.a.c .
num .
when storing explosives within the project limits store safely under lock and key at a location approved by the re .
clearly mark the storage places as dangerous explosives .
ensure that the storing and handling of explosives and highly inflammable materials conform to the regulations of the new jersey department of labor and workforce development safety compliance unit and local regulations .
submit a blasting plan as specified in num.a.num.a .
attend a preblasting meeting scheduled by the re with the new jersey department of labor and workforce development safety compliance unit .
do not blast before the preblasting meeting and obtaining re approval .
when using explosives for the prosecution of the work exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property including work completed under the contract .
section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements ensure that materials furnished for the project are new unless otherwise specified in the contract .
use materials that conform to the requirements of the contract .
when required by the contract use only products and suppliers listed on the qpl .
use sources of materials that have been approved by the department on a materials questionnaire as specified in num .
num within num hours of receiving a shipment of material notify the re of the type size quantity and location of the material .
within num days of the receipt of material provide the re with the delivery ticket indicating the project contractor material supplier date shipped material description quantity item and item number .
do not change the source brand or type of material from that which has been approved for use without the consent of the department as specified in num .
num departmentfurnished material if the department furnishes materials the department will deliver or make the materials available at the points specified in the special provisions .
after the contractor picks up or takes possession of departmentfurnished material submit written notice to the department certifying that the material was received inspected and accepted by the contractor .
after the notice is submitted the contractor is responsible for the material .
the department has the right to recover costs from the contractor for losses deficiencies or damage to materials that occur after receipt by the contractor .
the department may require the contractor to replace at no cost to the department the lost deficient or damaged material with material that is acceptable to the department .
num foreign materials comply with the appropriate statutes and regulations concerning the use of foreign materials as follows num .
wholly statefunded projects .
comply with n.j.s.a .
num and n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
which prohibits the use by the contractor or subcontractors of farm products or materials produced or manufactured outside of the united states on public work .
the department may allow exceptions if its enforcement would be inconsistent with the public interest where the cost of enforcing the prohibition would be unreasonable or where the material in question is not of a class or kind mined produced or manufactured in the united states .
num .
federal aid projects .
comply with the federal statutes and regulations that establish the buy america requirements applicable to the project .
these federal requirements which are contained in num cfr num and num cfr num mandate among other things that manufacturing processes for iron and steel materials and all iron and steel coatings must be performed in the united states .
if the use of foreign materials is allowed the department may require the contractor to deliver the material to a departmentapproved site for sampling inspection and testing .
do not use or incorporate the foreign material into the work before the department approves the material .
if the department finds the contractor failed to comply with the federal or state provisions regarding foreign materials the department may require the unapproved foreign material be removed and replaced with acceptable material .
if the department decides not to remove the unapproved foreign material the department will not make payment for the item incorporating unapproved foreign material and will make the findings including the contractors name public .
num materials questionnaire at least num days before shipment of a material and at least num days before fabrication of structural steel precast concrete and prestressed concrete items notify the re of the proposed source of materials using the materials questionnaire form provided by the department .
for soil aggregate and dense graded aggregate dga material submit a copy of recently performed test results for washed gradation test proctor test and other tests as specified in num for the source with the materials questionnaire .
for its systems as specified in section num obtain approval of system working drawings before submitting the materials on the materials questionnaire .
the department will approve the source of material based on conformance of the source or material with the requirements of the contract .
if the material is required by the contract to be listed on the qpl the department will base approval on the qpl .
a material is not approved for use solely because the product is on the qpl the contractor must submit the material for approval .
do not order fabricate or procure materials before obtaining material source approval by the department .
approval by the me of a proposed source of aggregate materials does not constitute approval of materials delivered to the project limits from that source but is permission to select and use materials from that source only so long as they conform to the specifications .
as the work progresses ensure that materials selected from approved sources continue to conform to the specifications .
num the department will not approve material from firms and individuals suspended or debarred by the department included in the state of new jersey consolidated debarment report as maintained by the department of the treasury division of building and construction bureau of contractor prequalification or in the federal governments general services administration document titled list of parties excluded from federal procurement and nonprocurement programs gsa list .
num materials inspections tests and samples all materials being used are subject to inspection and testing at any time before acceptance .
for materials that are stored locate the materials so that the department may promptly and conveniently inspect them .
the departments test results are the official test results for acceptance or rejection of materials .
the department will base acceptance or rejection on acceptance testing results or certifications of compliance for the various materials as specified in the respective methods of test or in the subsections applicable to that particular material or work .
after inspection store materials to ensure the preservation of their quality .
the department has the right to reinspect or retest materials regardless of previous approvals .
the department may require additional samples to determine the quality and suitability of materials for their intended uses .
the provisions in section num do not limit the rights of the department to order special inspections or tests as specified in num .
submit to the re a request for hma plant and field inspection concrete plant and field inspection and inplace testing for soil aggregate by num p.m. of the day before the requested inspection or by num p.m. of the previous friday for inspections requested for a monday .
with the request provide the re with the locations estimated quantities and estimated start times for each type of material .
if the start time for a material delivery is delayed by more than num hours the department has the right to cancel the request and require the contractor to submit a new request .
the department will not pay for unapproved materials and the contractor shall remove and replace unapproved materials at no cost to the department .
when the department performs testing on materials the department will bear the expense of the testing except as otherwise specified .
for aggregates that do not meet the requirements of the contract for gradation or density or are not used in the work the department has the right to charge the contractor for the cost of sampling and testing at departmental rates .
the department will charge num per failing sample tested for gradation and num per failing lot or sublot tested for density .
num plant inspection the me has the right to inspect the materials at the source and has the right to inspect manufacturing plants periodically for compliance with specified manufacturing methods .
the me may obtain material samples for laboratory testing for compliance with materials quality requirements at the plant or may use plant inspection as the basis for the acceptability of manufactured materials .
in the event plant inspection is undertaken meet the following conditions num .
ensure that the me has the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the producer .
num .
ensure that the me has full access at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
num .
if required for the use of the me provide office space located conveniently in or near the plant .
num .
ensure that adequate safety measures for the me are provided and maintained .
the department reserves the right to retest or reinspect materials that have been approved at the source of supply after they have been delivered and to reject materials which when retested or reinspected do not meet the requirements of the contract .
num certification of compliance the department will accept materials as specified on the basis of certificates of compliance stating that the materials or assemblies fully comply with the requirements of the contract .
num the department has the right to sample and test materials or assemblies accepted on the basis of certificates of compliance at any time .
the department will reject materials or assemblies whether in place or not if found not to be in conformance with the contract requirements .
ensure that num copies of the manufacturers certificates of compliance are provided with each delivery of materials components and manufactured items that are accepted by certification .
retain num copy and submit num copies to the re .
with the certificate of compliance provide a transmittal identifying the item for which it is submitted .
ensure that certificates of compliance contain the following information num .
project name .
num .
name of the prime contractor .
num .
material description .
num .
quantity of material represented by the certificate .
num .
means of identifying the consignment such as label marking and seal number .
num .
date and method of shipment .
num .
a statement that the material conforms to the contract material requirements and that representative samples have been sampled and tested .
num .
if the submission is for an assembly of materials a statement that the assembly conforms to the contract .
num .
signature of a person having legal authority to bind the supplier .
num .
signature attested to by a notary public or other properly authorized person .
the department will not make payment for work for which material is accepted on the basis of a certificate of compliance until the re has received the required certificate of compliance and inspected and accepted the material or assembly .
num unacceptable material materials whether in place or not that do not conform to the requirements of the contract are considered unacceptable .
the department will reject unacceptable materials .
immediately remove rejected materials unless approved by the re as specified in num .
do not use rejected material for which the defects have been corrected until approval has been given by the re .
num substitutes for proprietary items if material or equipment is specified in the contract by using the name of a proprietary item or the name of a particular supplier the contractor may propose a substitute except when the special provisions state that no substitution is permitted .
to request approval for using a substitute item of material or equipment submit a written request to the re including the following num .
certification that the proposed substitute performs the functions and achieves the results called for by the design is similar and of equal substance to that specified and is suited to the same use as that specified .
num .
details or catalogue cut sheets on the material properties of the substitute .
num .
a statement that the evaluation and approval of the proposed substitute does not hinder the contractors ability to complete the contract as specified in num .
num .
a statement that the proposed substitute for use in the work does not change or modify the contract .
num .
difference between the proposed substitute from that specified .
num .
manufacturers recommendations maintenance requirements and repair or replacement requirements for the substitute .
submit additional information as requested by the department to assist the departments evaluation .
the department will evaluate the request and notify the contractor in writing of approval or rejection of the proposed substitute .
the department has the right to require the contractor to provide at no cost to the department a special performance guarantee or other bond with respect to a substitute .
if during the use of the substitute material or equipment the re determines that the work produced is not in conformance with the contract immediately discontinue the use of the substitute and complete the remaining work with the specified material or equipment .
remove the deficient work and replace it or take corrective action as directed by the re .
the department will not make payment or modify contract time to remove and replace work resulting from an authorized substitution .
num section num legal relations num legal jurisdiction num applicable law this contract shall be construed and governed by the constitution and laws of the state .
it is the contractors responsibility to be aware of and comply with federal state and local laws ordinances rules and regulations and orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction or authority that affect those engaged or employed on the work or that affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor shall observe and comply with and ensure the contractors agents and employees observe and comply with laws ordinances rules regulations orders and decrees .
defend and indemnify the state and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor or the contractors agents or employees subcontractors of any tier or suppliers .
if discrepancies or inconsistencies are discovered between any document of the contract and any law ordinance regulation order or decree immediately notify the re in writing .
num permits licenses and approvals procure permits grants licenses authorizations certifications and other approvals for the prosecution of the work except where the department has procured such permits grants licenses authorizations certifications and other approvals .
for existing permits previously obtained by the department submit proposed modifications to the permits to the department for approval before submitting them to the regulatory agencies having jurisdiction and interest .
after receiving the departments approval obtain the necessary approvals from the appropriate regulatory agencies .
do not begin work covered by the proposed permit modification until the necessary approvals are obtained from the designated regulatory agencies .
before beginning the work affected by the modification provide a copy of the approval authorization or modification to the re .
keep copies of current permits grants licenses authorizations certifications other approvals and modifications within the project limits .
clearly post a copy of each so that it is publicly available for inspection .
before beginning work that requires contractorprocured permits grants licenses authorizations certifications or other approvals provide a copy to the re .
if the contractor is not in compliance with required permits grants licenses authorizations certifications or other approvals the contractor shall take corrective actions immediately .
the re has the right to suspend the work as specified in num until the contractor is in full compliance .
provide to the re whenever requested documentation pertaining to the noncompliance and related corrective actions taken .
the department will not make payment for or modify contract time for performing corrective and remedial work required to bring the contractor into compliance .
the contractor is responsible to pay fines levied against the contractor its agents employees and subcontractors that arise out of or are alleged to arise out of noncompliance with permits grants licenses authorizations certifications or other approvals .
the department will recover from the contractor costs due to fines levied against the department that arise out of or are alleged to arise out of noncompliance by the contractor its agents employees and subcontractors with permits grants licenses authorizations certifications or other approvals .
the department may hold the contractor responsible for all engineering inspection and administration costs including overhead incurred as a result of the contractors noncompliance .
num sovereign immunity the department by entering into this contract does not waive its sovereign immunity except as provided under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the rights or benefits provided the contractor in this contract that exceed those provided under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
are contractual in nature and do not expand the waiver of sovereign immunity provided under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num discrimination in employment on public works pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num the contractor agrees that in the hiring of persons for the performance of work under the contract or any subcontract or for the procurement manufacture assembling or furnishing of materials equipment num supplies or services to be acquired under the contract the contractor subcontractor or any person acting on their behalf shall not discriminate against any person who is qualified and available to perform the work to which the employment relates by reason of race creed color national origin age ancestry marital status gender or affectional or sexual orientation .
the contractor subcontractor or any person acting on their behalf shall not in any manner discriminate against or intimidate any employee engaged in the performance of the work under the contract or any subcontract hereunder or engaged in the procurement manufacture assembling or furnishing of any such materials equipment supplies or services to be acquired under such contract by reason of race creed color national origin age ancestry marital status gender or affectional or sexual orientation .
the department has the right to deduct a penalty of num for each person for each day that the person is discriminated against or intimidated in violation of the provisions of the contract pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num .
the department has the right to terminate the contract and any monies due the contractor under the contract may be forfeited for any violation of this subsection occurring after notice to the contractor from the department of any prior violation of this subsection .
num affirmative action disadvantaged business enterprises or emerging small business enterprise it is the public policy of the state and of the united states that no individual group firm or corporation working on or seeking to work on a public works project should be discriminated against on the basis of race creed color national origin age ancestry nationality marital or domestic partnership status gender disability liability for military service affectional or sexual orientation atypical cellular or blood trait or genetic information including the refusal to submit to genetic testing .
the department has developed affirmative action disadvantaged business enterprise or emerging small business enterprise programs to implement this policy and the regulations and requirements applicable to the contract are contained in the special provisions .
the department will resolve conflicts between these regulations and requirements and the other provisions of the contract to further the above stated public policy .
num new jersey contractual liability act the contractor agrees to be responsible for compliance with n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the contract does not in any way waive or amend the contractors duties under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the various notice provisions specified in the contract are contractual obligations that are in addition to the contractors notice obligations under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the contractor must submit a fully completed contractual notice form in order to comply with the notice requirements of n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the contractor acknowledges that it will be forever barred from recovering against the state if it fails to give timely notice in accordance with n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
on the contractual notice form of any happening of an event thing or occurrence or of an act or failure to act by the department and that the contractor is solely responsible for complying with the various notice requirements and the timeliness of a claim as set forth under n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
for purposes of determining the date of completion of the contract pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num completion of the contract occurs on the date that the contractor provides written notice to the department of acceptance or conditional acceptance of the proposed final certificate or the numth day after the department issues the proposed final certificate whichever event occur first .
subcontractors suppliers manufacturers and fabricators are barred from making claims against the department as a matter of law by n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num limitations of liability regarding any claim arising from a breach of contract tort including negligence or otherwise the state will not be liable to the contractor for any special consequential incidental or penal damages including but not limited to loss of profit or revenues loss of rental value for contractorowned equipment damages to associated equipment cost of capital or interest except as permitted by n.j.s.a .
num .
num num personal liability of public officials there shall be no liability upon the department or authorized representatives of the department either personally or as officials of the state in carrying out any of the provisions of the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the state .
similarly for projects on county or local roads there shall be no liability either personally or in an official capacity upon the board of chosen freeholders of the county or counties or upon the governing body of the municipality or municipalities within the project limits .
num assignment do not assign the performance of the contract .
do not transfer or assign to any party any contract funds due or to become due or claims of any nature the contractor has against the department without obtaining the written approval of the department .
the department by sole discretion may grant or deny such approval .
num non waiver provisions of the contract do not waive other provisions of the contract unless specifically stated .
if the department waives a provision of the contract for a particular occurrence this waiver does not constitute a continued waiver by the department of that provision or any other provision of the contract .
num independent contractor the relationship of the contractor to the state is that of an independent contractor and the contractor shall conduct itself consistent with such status .
it shall neither hold itself out as nor claim to be an officer or employee of the department by reason hereof .
do not make a claim demand or application to or for the rights or privileges applicable to an officer or employee of the department including but not limited to workers compensation insurance unemployment insurance benefits social security coverage or retirement membership or credit .
num nonthird party beneficiary clause no provision of the contract is intended to make the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary or to authorize anyone not a party to the contract to maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the terms or provisions of the contract .
it is the further intent of the department and the contractor in executing the contract that no individual firm corporation or any combination thereof that supplies materials labor services or equipment to the contractor for the performance of the work becomes thereby a third party beneficiary of the contract .
the department and the contractor understand that such individual firm corporation or combination thereof has no right to bring an action in the courts of this state against the department by virtue of this lack of standing and also by virtue of the provisions of n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
which allows suit against the state in contract only on the basis of express contracts or contracts implied in fact .
num risks assumed by the contractor the contractor shall take every precaution as allowed by the contract against injury or damage to any part of the project by the action of the elements the traveling public vandalism or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor can not impute the negligence of consultants other contractors utilities other than the department other public entities persons or entities to the department .
the contractor assumes the following distinct and several risks whether they arise from acts or omissions whether negligent or not and whether such risks are within or beyond the control of the contractor as specified in num to num .
excepted from this assumption of risks are only those risks that arise from solely affirmative acts by the state subsequent to the execution of the contract with actual and willful intent to cause loss damage or injury .
the risks are assumed by the contractor as follows num num .
damage caused by the contractor .
the contractor bears the risk of all loss or damage caused by the contractor the contractors agents or employees subcontractors of any tier suppliers or agents making deliveries .
protect and preserve public and private property from damage or loss in the prosecution of the work .
promptly repair or replace such damage or loss as directed by the re .
the department will not make payment or modify contract time for such repair or replacement .
if the contractor damages the departments fiber optic network the contractor shall immediately notify the re and the traffic operations center .
the contractor shall include in the notification if the contractor shall perform the repairs or if it is necessary for the department to perform the repairs .
if the contractor can not complete the repairs in the time specified by the re the department has the right to repair the damage and recover the cost for the repair from the contractor .
the department will assess liquidated damages for lost services at the rate of num per hour .
num .
risks of loss or damage to the construction .
until acceptance the contractor bears the risk of all loss or damage to materials and to construction performed under the contract .
promptly repair or replace such damage or loss .
the department will not make payment or modify contract time for repairing or replacing loss or damage .
the contractor shall not bear such risk of loss or damage for the repair or replacement of any permanent element of work if the element of the work damaged is completed and is serving its intended function is subsequently damaged by a public traffic accident and the contractor provides the re satisfactory evidence that such damage was caused by a public traffic accident .
satisfactory evidence is limited to num .
accident reports filed with the new jersey motor vehicle commission .
num .
documents supporting the damage issued by police agencies or insurance companies .
num .
statements by reliable unbiased eye witnesses .
num .
identification of the vehicle involved in the accident .
the contractor shall not bear the risk of loss or damage that arises from acts of war floods tidal waves earthquakes cyclones tornadoes hurricanes or other cataclysmic natural phenomenon unless such loss or damage is covered by the contractors insurance .
num .
risks of claims on account of injury loss or damage .
the contractor bears the risk of claims just or unjust by third persons made against the contractor or the state on account of injuries including wrongful death loss or damage of any kind whatsoever arising or alleged to arise out of or in connection with the performance of the work .
the risk of claims whether or not actually caused by or resulting from the performance of the work or out of or in connection with the contractors operations or presence at or within the project limits whether such claims are made and whether such injuries loss and damages are sustained applies at any time both before and after acceptance .
num .
risks of loss to property of those performing the work .
the contractor bears the risk of loss or damage to any property of the contractor and of claims made against the contractor or the state for loss or damage to any property of subcontractors workers and others performing the work and to lessors .
said risk occurs at any time before removal of such property from the project limits the states row or any other property procured by the contractor for the project .
defend and indemnify the state from any and all claims or alleged claims described in num and num and for all expense incurred by the state in the defense including legal and related costs settlement or satisfaction thereof .
if so directed by the state the contractor shall at its own expense defend against such claims in which event it shall not without obtaining express advance permission from the state raise any defense involving in any way jurisdiction of the tribunal immunity of the state governmental nature of the state or the provisions of any statutes respecting suits against the state .
the provisions of this subsection are also for the benefit of the state its agents officers and employees so that they have all the rights that they would have under this subsection if they were named at each place above at which the state is named including a direct right of action against the contractor to enforce the foregoing indemnity except however that the state may at any time in its sole discretion and without liability on its part cancel the benefit conferred on any of them by this subsection whether or not the occasion for invoking such benefit has already arisen at the time of such cancellation .
num except as specified in num acceptance the final certificate or termination does not release the contractor from its obligations under this subsection .
the enumeration in this subsection or elsewhere in this contract of particular risks assumed by the contractor or of particular claims for which it is responsible shall not be deemed num .
to limit the effect of the provisions of this subsection or of any other provision of the contract relating to such risks or claims or num .
to imply that the contractor assumes or is responsible for risks or claims only of the type enumerated in this subsection or num .
to limit the risks that the contractor would assume or the claims for which the contractor would be responsible in the absence of such enumerations .
the contractor expressly understands and agrees that any insurance protection required by the contract or otherwise provided by the contractor in no way limits the contractors responsibility to defend and indemnify the state .
such insurance requirements are designed to provide greater assurance to the state that the contractor is financially able to discharge its obligations under this subsection and as to the risks assumed elsewhere in the contract and are not in any way construed as a limitation on the nature and extent of such obligations .
num the contractual claim resolution process num satisfying the notice requirements if the contractor has provided the re notice of change as specified in num the re and the contractor may negotiate a resolution even if the full impact has not been determined .
if a notice of change has not been resolved the contractor may initiate the contractual claims resolution process .
to initiate the contractual claims resolution process submit to the re a contractual notice form for the claim .
at a minimum include the following information with the contractual notice form num .
a detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items affected by the claim .
num .
the date on which facts arose that gave rise to the claim .
num .
a copy of notice given to the department pursuant to any other subsection of the contract that relates to the matter giving rise to the claim .
num .
the name function and activity of each individual involved in or knowledgeable about the claim .
num .
the specific provisions of the contract that support the claim and a statement of the reasons why the provisions support the claim .
num .
a detailed factual statement of the actions taken by the contractor to mitigate the claim .
num .
if the claim relates to a decision of the department that the contract leaves to the departments discretion or as to which the contract provides that the departments decision is final the contractor shall set out in detail the facts supporting its contention that the decision of the department was fraudulent arbitrary or capricious .
num .
the identification of documents and the substance of communications relating to such claim .
num .
if an extension of contract time is sought the specific days sought and the basis for the claim supported by the contractors approved baseline progress schedule and updates as well as relevant fragnets .
include a time impact evaluation of the delay as specified in num.c .
num .
if additional payment is sought provide a breakdown of the amount sought in the manner specified in num or other calculations and basis of the amount sought .
num .
if additional payment is sought the contractor may provide the bid documents when escrowed with an escrow custody agent as specified in num .
num .
the contractor must state in writing that all documentation in support of the claim has been provided to the department and that the contractor has requested that the review process begin .
if the department determines that the submitted contractual notice form does not provide sufficient information the department will consider the contractual notice form incomplete for the purpose of processing the claim under the contractual claim resolution process and the department will notify the contractor of the missing components required to start the process .
the department will not initiate formal discussions or meetings concerning a claim submitted on an incomplete contractual notice form .
the department will review alleged liability and damages at the same time .
num num steps the department will not process or review claims submitted by a subcontractor or supplier at any tier .
claims submitted by the contractor are eligible only for payment when there is an obligation or liability on the part of the contractor and shall not be a pass through of a claim by a subcontractor or by a supplier .
a contractor may initiate the contractual claims resolution process up to num days after the issuance of the proposed final certificate .
the contractual claims resolution process may continue beyond the completion of the contract as defined in num however the contractual claims resolution process will not extend any statute of limitation that may apply to a claim .
the contractual claims resolution process is sequential in nature and is composed of the following steps num .
step i review by the re .
num .
step ii review by the dispute review board .
num .
step iii review by the claims committee .
num .
step iv nonbinding mediation .
the department will not allow a claim to proceed to the next level of review unless and until the claim has been reviewed at the preceding step .
additionally the department will not allow the claim to proceed to the next level until the contractor indicates in writing that the decision of the previous step is unacceptable and requests that the claim be forwarded to the next step within the specified timeframe .
if during any step in the process a claim is resolved the contractor must sign an unconditional release provided by the department as to all matters arising from the claim .
the contractor is limited to the documentation provided to the department at the beginning of step i throughout all steps of the contractual claims resolution process .
submission of additional information by the contractor at any subsequent step is cause for the claim to be returned by the department to step i for review .
the department will inform the contractor in writing if the claim is returned to step i .
if a claim is returned it must proceed through all completed steps in the process again .
the department will not pay interest on the amount of any payment made in resolution or settlement of a claim resolved through the contractual claims resolution process .
when the value of the claim submitted by the contractor is num or less the step ii review will be the final step in the contractual claims resolution process .
for such claims the decision of the dispute review board is final and terminates the contractual claims resolution process .
where there has been a determination at step i or step ii that the contract does not provide a basis for the claim or that the contractor has failed to timely submit a notice of claim pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the department reserves the right to terminate the contractual claims resolution process at the end of step ii .
for such claims the secretary of the department claims committee will provide the contractor with the reasons for the termination of the contractual claims resolution process and the rejection of the claim .
the review of a claim at any step does not constitute a waiver by the department of its defenses that the contract does not provide a basis for the claim or that the contractor failed to timely submit a notice of claim pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
when the contractual claims resolution process is terminated for a claim as a result of the contractors act or failure to act the contractor waives its rights to further participation in the contractual claims resolution process for that claim .
the contractual claims resolution process is as follows num .
step i re .
the re will render a written decision regarding the claim presented by the contractor within num days after the re has determined that sufficient information was provided by the contractor on the contractual notice form as specified in num .
this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
within num days of the receipt of the decision by the re the contractor shall either accept or reject the decision in writing or upon failure to accept or reject the decision in writing the department will terminate the contractual claims resolution process .
if the contractor rejects the decision and intends to proceed to a step ii review the contractor must request a step ii review within num days of receipt of the res decision .
num .
step ii dispute review board drb .
the drb is comprised of num delegated members of the department .
num if the contractor provides a timely written rejection of the res decision and a timely request to forward the claim to step ii the re will forward the claim and supporting information previously submitted by the contractor to the drb within num days of receipt of the contractors request to forward the claim to the next step .
the drb will schedule and hold a meeting to review the claim with the contractor within num days of receipt of the claim information from the re .
this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
the drb will issue a written decision regarding the claim within num days of the meeting .
within num days of the receipt of the decision by the drb the contractor shall either accept or reject the decision in writing or upon failure to accept or reject the decision in writing the department will terminate the contractual claims resolution process .
if the contractor rejects the decision and intends to proceed to a step iii review the contractor must request a step iii review within num days of receipt of the drbs decision .
submit the request to the secretary of the department claims committee p.o .
box num trenton new jersey num .
num .
step iii claims committee .
the claims committee is comprised of num delegated voting members of the departments management .
additional nonvoting members may include a deputy attorney general the secretary of the claims committee and a member of the fhwa .
for issues involving the claims committee or mediation contact the secretary of the claims committee .
the claims committee will not review a claim or combination of claims valued less than num until after the receipt of conditional release as specified in num .
the claims committee will review a claim or combination of claims valued more than num the claims committee will review the claim or claims unless the contract is num percent complete as measured by contract time or adjusted total contract price which ever occurs first .
if the claims committee does not review a claim or combination of claims before completion the claims committee will review the claim or combination of claims at a single session of the claims committee after the receipt of the conditional release as specified in num and all claims have been reviewed at steps i and ii of the claims resolution process .
when reviewing a combination of claims the claims committee will not review any individual claim valued less than num .
regarding a request for a step iii review that meets the applicable requirements the secretary of the claims committee will schedule a claims committee review to be held within num days of the receipt of the request from the contractor .
this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
the claims committee will notify the contractor in writing of its decision on the claim within num days of the review .
within num days of the receipt of the decision by the claims committee the contractor shall either accept or reject the decision in writing or upon failure to accept or reject the decision in writing the department will terminate the contractual claims resolution process .
if the contractor rejects the decision and intends to proceed to a step iv nonbinding mediation the contractor must request a step iv nonbinding mediation within num days of receipt of the claims committees decision .
submit the request to the secretary of the claims committee .
num .
step iv nonbinding mediation .
a .
conditions .
if the contractor submits a timely request for a step iv nonbinding mediation and the department tentatively agrees to participate in nonbinding mediation the contractor must satisfy the following conditions to proceed num .
the contractor has entered into the departments standard step iv nonbinding mediation agreement step iv agreement a copy of which is available on the departments website .
num .
the contractor has submitted the names of num proposed mediators .
include the fee schedule and the biographical background listing the experience and qualifications of each candidate .
if a candidate was previously engaged by the department or contractor identify the project and when the candidate served .
if a candidate was employed by the department or contractor identify when the candidate was employed and the candidates job duties .
the contractor may propose candidates that have been used for mediation purposes for this project or another project .
b .
mediator .
the department will select the mediator for the nonbinding mediation from the list of candidates submitted by the contractor .
if the department rejects the proposed candidates the department will request the contractor to submit num additional candidates that meet the original criteria .
submit this additional list within num days of the receipt of a written request from the department .
the num mediator must be acceptable to both the contractor and to the department for the nonbinding mediation to proceed .
upon mutual agreement the mediator can be an individual proposed by the department .
c. meeting .
upon selection of the mediator and the return of the executed step iv agreement the secretary of the claims committee will schedule a meeting for the nonbinding mediation .
d. decision .
if an agreement is reached at nonbinding mediation it will be forwarded for department approval .
num litigation of claims by the contractor the contractual claims resolution process is not an administrative procedure but is contractual in nature intended to review properly filed and documented claims .
the exhaustion of the claims resolution process is not a prerequisite to the filing of a legal action against the department .
the contractor however must fully comply with all of the terms and conditions of n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
before commencing a legal action .
therefore where a contractor brings a legal action arising out of a contract against the department its agents officers or employees arising out of or related directly or indirectly to a claim pending against the department the contractual claims resolution process at any step shall terminate as to that claims or related claims being litigated no matter which level of review the claim may be at when the legal action is filed .
the department will thereafter resolve such claims under the legal action subject to the provisions of n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the contractor may submit claims to the department for processing through the contractual claims resolution process that are unrelated to pending litigation subject to the terms of the contract and n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
in a legal action the contractors remedy for additional payment or an extension of contract time shall not exceed the actual additional costs incurred by the contractor resulting directly from the change .
in addition the damages sought by the contractor shall not exceed the amount allowed by force account as specified in num .
the contractor bears the burden of proving compliance with the requirements of the contract and must maintain all records required under the contract .
num patented devices materials and processes observe patent and copyright laws .
if a design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright is used in the work obtain permission for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
pay the costs for the use of patented materials equipment devices or processes used on or incorporated in the work .
defend and indemnify the state and the department affected third parties or political subdivision from any and all claims filed against the state or department for infringement of patented designs devices materials or processes or any trademark or copyright .
the contractor is responsible for all costs expenses and damages that the contractor may be obliged to pay by reason of an infringement during the performance of the work or after acceptance .
num taxes n.j.s.a .
numbnum provides that any sale or service to the state or any of its agencies instrumentalities public authorities public corporations including a public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or political subdivisions where the state is the purchaser user or consumer is not subject to the sales and use taxes imposed under the sales and use tax act .
n.j.s.a .
numbnum provides that sales of materials supplies or services made to contractors subcontractors or repairmen for exclusive use in erecting structures or building on or otherwise improving altering or repairing real property of the above listed bodies are exempt from the tax on retail sales imposed by the sales and use tax act .
the sales tax exemption does not apply to equipment used for contract work or for force account work whether the equipment is to be purchased or rented .
the contractor may obtain the required contractors exemption purchase certificate form no .
stnum to apply for the exemption by writing or calling the new jersey division of taxation tax information services p.o .
box num trenton new jersey num or any new jersey division of taxation regional office .
pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
and notwithstanding any provisions of the law to the contrary whenever a taxpayer partnership or scorporation under contract to provide goods services or construction projects to the state or its agencies or instrumentalities including the legislative and judicial branches of the state government is entitled to payment for those goods or services at the same time a taxpayer partner or shareholder of that entity is indebted for any state tax the director of the division of taxation will seek to set off the necessary payment to satisfy the indebtedness .
num the amount set off shall not allow for the deduction of any expense or other deductions that might be attributable to the taxpayer partner or shareholder subject to setoff under this act .
the director of the division of taxation will give notice of the setoff to the taxpayer partner or shareholder and will provide an opportunity for a hearing within num days of the notice under the procedures for protests established under n.j.s.a .
num .
no request for conference protest or subsequent appeal to the tax court from any protest shall stay the collection of the indebtedness .
the department will stay interest that may be payable by the state to the taxpayer pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num recovery of monies by the state whenever the contract provides that num. the state or department is entitled to withhold deduct or recover money from any monies due or that may become due the contractor num. the contractor is to pay or return monies for any reason and num. the state or department is entitled to payment from the contractor for costs assessments or fines the state or department has the right to recover any monies due or that may become due the contractor under the contract or any other contracts with the department including joint ventures in which the contractor is a participant but only to the extent of its participation including but not limited to deducting the amount from estimates retainage or the sale of bonds held in lieu of retainage for any contract with the department even when such recovery is being contested by the contractor .
section num prosecution and completion num subcontracting the department will not permit subcontracting without department approval .
the contractor is responsible for the work performed by subcontractors .
ensure that no work is performed by a subcontractor before receiving written approval for each subcontractor from the department .
ensure that work reserved for a subcontractor designated as a dbe esbe or sbe is not performed by any other firm including the contractors own organization .
submit requests for approval to subcontract on department forms to the department at least num days before the anticipated start of the work with the following num .
a certified copy of the executed subcontract agreement between the contractor and the subcontractor .
num .
proof of the subcontractors valid business registration with the department of treasury division of revenue according to n.j.s.a .
num .
num .
proof of the subcontractors valid public works contractor registration with the department of labor division of wage and hour compliance according to n.j.s.a .
num .
if requesting approval for a third tier subcontract submit a letter from the subcontractor permitting subcontracting to a third tier and submit the request for approval to subcontract completed by the second tier subcontractor .
the department will allow the contractor to subcontract work as follows num .
values and quantities .
the total value of the work subcontracted may not exceed num percent of the total contract price except as follows num .
the contractor may deduct the value of work for items designated as specialty items as specified in the special provisions from the value of the total contract price .
num .
the contractor may deduct the value of work subcontracted to certified dbe esbe and sbe firms indicated on the original dbeesbesbe form a approved by the department from the value of work subcontracted .
the total value of the work subcontracted may not exceed num percent of the total contract price less the value of specialty items as noted above .
num if the entire quantity or a portion of the quantity of a unit price item is subcontracted the department will determine the value of the work subcontracted by multiplying the price of the item by the quantity to be performed by the subcontractor .
if a portion of the work for a unit price item is subcontracted the department will consider the entire unit subcontracted .
the department will determine the value of the work subcontracted by multiplying the price of the item by the quantity of units to be performed by the subcontractor .
if a portion of a lump sum item an item that includes specialty work or a sign support structure is subcontracted the department will determine the value of work subcontracted based on the value of the work subcontracted as indicated in the subcontract agreement and as shown in a breakdown of cost submitted by the contractor .
num .
limits and restrictions .
the department will permit subcontracting of work with the following restrictions num .
the contractor is barred from subcontracting mobilization .
num .
the contractor may only subcontract electrical blasting asbestos removal landscaping and lead paint abatement work to subcontractors having the required certificates and licenses .
submit copies of required certificates and licenses with the request for approval to subcontract .
num .
the contractor is barred from subcontracting to firms and individuals suspended or debarred by the department or included in the state of new jersey consolidated debarment report maintained by the department of the treasury division of building and construction bureau of contractor prequalification .
the contractor must certify that neither the individual partnership corporation or limited liability corporation applying to do subcontract work nor any of its corporate officers stockholders partners or members are collectively or individually suspended debarred proposed for debarment disqualified declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from doing business by this or any other state or subdivision thereof or listed in the federal governments general services administration document list of parties excluded from federal procurement and nonprocurement programs gsa list .
num .
subcontractors are barred from making claims against the department its agents officers or employees .
num .
subcontract requirements .
ensure that subcontract agreements include the following contract provisions a .
federal aid projects .
when subcontracting work on a federal aid project ensure the following are included in the subcontract agreement .
num .
required contract provisions federal aid construction contracts form fhwa num .
num .
standard federal equal employment opportunity construction contract specifications executive order num .
num .
notice of requirement for affirmative action to ensure equal opportunity executive order num .
num .
state of new jersey equal employment opportunity specifications for contracts funded by fhwa .
num .
disadvantaged business enterprise utilization attachment fhwa funded contracts or emerging small business enterprise utilization attachment fhwa funded contracts .
num .
incentive program disadvantaged business enterprise utilization attachment for fhwa funded contracts .
num .
equal employment opportunity special provisions .
num .
special contract provisions for investigating reporting and resolving employment discrimination and sexual harassment complaints .
num .
training special provisions .
num .
general wage determinations issued under the davisbacon and related acts .
num .
new jersey department of labor prevailing wage rate determination .
num .
new jersey department of transportation code of ethics for vendors .
num .
subsection num as amended or supplemented .
num b .
wholly state funded projects .
when subcontracting work on a wholly state funded project ensure the following are included in the subcontract agreement .
num .
state of new jersey equal employment opportunity for contracts funded by wholly state funds .
num .
payroll requirements for num percent state projects .
num .
americans with disabilities act for num percent state funded contracts .
num .
equal employment opportunity special provisions construction contracts funded by wholly state funds .
num .
small business enterprise utilization attachment for num percent state funded contracts .
num .
minorityfemale outreach and training program for wholly state funded projects .
num .
training reimbursement .
num .
new jersey department of labor prevailing wage rate determination .
num .
new jersey department of transportation code of ethics for vendors .
num .
subsection num as amended or supplemented .
num commencement of work within num days from the date of the execution of the contract and before beginning construction operations submit to the re the following num .
insurance certificates as specified in num .
num .
the designated superintendent environmental manager tcc and safety officer contact information .
num .
safety program as specified in num .
num .
progress schedule as specified in num .
provide written notice to the contact provided in num of the date when construction operations will begin .
provide the notice at least num days in advance of starting construction operations .
do not begin construction operations before the date provided .
do not perform construction layout and field office type ___ set up until the department has approved the insurance certificates and the safety program .
do not begin other construction operations until after the following actions num .
a preconstruction conference with the department has been held .
num .
approval of the progress schedule as specified in num .
num .
the field office has been established .
num .
the row limits limits of construction and environmentally restricted areas have been laid out .
when a request for authorization form for the new jersey pollutant discharge elimination system numgnum construction activity stormwater general permit njgnum is specified as a contract requirement do not perform land disturbance activity including clearing grading or excavation until num days after submission of the request for authorization form to the department as specified in num .
begin construction operations within num days of the date the contract is executed by the department .
for contracts with a completion date as specified in num the contract start date is the numth day after execution of the contract .
for working day contracts the contract start date is the earlier of the numth day after execution of the contract or the first day that the contractor begins construction operations .
if the contractor begins work before the execution of the contract the work is at the contractors own risk and as a volunteer .
in the event the department decides not to execute the contract the contractor shall at its expense perform whatever work is necessary to leave the project limits in an approved condition .
if any work performed before the departments decision not to execute the contract affects any existing road or highway the contractor shall at its expense restore it to its former condition or the equivalent thereof as approved .
however all work done according to the contract before its execution by the department will if the department executes the contract be considered authorized work and the department will make payment for this work as provided in the contract .
the contractor is not entitled to payment or an extension of contract time for any delay hindrance or interference before the first day of contract time following execution of the contract by the department .
num num daily communications by num a.m. every friday submit a written proposed work schedule for the following week monday through sunday .
include at a minimum the following num .
items to be performed .
num .
location of the item to be performed .
num .
hours to be worked .
confirm with the re the proposed work schedule before beginning each days operation .
do not perform any work operation without providing notice to the re .
if weather restricts the controlling activity on the critical path provide written notice identifying the date of occurrence and activities restricted to the re .
provide the re with written notice num hours in advance of changes in work shifts and before restarting work after shutdowns of more than num hours .
num work site and storage with the approval of the re the contractor may use areas within the project limits for storage .
with the approval of the department the contractor may use portions of row outside of the project limits for storage and for work .
store and handle materials to maintain their conformance with the contract .
comply with manufacturers suppliers and fabricators storing and handling recommendations .
do not store flammable or explosive materials near bridge structures .
the department will not allow the decks of bridges or the area under bridges including the slopes to be used as work sites or storage areas .
do not store equipment or material within num feet of the traveled way unless protected by construction barrier .
if construction barrier is requested to protect a work site or storage area submit a plan detailing the proposed installation including required impact attenuators to the re for approval .
the department will not make payment for traffic control devices placed to protect a work site or storage area .
restore storage areas and work sites to their original condition or restore as directed by the re .
if the contractor is in default as specified in num the department has the right to take over and occupy leased or rented areas used for work sites and storage or cause it to be occupied for the purpose of completing the project .
if the procured space is leased the lease shall contain a provision that in event that the contractor is in default the lease may be assigned to the department or its nominee .
num sanitary and safety provisions num sanitary provide sanitary facilities that comply with the requirements of the federal state and local health departments for the use of anyone authorized to be within the project limits .
ensure that the sanitary facilities are in compliance with num cfr numc .
provide separate sanitary facilities for male and female employees clearly marked men and women .
ensure that the maximum distance between same gender sanitary facilities is not more than onehalf mile and the maximum distance between sanitary facilities and workers is not more than onehalf mile .
provide the number of facilities at each facility site as specified in table num .
num table num number of facilities number of male employees minimum no .
of facilities for male use number of female employees minimum no .
of facilities for female use num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num over num num num .
provide one additional facility for each additional num employees of each sex .
from october through april clean and sanitize sanitary facilities at least once per week .
from may through september clean and sanitize sanitary facilities at least twice per week .
num safety program observe all rules and regulations of the federal state and local health officials including regulations concerning construction safety and health standards .
at the preconstruction meeting submit to the re for approval a written safety program that meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the contract and applicable state or federal regulations .
include at a minimum the following num .
description .
describe in detail how the safety program is implemented and monitored .
provide guidelines for protecting personnel from hazards associated with project operations and activities .
establish the policies and procedures for safety practices that are necessary for the work to be in compliance with the requirements of osha and other state and federal regulatory agencies with jurisdiction rules regulations standards or guidelines in effect at the time the work is in progress .
num .
certification responsibility and identification of personnel .
identify the qualified safety professional responsible for developing the safety program and provide that persons qualifications for developing the safety program including but not be limited to education training certifications and experience in developing this type of safety program .
provide a certification executed by the qualified safety professional that developed the safety program stating that the safety program complies with the rules regulations standards and guidelines in effect at the time the work is in progress of osha and other applicable federal state and local regulatory agencies having jurisdiction .
identify a safety officer and designate the onsite supervisorylevel personnel responsible for implementing and monitoring the safety program until acceptance and having the authority to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate hazards including the authority to stop work .
include documentation of training provided to the onsite supervisorylevel personnel .
for work that requires a competent person as defined by osha ensure that the person is capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards and has the authority to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate the hazards including the authority to stop work .
include documentation of the qualifications of such competent persons identified including certifications received .
num .
elements of the program .
include information and procedures for the following elements a .
chain of command .
include the responsibilities of the management supervisor safety officer and employees .
b .
traffic control coordinator .
include the name and contact information .
ensure that the traffic control coordinator meets the requirements specified in num. c. environmental manager .
include the name and contact information .
ensure that the environmental manager meets the requirements specified in num .
num d. local emergency telephone numbers .
include police fire medical and njdep hot line num warn dep num. e. procedures for handling emergencies .
provide guidelines for handling emergencies including emergency action plans for accidents involving death or serious injury property damage fires explosions and severe weather .
include the emergency contact information of the contractors personnel responsible for handling emergencies .
f. training topics .
include regulatory and jobsite toolbox meetings .
include the documentation from the training and an attendance sheet for each .
g. contractors safety rules .
include housekeeping procedures and personal protective equipment requirements .
h. employee disciplinary policy .
include the violation forms .
i .
safety checklists .
include project safetyplanning emergency plans and procedures documentation and protective materials and equipment .
j .
forms .
include osha num log and new jersey department of labor linum .
k. security policy guidelines .
provide a copy for the office and for the project limits .
l. hazard communication program .
provide the following num .
the location of and instructions for understanding the msds .
ensure that the location and instruction are available to anyone within the project limits .
num .
the person responsible for the hazard communication program and the method of informing personnel of the hazardous communication program .
include attendance sheets of hazard communication meetings .
num .
when performing work that generates airborne crystalline silica include engineering and work practice controls to limit exposure levels to at or below the permissible exposure limit according to num cfr num table znum .
ensure that the program includes employee training and respiratory protection measures according to num cfr num and control of the area when the permissible exposure limit is exceeded .
provide a trained and competent person according to num cfr num within the project limits at all times when performing work that produces airborne crystalline silica .
m. additional requirements .
provide additional procedures for project specific topics including num .
compressed gas cylinders .
num .
confined spaces .
num .
cranes .
num .
electrical .
num .
equipment operators .
num .
fall protection .
num .
hand and power tools .
num .
hearing conservation .
num .
highway safety .
num .
lead .
num .
lock outtag out .
num .
materials handling storage use and disposal .
num .
night work .
num .
personal protective equipment .
num .
project entry and exit .
num .
respiratory protection .
num .
sanitation .
num .
signs signals and barricades .
num .
subcontractors .
num .
trenching .
num within num days of receiving the safety program the department will determine if the safety program meets the requirements of the contract .
if the safety program does not meet the requirements the department will return the safety program for revision .
do not begin work within the project limits until the department has approved the safety program .
the contractor is responsible for implementing monitoring updating and revising the safety program until acceptance .
submit updates and revisions to the safety program to the re for approval when new information new practices or procedures or changing site and environmental conditions necessitate modifications to protect site personnel .
maintain a copy of the updated safety program including the appropriate documentation associated with each element within the project limits so that it is available to workers and other authorized persons entering the project limits .
provide copies of updates to the safety program to the re .
if an incident occurs that requires a new jersey department of labor form linum to be submitted send a copy to the office of capital project safety new jersey department of transportation num parkway avenue p.o .
box num trenton nj num .
num night operations night operations comprises work performed from num minutes before sunset to num minutes after sunrise .
before beginning night operations demonstrate to the re the method of meeting the specified illuminance levels and visibility requirements for workers and equipment for each planned operation .
the department will determine illuminance levels by taking light meter readings horizontally to the road surface facing the light source .
do not begin night operations until the re approves the method of meeting the specified illuminance levels and visibility requirements .
num .
lighting requirements and illuminance levels .
maintain the minimum illuminance level throughout the required lighting area as specified in table num .
provide lighting for all areas of the work .
table num minimum illuminance levels for night operations work description minimum level foot candles minimum lighting area embankment excavation landscaping seeding and sodding mechanical sweeping and cleaning subgrade num general lighting throughout area of operation traffic control setup and removal excluding barrier curb num lighting on task traffic director num lighting on task plus minimum of num feet ahead and num feet behind employee millingnum hma paving operationnum hma roller operationnum num lighting on task and around equipment plus minimum of num feet ahead and num feet behind equipment plus num feet to each side of equipment crack sealing sawcutting and sealing joints electrical work intelligent transportation system work num lighting on task all work not listed in this tablenum num lighting on task num .
provide num footcandles for the indicated lighting area outside the limits for num footcandles to a minimum of num feet ahead and num feet behind equipment ensure that lighting equipment is in good operating condition and in compliance with applicable nec and nema codes .
use freestanding portable or trailermounted towers capable of being moved as needed to keep pace with construction operations .
for moving operations ensure that lighting and illuminance requirements are maintained where the work is in progress and that lighting keeps pace with the operation .
provide sufficient fuel spare lamps generators and qualified personnel to ensure that required illuminance levels are maintained continuously during night num operations .
if at any time minimum illuminance levels are not met cease night operations until the required illuminance levels are attained .
num .
visibility requirements for workers and equipment .
ensure that workers wear a num highvisibility retroreflective orange safety garment meeting ansiisea class num level num standards .
uniformly light the hopper auger and screed areas of pavers as well as the operators controls on all machines .
conventional vehicle headlights do not meet illuminance requirements .
ensure that moving lighting equipment used for night operations has lights directed ahead and behind the equipment .
equip moving equipment with numinch wide alternating red and white conspicuity tape meeting the national highway transportation safety administration standards .
equip offroad equipment with conspicuity tape along the full length of all num sides .
equip onroad vehicles including trailers and trailermounted devices with conspicuity tape along the full length of both sides excluding the cab and across the rear of the vehicle .
prevent or minimize glare that may interfere with traffic or disturb local residents .
perform glare control to the res satisfaction .
glare control may require relocating aiming or adjusting lights or providing screens shields visors or louvers on lights .
num traffic control num interference do not occupy a lane shoulder median or sidewalk area adjacent to traffic with equipment material personnel or employee vehicles without the res approval .
schedule and perform the work so that successive construction operations and lane or roadway openings follow preceding operations as closely as possible .
confine construction operations adjacent to traffic to one side of the roadway at a time unless otherwise specified by the contract .
where the work is performed in stages adjacent to traffic ensure that the road opened to traffic adequately accommodates traffic .
do not interfere with existing traffic access except when required to perform the work or as approved by the re .
do not work above vehicular or pedestrian traffic except as specified in the contract .
where construction interferes with existing pedestrian access provide temporary pedestrian access as directed by the re .
where necessary install and maintain temporary sidewalks and curb ramps .
remove temporary access measures when no longer required .
provide temporary approaches to maintain traffic access to private and public property as directed by the re .
when the work interferes with property owners normal passage provide written notice to the re and the property owners at least num days before beginning work .
the re has the right to reject or rescind approval of lane or shoulder closures because of the following num .
weather conditions .
num .
the closure is unnecessary to perform the work .
num .
emergency conditions either on or off the project that result in an unacceptable impact to the traveling public .
the department will only make payment for delays or costs arising from the res rejecting or rescinding of lane or shoulder closure resulting from emergency conditions .
if the work is stopped for more than num days or if the work is suspended restore excavated areas within or adjacent to the traveled way as directed by the re .
num changes to the traffic control plan tcp submit requests for changes to the tcp to the re for approval at least num days before the change is needed .
include a written description of the requested tcp change and detailed plan sheets signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
when proposing detours include a copy of the signed agreement with the local government authority having jurisdiction .
the signed agreement shall document the local government authoritys approval of the proposed detour and indicate that the contractor is solely responsible for the maintenance and restoration of the roadway .
num the department will not make payment for furnishing installing or maintaining additional traffic control devices .
remove traffic control devices when no longer required .
if detours were used restore the roadway to its original condition or as required by the agreement with the local government .
the department will not make payment for costs to restore the roadway .
num lane occupancy charges the lane closure schedule is the time period for allowable lane closures as specified in the contract .
if the contractors lane closures exceed these time periods the department will deduct from the monthly estimate a lane occupancy charge for the use and occupancy of each such lane or lanes beyond the permitted lane closure schedule until such time that the lane or lanes are reopened to traffic or until such time that the lane closure is allowed to take place again under the lane closure schedule .
the re will keep record of each occurrence as well as the cumulative amount of time that a lane is kept closed beyond the lane closure schedule and provide the record to the contractor .
the department will calculate the lane occupancy charge by multiplying the length of time of the delayed opening in minutes by the rate of num per minute per lane .
the total amount per day for the lane occupancy charge that the department will collect will not exceed num .
the department will waive the lane occupancy charge where a lane or lanes are not reopened as specified in the lane closure schedule directly and solely by reason of extraordinary exigent circumstances not under the control of or reasonably foreseeable by the contractor .
equipment breakdowns supplier deliveries and weather related hindrances are not extraordinary exigent circumstances .
however the department has the right to assess a lane occupancy charge for any period of time that a lane or lanes are closed beyond the reasonable period of time needed by the contractor to open the lane or lanes closed due to an extraordinary exigent circumstance .
num maintenance within the project limits continuously perform maintenance requirements within the project limits until acceptance .
the project limits to be maintained include the limits of all temporary and permanent construction excluding those sections of highways streets and roads where only signs are placed .
maintenance includes but is not limited to the following num .
picking up and disposing of trash and debris including trash and debris not generated by the contractor .
however the contractor is not responsible for the disposal of dead animals .
num .
keeping the roadway clear of dust soil and cleaning up nonhazardous spills .
num .
maintaining a safe and unobstructed passageway through the construction area for public traffic including but not limited to constructing escape ramps at the edges of pavement .
num .
maintaining surface drainage including the removal of debris ice and snow around inlets to ensure that it is functioning as intended .
num removal of ice and snow from bridge sidewalks open to pedestrian access .
provide for maintenance and repairs beyond the project limits for reasonable continuance to restore the required functional operation of any systems that are impacted within the project limits such as drainage utilities and electrical .
the contractor is not responsible for removal of ice and snow from sections of the roadway opened to traffic .
for critical safety repairs the department has the right to complete the necessary repairs if the contractor has not responded to the res notice to complete the repairs in the time frames given in the notice .
the department will recover costs incurred for having to make such repairs from the contractor .
if the contractor at any time fails to fully perform maintenance the re will immediately notify the contractor of the noncompliance and direct a time by which the contractor must perform the maintenance .
if the contractor fails to remediate unsatisfactory maintenance within the time directed by the re after receipt of such notice the department has the right to proceed to maintain the project and recover costs incurred for this maintenance from the contractor .
num contract time time is of the essence as to all time frames stated in the contract .
complete the work required for interim completion and completion requirement as specified in the special provisions .
when contract time is specified in working days the re will provide the contractor with a weekly statement showing the number of days charged to the contract for the preceding week and the number of days of contract time remaining .
if the contractor has dismissed its crew due to unfavorable conditions that affect the controlling operations on a day num where the contractor was prepared to begin work at the regular starting time of a scheduled shift the department will not charge a working day to the contract .
num modifications to contract time num extensions to contract time a .
qualifications for extensions .
the department will only extend contract time if an excusable delay as specified in num.b.num or num.b.num delays work on the critical path beyond the contract time as specified in num using the approved progress schedule that is current at the time the delay occurred .
the department will not extend contract time due to extra work or other type of delay unless an approved progress schedule and updates are current as specified in num .
the department will not make payment for delay damages as specified in num unless an approved progress schedule and updates are current as specified in num .
the department will not extend contract time for failure of the re to furnish interpretations of the contract unless such request for an interpretation of the contract is reasonable and made in good faith and was provided more than num days after the written request was received by the re and the failure to respond within this numday period was unwarranted .
the department will not extend contract time for a delay that was or should have been anticipated by the contractor at the time the contract was awarded .
b .
types of delays .
the department recognizes the following types of delays num .
nonexcusable delays .
nonexcusable delays are delays that are the contractors fault or responsibility .
the department will not extend contract time or make payment for delay costs incurred due to non excusable delays .
num .
excusable noncompensable delays .
excusable noncompensable delays are delays that are not the contractors or the departments fault or responsibility .
the department will extend contract time but will not make payment for the delay costs incurred by the contractor for the following excusable non compensable delays a .
others .
delays caused by work done by others excluding the department .
b .
utilities .
delays caused by utilities excluding the department when the actual duration to complete the utility work is more than num percent greater than the estimated duration specified in num .
the duration includes both the advance notice and the completion of the work by the utility .
c. extreme weather .
the department will only extend contract time for weather if the contractor can not perform work on the controlling activity on the critical path due to weather and the cumulative delay due to weather each month exceeds the number of days specified in table num .
the work on the controlling activity on the critical path is considered delayed if the contractor is prevented from proceeding on such activity for at least num percent of the total daily time planned for the activity for all shifts scheduled for that day .
submit daily documentation as specified in num for activities that are delayed by weather .
num table num anticipated number of days lost per month for weather sensitive activities month number of days lost january num february num march num april num may num june num july num august num september num october num november num december num num .
for concrete placements items as specified in division num other than approach slabs the number of days restricted is num days .
num .
for leap years the number of days restricted is num. d. cataclysmic natural phenomena .
delays caused by lightning strikes wild fires floods tidal waves earthquakes tornadoes hurricanes or other cataclysmic phenomena .
e. sovereign acts of the state .
delays caused by the state in its sovereign capacity including but not limited to epidemic or quarantine restrictions states of emergency and state shutdowns .
f. war and unrest .
delays due to war or civil disturbances .
g. labor disputes .
delays due to strikes or labor disputes beyond the control of the contractor .
h. shortage of materials .
extraordinary delays in material deliveries that the contractor or suppliers can not foresee or forestall resulting from freight embargos government acts or area wide material shortages .
shortage of materials applies only to raw and fabricated materials articles parts or equipment that are standard and does not apply to materials parts articles or equipment that are processed made constructed fabricated or manufactured to meet the specific requirements of the contract .
the department will only consider the physical unavailability of the material as constituting a shortage and shall not consider cost factors as constituting a shortage .
provide documented proof that every effort to obtain the materials from all known sources within a reasonable distance from the project limits was made .
also provide proof that the inability to obtain such materials when originally planned could not be remedied by revising the sequence of the construction operations .
if approved excusable noncompensable delays exceed a total of num days the time in excess of num days will become excusable and compensable as specified in num.b.num .
num .
excusable compensable delays .
excusable compensable delays are delays that are the departments fault or responsibility .
for excusable compensable delays the department will grant an extension of contract time and will make payment for delay damages as specified in num .
num .
concurrent delays .
concurrent delays are separate delays on the critical path that occur at the same time .
when an excusable noncompensable delay is concurrent with an excusable compensable delay the department will grant an extension of contract time but will not make payment for delay damages as specified in num .
when a nonexcusable delay is concurrent with an excusable delay the department will not grant an extension of contract time or make payment for delay damages .
c. submitting time impact evaluation .
if an excusable delay occurs notify the re as specified in num detailing how the event or cause is affecting the approved progress schedule that is current at the time the delay occurred .
when the full extent of the impact on the approved progress schedule can be determined submit a request for an extension of contract time to the re with a time impact evaluation form and a cpm fragnet diagram including all additional work and the fragnets relationship to the approved progress schedule that is num current at the time the delay occurred .
clearly identify how each change or delay is represented by an activity or group of activities .
ensure that the fragnet shows logic revisions duration changes and new activities including the predecessor and successor relationships .
the contractor is considered to have waived its rights to claim an extension of contract time if the contractor fails to provide written notice as specified in num or fails to provide the time impact evaluation .
the re will evaluate the time impact evaluation .
the department will only extend contract time when delay causes the work to be extended beyond the scheduled contract time as specified in num .
if the contractor is already behind schedule and an excusable delay delays the work beyond the contract time as specified in num the department will only extend contract time for the amount of time that directly results from the excusable delay .
if the department determines that an extension of contract time is warranted the department will extend contract time by a change order .
for excusable compensable delays submit a request for and documentation supporting the entitlement to compensable delay damages associated with the delay as specified in and limited by num .
num reductions to contract time if the work required is reduced or altered such that less time is needed to meet contract time the department has the right to reduce contract time by analyzing the current approved progress schedule .
num rightofway restrictions the special provisions will indicate row that has not been secured and the anticipated dates of availability .
review the row plans and obtain from the re all other information regarding row parcels easements temporary easements and temporary access to parcels acquired for the project as well as the nature and type of title acquired .
temporary easements and temporary access to parcels will in most cases contain a limitation as to the length of time that they are in force and effect .
schedule the work as specified in num to accommodate the time limitations associated with each parcel .
provide written notice to the re at least num days before entering a parcel with a temporary easement or entering a parcel with temporary access .
do not enter a parcel until the re provides written notice to the property owner .
if the contractor needs to occupy a temporary easement or parcel beyond the time period provided by the temporary easement or access provide a written request to the re at least num days before the time period expires .
do not enter or continue to occupy the easement or parcel unless approved by the re .
num suspension of work the re has the right to suspend the work wholly or in part for such period as deemed necessary for the following num .
contractor fault .
contractor fault includes but is not limited to failure to carry out contract requirements failure to correct unsafe conditions or failure to carry out the directions of the re .
num .
unsuitable weather .
unsuitable weather is a weather condition that prevents the contractor from performing work as specified in the contract .
the re also has the right to suspend work for a potential weather condition .
num .
convenience of the department .
for the convenience of the department the re may direct in writing the contractor to suspend all or any portion of the work for the period of time that the re determines to be appropriate .
if the re suspends a portion of the work contract requirements governing work on continuing portions of the project remain in effect .
when the re suspends the work or portions of the work the contractor is still responsible for the following num .
maintaining the project limits as specified in num .
num .
maintaining sesc measures as specified in num .
num .
maintaining traffic control devices as specified in num .
num .
protecting the work already performed and preventing damage and deterioration .
num num .
protecting stored materials .
num .
complying with additional direction by the re to secure the project limits and safeguard the public .
if during suspension the contractor at any time fails to comply with items num to num above the re will immediately notify the contractor of the noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remediate unsatisfactory conditions within num hours after receipt of such notice or within the time otherwise specified the department has the right to remediate the unsatisfactory conditions and recover the cost of this remediation from the contractor .
resume work when directed by the re .
within num days of receiving notice to resume work provide the re a written request for payment for the costs and for a modification of contract time for the number of days sought resulting from the suspension .
num default and termination of contractors right to proceed the department will provide written notice to the contractor and the surety of the cause for default and demand elimination of such cause for default if the contractor does any of the following num .
fails to begin construction operations within num days of execution of the contract .
num .
fails to perform the work with sufficient workers and equipment or with sufficient materials to ensure its completion within the contract time specified or any modification thereof .
num .
fails to complete the contract within the contract time specified as modified .
num .
performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to again perform such work as may be rejected as unacceptable and unsuitable .
num .
discontinues the prosecution of the work .
num .
fails to resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so .
num .
becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency .
num .
allows any final judgment to stand against it unsatisfied for a period of num days .
num .
makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors .
num .
fails to acquire or maintain the required insurance .
num .
fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments dbes or equal employment opportunity requirements .
num .
is a party to fraud .
num .
for any other cause whatsoever fails to carry out the work in an acceptable manner .
if the contractor or surety within a period of num days after such notice does not proceed as specified in the notice then the department has full power and authority without violating the contract to declare the contractor in default and notify the contractor to discontinue the work .
the department will provide in writing the declaration of default to the contractor and surety .
the department has the right to appropriate any or all materials and equipment within the project limits to complete the contract .
the department has the right to direct the surety to complete the contract or may enter into an agreement for the completion of the contract with the surety or another contractor or use such other methods required for the completion of the contract including completion of the work by the department .
the contractor and surety are not relieved of the assessment of liquidated damages as specified in num because of the contractors default .
the department will recover the costs and charges incurred by the department together with the cost of completing the work from the contractor or surety .
the rights and remedies of the department are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law or under the contract and the bonds .
if after declaration of default the department determines for any reason that the contractor was not in default or that the delay was excusable the rights and obligations of the parties are the same as if the department had issued an order of termination for convenience as specified in num .
if after declaration of default a court determines for any reason that the departments default of the contract was legally improper the rights and obligations of the parties are the same as if the department had issued an order of termination for convenience as specified in num .
num num termination of contract num for convenience the department has the right to by written order terminate the contract for convenience .
upon receipt of an order of termination for convenience only perform the work required in the order of termination .
the department may add work in order to secure the project .
perform the work required in the order of termination as specified in the contract .
the department has the right to declare the contractor in default as specified in num if the contractor fails to carry out the conditions set forth in an order of termination for convenience .
when the department orders termination for convenience the department will make payment for the items completed as of the date of termination at the contract price .
the department will make payment for the work in the order of termination including work that was not in the contract .
num for cause the department has the right to by written order terminate the contract for cause after determining the contractor has been declared in default as specified in num .
upon receipt of an order of termination for cause only perform the work required in of the order of termination .
the department may add work in order to secure the project .
perform the work required in the order of termination as specified in the contract .
if the contractor fails to carry out the conditions set forth in an order of termination for cause the department will recover the costs and charges incurred by the department together with the cost of completing the work from the contractor or surety .
the rights and remedies of the department are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law or under the contract and the bonds .
when the department orders termination for cause the department will make payment for the items completed as of the date of termination at the contract price .
the department will make payment for the work in the order of termination including work that was not in the original contract .
the department will not make payment for profit and overhead not included in the contract price for items for work completed or partially completed except that the department may make payment for profit and overhead on force account work as specified in num .
if the departments termination for cause is found by a court to be legally improper the department will rescind the termination for cause and order a termination for convenience .
the department will then make payment as if the termination for cause had been a termination for convenience as specified in num .
num partial acceptance if the contractor completes a portion of the work the contractor may request that the re inspect that portion .
if the re finds that the portion has been completed as specified in the contract the department may accept that portion as being completed .
if the portion is accepted the department may relieve the contractor of the responsibility of maintaining that portion of the work as specified in num .
the re may reject the request made by the contractor if the re determines that the portion of the project should not be subject to partial acceptance .
num interim completion when an interim completion requirement is specified notify the re in writing when the work for the milestone is complete .
if the re determines that the work for the milestone appears to be complete the re will notify the contractor .
if the re determines that the work for the milestone has not been completed the re will give the contractor the necessary instructions to correct or complete the work to meet the interim completion requirement .
notify the re upon compliance with the res instructions .
repeat this procedure until the re determines that the work for a milestone has been completed .
num num substantial completion notify the re in writing when the work is substantially complete .
when the re receives written notice the department will perform an inspection .
if the inspection indicates that the work is not substantially completed to the departments satisfaction the re will respond within num days and provide the contractor the necessary instructions for completion and correction .
upon completion and correction of the work the contractor shall renotify the re that the work is substantially complete and the re will perform another inspection .
repeat this procedure until the department determines that the work is substantially complete .
the date of the contractors acceptable notice is the date of substantial completion .
num completion and acceptance notify the re in writing when the work is complete .
when the re receives written notice the department will perform an inspection .
if the department determines that the work is complete the department will issue a certificate of completion .
if the department determines that the work is not complete the re will respond within num days and provide the contractor with the necessary instructions for completion and correction .
complete the work and renotify the re .
repeat this procedure until the department issues a certificate of completion .
the date of the contractors acceptable notice is the date of completion .
the department will notify the contractor of the date of acceptance .
after acceptance the contractor is relieved of the duty of maintaining and protecting the project .
in addition the contractor is relieved of its responsibility for damage to the work that may occur after acceptance .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract is liable to the department at any time both before and after acceptance for latent defects fraud such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or actions affecting the departments rights under any warranty or guarantee .
num liquidated damages the contractor and the department recognize that delays to contract time result in damages to the department including the effect of the delay on the use of the project public convenience and economic development of the state and additional costs to the department for engineering inspection and administration of the contract .
because it is difficult or impossible to accurately estimate the damages incurred the parties agree that if the contractor fails to complete the contract or portion of the contract within the contract time the contractor shall pay the department the liquidated damages specified in the special provisions .
the department will assess liquidated damages for each and every day that the contractor has failed to complete the work or portion of the work within the contract time requirements as specified in num .
if the department discovers that the work required to meet an interim completion requirement is unacceptable after the re notified the contractor that the work appeared to be complete the department has the right to assess liquidated damages for the time period required to correct the unacceptable work .
num warranties enforce all subcontractors manufacturers fabricators and suppliers warranties express or implied respecting any work or materials at the direction of the re for the benefit of the department .
obtain the warranties that subcontractors manufacturers fabricators and suppliers would give in normal commercial practice .
if directed require the warranty to be executed in writing to the department .
the re has the right to direct the contractor to undertake litigation to enforce a warranty .
num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities the department will use the united states customary units to measure work completed under the contract .
the department will determine quantities of work performed under the contract using measurement methods and computations conforming to good engineering practice .
the department will designate items as measured items or as proposal items by having a suffix of p or m in the item number respectively .
the department will measure quantities of measured items for payment .
for measured quantities the department will measure to the significant figure as specified in table num .
table num item price significant figure num num num to num num num .num for measured quantities that are measured by area and where areas contain fixtures that are not part of the item the re will only deduct the areas of individual fixtures having an area of greater than nine square feet .
for measured quantities that are measured by volume the department will calculate volumes using the end area method .
for measured quantities that are measured by weight the department will calculate weight using the net certified weight tickets corrected for any loss or waste .
whenever the phrase contract quantity is used in this subsection it is the quantity in the proposal adjusted by change orders .
the department will not measure quantities for proposal items except quantities designated on the plans as if and where directed for payment except at the request of the contractor or the re .
if making a request submit drawings calculations and other information demonstrating the asbuilt quantity .
if the difference between the measured quantity and the contract quantity is less than or equal to num percent of the proposal quantity the department will make payment based on the contract quantity .
if the difference is more than num percent of the contract quantity the department will make payment based on the measured quantity .
for each item that the contractor requests a proposal item be measured and it is determined that the difference between the quantity measured and the contract quantity is less than or equal to num percent of the proposal quantity the department will deduct num .
the department will measure quantities for proposal items that are designated on the plans as if and where directed for payment when the re directs work using the if and where directed quantity .
num scope of payment the department will make payment for the elements of work described under the construction or procedure subsection under the corresponding item in the measurement and payment subsection .
the items included under the measurement and payment subsection are full payment for the materials described under the materials subsection and the work described under the corresponding construction or procedure subsection .
the department will not make additional or separate payment for work or portion of work unless specifically provided for in the method and measurement subsection .
for items subject to payment modification based on quality requirements the department will make the payment modification as specified .
the contractor agrees to accept the payment provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing labor materials tools equipment and other resources necessary to complete the work and for performing the work contemplated and embraced under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner .
except where specified elsewhere in the contract payment will include full compensation for all risk loss damage or expense of whatever character arising out of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof or for the action of the elements that the contractor may encounter during the prosecution of the work .
num num payment for force account for work done under force account the department will make payment for the costs allowed as specified in num based on the following documentation submitted by the contractor at the completion of each force account num .
copy of all re preapprovals for extraordinary labor as specified in num specific extraordinary expenses as specified in num and equipment as specified in num .
num .
copy of daily and shift reports submitted as specified in num .
num .
copies of the associated certified payrolls for all eligible labor and foreman charges .
num .
certified records documenting all eligible labor fringe benefit rates .
num .
certified records documenting all eligible indirect labor costs .
num .
certified records documenting additional insurance rates .
num .
copies of the vendors paid invoices for eligible materials including breakout for handling transportation discounts and allowable sales tax .
num .
copies of paid invoices for all allowable specific extraordinary expenses .
num .
certified records of the eligible hours of contractorowned equipment and documentation of rates as specified in num .
num .
copies of the fully executed rental agreements and the paid invoices for eligible rental equipment .
for operating costs not covered by the rental agreement provide certified records of the eligible hours and documentation of costs .
num .
for each subcontractor provide and certify the subcontractors documentation for items num through num above .
provide to the re a summary of costs for the force account in an electronic format provided by the department and a certification stating the following all costs submitted have been incurred as a result of the force account and all vendor invoices have been paid .
the department will adjust force account payment for those costs incurred that the department determines to be the fault of the contractor .
the department will further adjust the force account payment where the contractors prices in its proposal for any affected original items did not include all the costs to complete the affected work as originally provided in the contract .
num payment for delay damages for eligible extensions the department will make payment for the costs allowed as specified in num based on the following documentation submitted by the contractor num .
copy of daily and shift reports signed off by contractors authorized representative .
num .
certified payrolls for all eligible labor and foreman charges .
num .
certified records on all eligible labor fringe benefits .
num .
certified records on all eligible indirect labor costs .
num .
certified records of additional insurance costs .
num .
certified records of the eligible hours of contractorowned equipment for payment at the rates approved by the re .
num .
copy of the fully executed rental agreement and the paid receipt or canceled check for eligible rental equipment .
for operating costs not covered by the rental agreement provide certified records of the eligible hours at the rates approved by the re .
num .
certified records of the eligible transportation costs for any equipment removed from the project limits .
num .
certified record of the eligible overhead num .
documentation in the same format as above for each subcontractor with certification by the contractor .
num estimates the department will make monthly payments to the contractor for work performed and for materials delivered as specified in num .
the re will calculate the payment in an estimate consistent with the provisions of the contract .
if not otherwise described in the contract the re will be the sole judge of the amount of progress payment due for partially completed work .
the quantities provided in the estimate may be approximations and may not be based on as built quantity measurements .
the department will establish the date of the month that the estimate is processed .
num the re will provide a summary of the estimate to the contractor .
before the issuance of each payment certify on forms provided by the department that num .
each subcontractor or supplier has been paid the amount due from the previous progress payment and shall be paid the amount due from the current progress payment and no retainage is being withheld from any subcontractor on federally funded projects or num .
there exists a valid basis under the terms of the subcontractors or suppliers contract to withhold payment from the subcontractor or supplier and therefore payment is withheld .
if the certification indicates that the contractor has withheld or will withhold payment from a subcontractor or supplier provide written notice according to n.j.s.a .
num and n.j.s.a .
num of such nonpayment to the subcontractor or supplier .
provide a copy of the notice to the department and to the surety that holds the performance bond .
include the reason for withholding payment and state the amount of payment withheld in the notice .
the date that the department receives the certification will initiate the numday approval period under n.j.s.a .
numanumanum et seq .
the department will not accept the certification before being requested by the re .
if no valid basis exists for withholding payment n.j.s.a .
num and n.j.s.a .
num authorize any subcontractor or supplier from whom payment is withheld to receive from the contractor in addition to any amount due interest at a rate equal to the prime rate plus one percent if the subcontractor or supplier is not paid within num days after receipt by the contractor of payment by the department for completed work that is the subject of a subcontract or a material supply agreement .
this interest begins to accrue on the tenth day after receipt of payment by the contractor .
if court action is taken by a subcontractor or supplier to collect payments withheld by a contractor and it is determined that a valid basis existed for the withholding of those payments the subcontractor or supplier shall be liable for any court costs incurred by the contractor in connection with the action .
the department will not make payment for an estimate having a value less than num unless it is for the final certificate .
from the total estimate amount excluding amounts for subcontracted work on federally funded projects the department will deduct and retain num percent until substantial completion .
in the first estimate following substantial completion the department will reduce the retainage withheld to one percent of the total adjusted contract price excluding subcontracted work on federally funded projects unless it has been determined by the department that the withholding of additional retainage is required .
if retainage is held in cash withholdings the reduction is to be accomplished by payment under the next estimate .
if retainage is held in bonds the department will authorize a reduction in the escrow account .
the re has the right to not process an estimate when in the judgment of the re the work is not performed or proceeding as specified in the contract or following the department giving the contractor and surety notice of default as specified in num .
the departments processing or payment of an estimate is not an approval of defective or improper work .
the department upon determining that any payment under a previous estimate was improper or unwarranted for any reason has the right to recover erroneous payment from the contractor .
num materials payments and storage the contractor may request payment for the cost of materials including the storage cost not incorporated into the work .
if approved by the re the department will make payment for the cost of materials including storage costs however the amount of payment may not exceed num percent of the bid price for the associated item .
the department will not make payment for such materials until the re is satisfied that num .
the contractor has properly stored and protected materials within the project limits or at locations owned or leased by the contractor or the department within the state except that the contractor may store structural steel outside the state with the prior approval of the department .
num .
the me has inspected the materials and they appear to be acceptable based upon available suppliers certification and materials test reports .
num .
the contractor has provided the re with the paid invoice or paid bill of sale for the materials and a fully executed release of liens for materials stored for incorporation in department of transportation project form including the transfer of ownership to the department .
num num .
for material stored on property not belonging to the department the material is stored in a fenced area with access limited to the department and the contractor .
additionally the contractor has posted a sign at the location clearly identifying and printed in large letters that the materials are without encumbrances and are to be solely used for the project .
num .
when materials are stored in a leased area the lease is made out to the contractor and provides that it shall be canceled only with the written permission of the department .
submit a copy of the lease to the re .
payment for materials does not constitute department approval or acceptance of the materials or work .
if materials paid for are damaged stolen or prove to be unacceptable the department has the right to recover the costs from the contractor .
the department will not make payment for plant materials until they are planted or installed .
num bonds posted in lieu of retainages the contractor may deposit negotiable bonds of the state or any of its political subdivisions which have been approved by the department in an escrow account to secure release of all or a portion of the retainage withheld as specified in num .
establish the account under the provisions of an escrow agreement to be entered into between the contractor the department and a bank located in the state that is an authorized depository and with a trust department .
pay the charges of the bank for services rendered according to the terms and conditions of the escrow agreement .
the contractor may obtain agreement forms and a list of approved bonds from the department .
obtain bonds that have a rating of at least b a a by moodys investor service or b b b by standard and poors corporation .
if the market value of the bonds on deposit in the escrow account falls below the amount of retainage required by the contract deposit additional bonds of sufficient value in the escrow account to secure the release of retainage or the department will deduct from current payments amounts sufficient to ensure that the total bond value on deposit plus retainage withheld will equal the total retainage requirement for the contract .
ensure that the bonds deposited in the escrow account remain acceptable to the department .
if the contractor does not replace unacceptable bonds with acceptable bonds the department will withhold from future payments amounts equal to the amount of retainage the release of which was based upon the value of the now unacceptable bonds .
in the event of a declaration of default or an order of termination of the contract the department will notify the bank in writing of the declaration of default or the order of termination .
following said written notification the bank shall not dispose of release or compromise any bonds or the proceeds of called or mature bonds without written instructions from the department .
if directed by the department the bank shall sell any bonds in the escrow account and pay the proceeds of such sale or the proceeds held in the account from called or matured bonds to the department or to any payee designated by the department .
the department will send a copy of the instructions to sell to the contractor .
num asbuilt quantities following substantial completion the re will finalize asbuilt quantities for all items and provide a list to the contractor for review .
accept or reject the proposed asbuilt quantities within num days of receipt .
if rejecting submit the disputed quantities and supporting calculations with a notice of rejection .
the re will review supporting calculations within num days and will accept or reject in part or in whole the disputed asbuilt quantities .
if the contractor fails to respond or fails to provide supporting calculations with a notice of rejection within the numday period the department will deem the contractor to have accepted the proposed asbuilt quantities and will deem the contractor to have waived any claim regarding the proposed asbuilt quantities .
num audits all claims filed and force account work are subject to audit at any time following the filing whether or not part of a suit pending in the courts of this state pursuant to n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
the audit may begin after the department has given numday notice to the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
if an audit is to be commenced more than num days after acceptance the department will provide the contractor with reasonable notice of the time when such audit is to begin .
provide adequate facilities that are acceptable to the department for such audit during normal business hours .
make a good faith effort to cooperate with the auditors .
failure to retain and maintain sufficient records to allow the departments auditor to verify a claim submitted by the contractor subcontractor or supplier constitutes a waiver of such claim and bars any recovery if the department has already made payment the contractor shall refund to the department the amount so disallowed .
num at a minimum provide the auditors the following documents unless their availability is otherwise limited by the custody agreement specified in num num .
daily time sheets and foremans daily reports .
num .
union agreements .
num .
insurance welfare and benefits records .
num .
payroll registers .
num .
earnings records .
num .
payroll tax forms .
num .
material invoices and requisitions .
num .
material cost distribution worksheet .
num .
equipment records list of company equipment .
num .
vendors rental agencies and subcontractors invoices .
num .
subcontractors payment certificates .
num .
canceled checks payroll and vendors .
num .
job cost report .
num .
job payroll ledger .
num .
general ledger .
num .
cash disbursements journal .
num .
financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on the project .
num .
income tax returns for all years reflecting the operations on the project .
num .
depreciation records on company equipment whether such records are maintained by the company involved or its accountant or others .
num .
if a source other than depreciation records is used to develop costs for the contractors internal purposes in establishing the cost of owning and operating equipment all such other source documents .
num .
all documents that reflect the contractors actual profit and overhead during the years the project was being performed and for each of the num years before the commencement of the project .
num .
all documents related to the preparation of the contractors bid including the final calculations on which the bid was based .
num .
all documents that relate to each and every request or claim together with all documents that support the amount of damages as to each .
num .
worksheets used to prepare the request or claim establishing the cost components for items of each including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance materials equipment subcontractors and all documents that establish the time periods individuals involved and the hours and rates for these individuals .
where payment for materials or labor is based on the cost thereof to forces other than the contractor the contractor shall ensure that the cost records of such other forces are open to inspection and audit by the department on the same terms and conditions as the records of the contractor .
num contractors compliance with n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
provide the re with a written statement on a form provided by the department certifying that all employees employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor have been paid wages not less than those required by the contract in compliance with n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
num final payment and claims the final certificate may result in either a final payment to the contractor or a credit payment due the department .
after acceptance and the asbuilt quantities are finalized the re will process an estimate and the department will issue the proposed final certificate to the contractor .
within num days after receiving this proposed final certificate submit a release or conditional release to the department on a payment voucher provided by the department .
if the contractor has no reservation of claims and accepts the proposed final certificate provide a written release stating the following in consideration of the above payment i hereby release the state of new jersey commissioner of transportation the department their agents officers and employees from all claims and liability of whatsoever nature for anything done or furnished or in any manner growing out of the performance of the work .
num if the contractor has a reservation of specific claims but otherwise has released all claims not specifically reserved and accepts the proposed final certificate state the following in consideration of the above payment i hereby release the state of new jersey commissioner of transportation the department their agents officers and employees from all claims and liability of whatsoever nature for anything done or furnished in any manner growing out of the performance for the work except for____________________ .
include in the release the specific monetary amounts and the specific nature of the claims being reserved .
failure to state specific monetary amounts and the specific nature of the claim shall result in a waiver of such claims .
the contractor may reserve only those claims properly filed with the department as specified in num and not previously resolved .
if the contractor reserves claims proceed as specified in num .
the contractor waives all claims for which the required notice has not been filed with the department .
the contractors failure to submit written release or conditional release within said num days constitutes acceptance of the proposed final certificate without exception and a wavier of all claims .
upon receipt of the contractors written acceptance of the proposed final certificate without exception or conditional release or when the contractor fails to provide written acceptance of the proposed final certificate within num days of issuance the department will pay the entire sum due there under as provided by the n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
provided the final certificate indicates a payment is due the contractor .
however where the final certificate indicates a credit payment is due the department the contractor shall remit said credit payment to the department .
if the contractor fails to remit the credit due the department as indicated on the proposed final certificate within num days of issuance of the proposed final certificate the department has the right to recover the credit from the contractor .
num ethics standards and conflicts of interest both the department and the contractor have a duty to prevent conflicts of interest or the appearance of conflicts of interest .
ensure that all officers employees agents and representatives are aware of these requirements .
obtain information regarding the states business ethics guide at www.state.nj.ustreasurypurchaseethics.htm .
do not pay offer to pay or agree to pay either directly or indirectly any fee commission compensation gift gratuity or other thing of value of any kind to any department employee or agent as defined by n.j.s.a .
numdnumb .
and n.j.s.a .
numdnume .
or to any member of the immediate family as defined by n.j.s.a .
numdnumi .
of any such officer or employee or agent or any partnership firm or corporation with which they are employed or associated or in which such employee or agent has an interest within the meaning of n.j.s.a .
numdnumg .
immediately report in writing the solicitation of any fee commission compensation gift gratuity or other thing of value by any state officer or employee or special state officer or employee from any state vendor to the attorney general and the executive commission on ethical standards .
do not directly or indirectly undertake any private business commercial or entrepreneurial relationship with whether or not pursuant to employment contract or other agreement express or implied or sell any interest in such contract to any department employee or agent having any duties or responsibilities in connection with the purchase acquisition or sale of any property or services by or to any state agency or any instrumentality thereof or with any person firm or entity with which he is employed or associated or in which he has an interest within the meaning of n.j.s.a .
numdnumg .
immediately report any relationships subject to this provision to the executive commission on ethical standards which may grant a waiver of this restriction upon application of the departments employee or agent and finding that the present or proposed relationship does not present the potential actuality or appearance of a conflict of interest .
do not influence or attempt to influence or cause to be influenced any department employee or agent in his or her official capacity in any manner which might tend to impair the objectivity or independence of judgment of said employee or agent .
do not cause or influence or attempt to cause or influence any department employee or agent to use or attempt to use their official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for the vendor or any other person .
num the provisions cited above in this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a department employee or agent from receiving gifts under the same terms and conditions as are offered or made available to members of the general public subject to any guidelines the executive commission on ethical standards may promulgate .
provide to the re at the preconstruction meeting on a form provided by the department a certification that the contractor understands these obligations has adhered to these ethics standards and shall continue to adhere to these ethics standards .
num division num contract requirements section num performance bond and payment bond num description this section describes the requirements for providing a performance bond and a payment bond .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num performance bond and payment bond using bond forms issued by the department provide a performance bond and a payment bond to the department within num days of the date of award or conditional award .
ensure that the penal sum of the bond is equal to at least the total contract price less the bid price for performance bond and payment bond .
with the bond provide a certification authorizing the attorneyinfact to commit the surety and a true and correct statement of the suretys financial condition .
submit the brokers fees the certified rate schedule and the report of execution for the bond to the re .
obtain bonds from sureties listed in the us treasury department circular num and authorized to do business in the state .
reinsurance is prohibited as per n.j.a.c numbnum .
if the surety becomes insolvent before acceptance provide a performance bond and a payment bond issued by another surety to the department .
the department may adjust contract time require extra work or issue other changes authorized by the contract without obtaining the consent of the surety of the bonds .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit performance bond and payment bond lump sum the department will make payment for performance bond and payment bond as follows bip the lesser of bb and bi bfp the lesser of bip rcf co and bf where bb bid price of the performance bond and payment bond .
bi actual price of the performance bond and payment bond at the start of work .
bf actual price of the performance bond and payment bond at completion of work .
bip initial payment for the performance bond and payment bond made by the department at the start of work .
bfp final payment for the performance bond and payment bond made by the department at the completion of work .
r rate from the certified schedule .
co original contract price .
cf final contract price .
the department will make adjustments to performance bond and payment bond in the final monthly estimate .
the department will not make adjustments of less than num .
num section num insurance num description this section describes the requirements for providing and maintaining insurance until acceptance .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num owners and contractors protective liability insurance a .
policy requirements .
procure and maintain insurance until acceptance .
the department will not consider the work or any portion as put to its intended use until acceptance .
the contractor may only obtain insurance from companies that are licensed to provide insurance in the state .
ensure that polices are underwritten by companies with a current a.m. best rating of a with a financial size category of vii or better .
before performing construction operations provide the re with certificates of insurance and policy declaration pages .
the departments insurance certificate form dcnum is the only acceptable form as evidence of insurance .
ensure that insurance policies are endorsed to provide written notice by certified mail to the department num days before changes to andor cancellation of the policy .
upon request provide the re with a certified copy of each policy .
submit documentation to identify all exclusions and deductible clauses .
the limits of liability set forth below do not relieve the contractor from liability in excess of such coverage .
deductibles for each policy are limited to num per occurrence .
the contractor is responsible for the deductible limit of the policy and all exclusions consistent with the risks it assumes under this contract and as imposed by law .
b .
types .
at a minimum provide the following insurances .
num .
comprehensive general liability insurance .
procure comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum limit of liability in the amount of num per occurrence as a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage .
ensure the coverage for the policy is at least as broad as that provided by the standard basic unamended and unendorsed comprehensive general liability coverage forms currently in use in the state .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include num .
personal injury .
num .
contractual liability .
num .
premises and operations .
num .
products and completed operations .
num .
independent contractors .
num .
waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
num .
severability of interestseparation of insureds .
num .
per project aggregate .
ensure the policy is endorsed to delete any exclusions applying to property damage liability arising from num .
explosions .
num .
damage to underground utilities .
num .
collapse of foundations .
ensure the policy names the state its officers employees and agents as additional insured .
on the insurance certificate indicate the cost for providing the policy .
num .
comprehensive automobile liability insurance .
procure comprehensive automobile liability insurance to cover owned nonowned and hired vehicles with a minimum limit of liability in the amount of num per occurrence as a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include a waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include severability of interestseparation of insureds clause .
num num .
owners and contractors protective liability insurance .
procure a separate owners and contractors protective liability insurance policy with a minimum limit of liability in the amount of num per occurrence as a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include a waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include severability of interestseparation of insureds clause .
ensure the policy names the state its officers employees and agents as additional insured .
provide documentation from the insurance company that indicates the cost of the owners and contractors protective liability insurance policy .
num .
workers compensation and employers liability insurance .
procure workers compensation insurance according to the requirements of the laws of this state and include an allstates endorsement to extend coverage to any state that may be interpreted to have legal jurisdiction .
provide employers liability insurance with the following minimum limits of liability num .
num each accident .
num .
num disease each employee .
num .
num disease aggregate limit .
if construction operations requires marine operations including working from a barge or ship or unloading material from a barge or ship on a navigable waterway in the united states ensure the policy is endorsed to include us longshore and harbor workers coverage and jones act coverage .
num .
excess liability insurance .
procure excess liability or umbrella liability insurance with limits in excess of the underlying policies for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability with minimum limits of liability of num .
ensure the excess liability insurance policy takes effect drops down if the primary coverage is impaired or exhausted .
ensure the excess or umbrella policy has the same terms and conditions as the primary underlying coverage .
num .
marine liability insurance .
if construction operations require marine operations procure marine liability insurance with a minimum limit of liability in the amount of num per occurrence .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include num .
personal injury .
num .
contractual liability .
num .
premises and operations .
num .
products and completed operations .
num .
independent contractors .
num .
waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
num .
severability of interestseparation of insureds .
ensure the policy names the state its officers employees and agents as additional insured .
c. maintenance .
submit an updated dcnum insurance certificate to demonstrate continued renewal of insurance .
during any period when the required insurance is not in effect the re may suspend the work .
the department may refuse to make payments due under this contract or any other contracts with the department until the required insurance coverage is in effect .
the department may use monies withheld to renew the insurance for the periods and amounts referred to above .
alternatively the department may default the contractor and direct the surety to complete the project .
num railroad protective liability insurance if required by the special provisions procure railroad protective liability insurance according to num cfr num subpart a as a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage with minimum limits of liability in the amounts of num per occurrence and num per annual aggregate .
ensure that the railroad protective liability insurance meets the policy requirements specified in num.a .
additionally ensure comprehensive general liability policy is endorsed to provide for independent contractors coverage and deletes any exclusions applying to liability arising out of operations in proximity to railroad property .
ensure that the railroad protective liability insurance policy is endorsed to provide written notice by certified mail to the railroad company num days before changes to andor cancellation of the policy .
num ensure the policy is endorsed to include a waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
ensure the policy is endorsed to include severability of interestseparation of insureds clause .
submit the policy for railroad protective liability insurance and endorsements to the comprehensive general liability insurance to the railroad company for approval .
the department will list the name and address of the railroad company representative in the special provisions .
construction operations will not be permitted on railroad property before approval of insurance by the railroad company .
reconcile all policy requirements to the satisfaction of the railroad company and the re .
the special provisions will contain an estimate of the percentage of the contract cost located within or adjacent to the railroad row .
the percentage is provided for informational purposes only and does not affect the amount of risk or coverage .
num pollution liability insurance procure contractors pollution liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage with minimum limits of liability in the amounts of num per occurrence and num aggregate .
ensure that the pollution liability insurance meets the policy requirements specified in num.a .
if the policy is written on an occurrence form ensure it will remain in effect until acceptance and ensure that completed operations coverage is provided for a period of no less than num years after acceptance .
if the policy is written on a claims made basis ensure an extended reporting provision coverage is maintained for a period of no less than num years after acceptance .
ensure the policy provides coverage for num .
bodily injury and property damage to third parties .
num .
natural resource damages .
num .
environmental cleanup including restoration or replacement costs .
num .
legal defense .
num .
transportation of waste material by or on behalf of the contractor away from the project limits .
num .
disposal liability for pollution conditions on at under or emanating from any disposal site location or facility used by or on behalf of the contractor for disposal of waste .
num .
waiver of subrogation for all claims and suits including recovery of any applicable deductibles .
num .
severability of interestseparation of insureds .
ensure the policy does not contain any exclusions or limitations for num .
liabilities assumed under an insured contract .
num .
lead silica or asbestos .
num .
underground storage tanks .
num .
insured versus insured exclusion that restricts coverage to the state .
ensure the policy names the state its officers employees and agents as additional insured .
provide documentation from the insurance company indicating the coverage limitation of coverage term of coverage and cost of the pollution liability insurance policy .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit owners and contractors protective liability insurance lump sum railroad protective liability insurance lump sum pollution liability insurance lump sum the contractor shall provide all other insurance costs at the contractors expense .
the department will make initial payment for owners and contractors protective liability insurance railroad protective liability insurance and pollution liability insurance at the lesser of the bid amount or actual costs as documented from paid invoices .
the department will make payment for any remainder with the final monthly estimate .
num section num progress schedule num description this section describes the requirements for providing a progress schedule to monitor contract progress and to evaluate impacts on contract time .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num cpm progress schedule provide a detailed cpm schedule in xer format using the njdot capital program management construction scheduling standard coding and procedures for designers and contractors manual and the njdot scheduling template .
the manual and template are available from the departments website .
determine the most feasible work sequence that meets the contract requirements .
ensure that the schedule includes row availability dates permits submittals working drawings procurement fabrication delivery of materials construction and other activities necessary to complete the work .
schedule the work according to the staging requirements specified by the contract .
the contractor may simultaneously perform work designated as part of separate stages where allowed by the contract or approved by the re .
the contractor may propose alternate staging .
ensure that proposed alternate staging does not interfere with work done by others .
the department may reject the proposed alternate staging if it causes an increase to the cost of work done by others .
the contractor is responsible for the cost of changes or additional work required as a result of completing the work according to the proposed alternate staging .
if the contractor proposes alternate staging submit a plan detailing the proposed alternate .
submit a schedule showing the original staging and a schedule showing the proposed alternate staging .
the re may extend its review of the schedule submissions by a reasonable length of time .
the department will not grant time extensions or make payment for delays to construction resulting from extended review time of the proposed alternate staging by the re regardless of whether the department accepts or rejects it .
the re may require the contractor to submit the proposed alternate staging as a ve proposal as specified in num .
ensure that the schedule submission conforms to the following num .
provide num activity for each discrete component of each item scheduled in the proposal .
the re may allow grouping of similar items into num activity .
for certain items the re may require the contractor to provide additional detail for each component to be included in the progress schedule .
num .
provide activity descriptions to ensure that the start completion and intermediate status of the work is readily identifiable .
do not use nonspecific activity descriptions like start continue complete x percent y percent z percent or similar .
num .
use activity codes to identify responsibility class type and wbs .
use area activity codes to distinguish the location of work such as stationing and structure number .
num .
for each activity indicate the calendar used .
ensure that no activity has a duration of less than num workday .
num .
ensure that no construction activity has a duration greater than num days unless approved by the re .
num .
ensure that activity logic and durations are consistent with the contract .
num .
ensure that all activities except the project start milestone and project completion milestone have predecessors and successors .
the start of an activity shall have a starttostart or finishtostart relationship with preceding activities .
the completion of an activity shall have a finishtostart or finishtofinish relationship with a succeeding activity .
do not use starttofinish relationships .
num .
indicate time frames when work is restricted in sensitive areas including wetlands floodplains waterbodies and parklands to ensure that appropriate staging and seasonal constraints are reflected .
num .
ensure that seasonal constraints are reflected for items of work such as stripping seeding and planting .
num .
indicate time frames when work is restricted by work performed by utilities or by others .
num .
indicate time frames as specified in num for the department to review working drawings .
num num .
identify the start and finish dates of stages with finish milestones .
num .
identify the completion and interim completion dates specified in num with finish milestones with a late finish constraint .
num .
use constraint dates only for completion and interim completion milestones unless approved by the re .
num .
calculate the cpm schedule in working days .
ensure that the working day to calendar date relationship is based upon the contractors proposed work week with allowance for weekends legal holidays and any special requirements of the contract .
num .
do not use resource loaded schedules .
the progress schedule does not constitute notice and does not satisfy the notice requirements as specified in num .
approval of the schedule by the re does not modify the contract or constitute acceptance of the feasibility of the contractors logic activity durations or assumptions used in creating the schedule .
if the schedule reflects a completion date different than that specified in num this does not change the specified completion date .
if the re approves a schedule that reflects a completion date earlier than that specified as the contract time the department will not accept claims for additional contract time or compensation as the result of failure to complete the work by the earlier date shown on the cpm schedule .
float is the amount of time that an activity may be delayed from its early start without delaying completion .
float belongs to the project and is not for the exclusive use of the contractor or the department .
submit the preliminary schedule and baseline schedule as follows num .
preliminary schedule submission .
within num days after executing the contract submit num electronic copy of the preliminary schedule to the re for review and approval .
for contracts with a total contract value of less than num million provide the schedule for at least the first num days of the project .
for contracts with a total contract value of more than num million provide the schedule for at least the first num days of the project .
provide a summary activity network for the remainder of contract time .
include a written narrative detailing the calendars the use of multiple shifts per day and the anticipated production rates .
the re may require num paper copies of the preliminary schedule gantt chart as specified in num.e and a network diagram pert printed on num numinch plans detailing the activity relationships .
ensure that the preliminary schedule includes milestone activities expected to be completed or partially completed before submission and approval of the baseline schedule .
do not begin construction operations until the re approves the preliminary schedule .
allow num days for the re to review and approve or reject and return the preliminary schedule submission .
if the preliminary schedule submission is rejected by the re revise and resubmit to the re for approval within num days .
num .
baseline schedule submission .
ensure that the baseline schedule depicts the work plan for the entire contract time .
submit as specified in table num num electronic copy of the baseline schedule to the re for approval .
the re may require the contractor to submit num paper copies of the baseline schedule .
table num baseline schedule submission timeline project construction cost pcc million days to submit baseline schedule after approval of preliminary schedule pcc num num num pcc num num num pcc num num pcc num num ensure that the baseline schedule submission includes the following num .
a written narrative explaining the schedule and the contractors general approach for achieving substantial completion and completion as specified in num including an explanation of calendars used in the schedule .
num .
a resource plan indicating the quantity and type of equipment that will be employed and the size and character of the proposed labor force for each operation .
num .
the re may require num paper copies of the tabular reports as specified in num and a printed network diagram pert on num numinch sheets detailing the activity relationships .
num within num days the re will review the baseline schedule and approve or reject the submission .
if rejected revise and resubmit the baseline schedule within num days to the re for review and approval .
the re will review the revised baseline schedule submission and approve or reject the resubmission within num days .
num cpm progress schedule updates the re will designate the due date for the first schedule update when the baseline schedule is approved .
the first update is due approximately num months following the baseline schedule approval .
the re will designate the data date to be used for each schedule update .
schedule progress review meetings to be held approximately num days before the schedule update due date .
prepare activity progress in advance of each meeting .
revise the logic to reflect the actual sequence of work .
do not submit schedules showing work performed out of sequence .
provide the re with a report detailing actual start and actual finish dates of activities in progress during the previous num months .
at the progress review meeting present and review the progress during the previous num months for incorporation into the schedule .
within num days from the date of the progress review meeting submit the schedule update to the re for approval with the agreed upon changes .
within num days the re will review the update schedule and approve or reject the submission .
if rejected revise and resubmit the schedule update within num days to the re for review and approval .
the re will review the revised schedule update submissions and approve or reject the resubmission within num days .
update and submit the subsequent schedule update even if the re has not approved the previous schedule update .
provide num electronic copy for each schedule update .
ensure that each schedule update conforms to the scheduling requirements specified in num and that each schedule update submission includes the following num .
progress narrative .
provide num paper copies of the progress narrative .
at a minimum include the following num .
a description of schedule status .
num .
a discussion of current and anticipated delaying problem areas and their estimated schedule effect .
num .
a discussion of intermediate milestones specified in the contract that are behind schedule .
num .
a discussion of schedule slippage pay revisions and progress along the critical path in terms of days ahead or behind previously established dates .
num .
a listing of logic changes and an explanation for the revisions .
changes in duration calendars and revisions to activity relationships are considered logic revisions .
num .
a listing of revisions to scheduled activities not worked on during the update period .
num .
tabular reports .
the re may require num paper copies of the longest path sort total float sort responsibility sort area sort and gantt chart .
include the following information for each num .
contract title .
num .
data date .
num .
activity id .
num .
activity description .
num .
activity codes including responsibility class area type and wbs .
num .
calendar used .
num .
original activity duration and remaining activity duration in working days .
num .
early start and early finish dates and late start and late finish dates .
num .
total float .
num .
historical actual start and finish dates for activities completed or underway to replace calculated early and late dates .
a .
longest path sort .
sort activities using the longest path filter .
b .
near critical path sort .
sort activities using the near critical path filter .
c. responsibility sort .
group activities by responsibility and then sort by early start .
d. area sort .
group activities by wbs area and then sort by early start .
e. gantt chart .
provide a precedencetype chart drawn using the early or actual start and finish dates .
ensure that the layout output is timescaled and the size of each activity represented is proportional to the activity duration .
num group the activities by wbs and sort by area .
ensure that the titles appear on the lefthand side of the plot .
show completed activities .
clearly identify the critical path .
use a vertical line to indicate the data date and the start of each month .
show milestones using symbols .
provide a legend explaining symbols and their meanings .
if the contractor falls behind schedule and can not complete the work by the completion date as specified in num the contractor shall take the necessary steps to improve progress .
the re may direct the contractor to increase the number of shifts begin overtime operations work extra days including weekends and holidays or supplement its construction plant and to submit for approval a recovery schedule to show that the contractor is meeting the directed acceleration .
num bar chart progress schedule and updates a .
schedule .
determine the most feasible work sequence that meets the contract requirements .
ensure that the schedule includes row availability dates permits submittals working drawings procurement fabrication delivery of materials construction and other activities necessary to complete the work .
schedule the work according to the staging requirements in the contract .
the contractor may simultaneously perform work designated as part of separate stages where allowed by the contract or approved by the re .
approval of the schedule by the re does not modify the contract or constitute acceptance of the feasibility of the contractors logic activity durations or assumptions used in creating the schedule .
the progress schedule does not constitute notice and does not satisfy the notice requirements as specified by num .
provide num paper copies of a bar chart progress schedule or similar type that is acceptable to the re for approval as follows num .
provide num activity for each discrete component of each item scheduled in the proposal .
the re may allow grouping of similar items into num activity .
for certain items the re may require the contractor to provide additional detail for each component to be included in the progress schedule .
num .
provide activity descriptions to ensure that the start completion and intermediate status of the work is readily identifiable .
do not use nonspecific activity descriptions like start continue complete x percent y percent z percent or similar .
num .
ensure that no construction activity has a duration greater than num days unless approved by the re .
num .
include the planned start and completion dates for each activity the duration of each activity and the sequencing of the activities .
num .
identify the quantity and the estimated daily production rate for critical activities .
num .
indicate time frames when work is restricted in sensitive areas such as wetlands floodplains waterbodies and parklands to ensure the appropriate incorporation of staging and seasonal constraints .
num .
ensure that seasonal constraints are reflected for items of work such as stripping seeding and planting .
num .
ensure that the progress schedule is of suitable scale to clearly indicate the duration of each activity .
within num days the re will review the schedule and approve or reject the submission .
if rejected revise and resubmit the schedule within num days to the re for review and approval .
the re will review the revised schedule submission and approve or reject the resubmission within num days .
b .
updates .
update the progress schedule to reflect changing conditions .
the re will designate the due date for the first schedule update when the schedule is approved .
the first update will be due approximately num months following the schedule approval .
the re will designate the data date to be used for each schedule update .
provide a progress narrative with each update submission that includes the following num .
a description of schedule status .
num .
a discussion of current and anticipated delaying problem areas and their estimated schedule effect .
num .
a discussion of all intermediate milestones specified in the contract that are behind schedule .
num .
a discussion of schedule slippage pay revisions and progress along the critical path in terms of days ahead or behind previously established dates .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit progress schedule lump sum progress schedule update unit bar chart progress schedule and updates lump sum the department will make payment for progress schedule when the baseline schedule submission is approved by the re .
if the contractors update is not approved by the date of the progress meeting for the following update the department will assess liquidated damages to recover the departments increased administrative costs .
the department will assess damages for each delinquent update as follows missed or unapproved update liquidated damage first num second consecutive num subsequent consecutive num if liquidated damages for delinquent updates are applied and the contractor subsequently provides an acceptable update the department will assess liquidated damages for the next delinquent update at the first liquidated damage rate .
the department will make payment for bar chart progress schedule and updates as follows schedule submission payment approval of baseline schedule num of the lump sum approval of each update num prorated over the duration of the contract section num mobilization num description this section describes requirements for mobilization .
num materials intentionally blank .
num procedure num mobilization mobilization consists of the preparatory work and operations including moving personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project limits .
it also includes all other work performed and costs incurred before beginning work on various items in the contract .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit mobilization lump sum the department will make payment for mobilization on a lump sum basis regardless of the number of times the contractor shuts down and returns to the project .
the department will make payment as follows work completed payment num of the worknum lesser of num of bid price or num of total contract price num of the worknum lesser of num of bid price or num of total contract price num of the worknum lesser of num of bid price or num of total contract price num of the worknum lesser of num of bid price or num of total contract price num of the work amount of bid price not previously paid num .
if the baseline schedule is not approved the department will not make payment for mobilization .
the department will calculate the percentage of work completed from the total of payments compared to the total contract price .
the total of payments excludes the amount paid for mobilization and the amount paid for materials furnished but not incorporated into the work as specified in num .
if mobilization is not included in the proposal include the costs in the various items scheduled in the proposal .
section num construction field office num description this section describes the requirements for set up and maintenance of the departments construction field office .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num field office provide and maintain a safe and secure field office for the exclusive use of the department at a location within or in the immediate vicinity of the project limits and approved by the re .
do not use any building scheduled for demolition under the contract as a field office .
if the field office is a temporary structure secure necessary permits from the new jersey department of community affairs and remove the structure when directed by the re .
ensure that the field office is weatherproof with a minimum ceiling height of num feet and conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
ensure that num of the rooms of the field office has a minimum area of num square feet .
ensure that the other rooms have a minimum area of num square feet except for conference rooms which require a minimum area of num square feet .
ensure that the field office doors and windows have locks .
provide the keys to the re .
ensure that the field office has one or more closets of sufficient capacity for the offices size .
num num .
office size requirements .
provide the following at a minimum for the field office type specified table num office size requirements field office type description a b c d e f total area sf num num num num num num number of roomsnum num num num num num num conference room num num num num num num desks with swivel chairs num num num num num num tables and chairs to seat num num num num num num file cabinetsnum num num num num num num plan racksnum num num num num num num parking spacesnum num num num num num num num .
including conference room .
num .
having a ul rating of num f num hour num drawers legalsize with lock and num keys .
num .
capable of holding num plan sheets .
num .
free parking on a paved or hard surfaced area adjacent to the building .
num .
utilities and lighting .
provide all utility services and connections including water sewer gas electricity telephone and broadband internet .
provide a separate telephone line for each telephone computer modem and fax machine specified in num .
provide a field office with sufficient natural and artificial light .
provide adequate insulation heat and airconditioning to maintain an ambient temperature of num to num f. num .
lavatory .
provide a separately enclosed and properly ventilated room with washing and toilet facilities suitable for use by male and female employees .
ensure that the facilities have hot and cold running water .
equip the doors and windows with locks .
num .
communication equipment .
provide the following communication systems a .
telephones .
provide a phone system as specified in the special provisions .
ensure that each phone is connected to the answering system .
b. fax machine .
provide a fax machine with builtin telephone autodial autoredial and autoreceive and outofpaper reception features .
c. cell phones .
provide cell phones as specified in the special provisions .
d. computer system .
provide a computer system as specified in the special provisions .
do not procure the computer system until reviewing the system requirements with the re .
ensure that the computer system is compatible with the departments construction management software and other specified software .
when the computer system is no longer required by the re the department will erase the hard drive and return the computer system to the contractor .
the department will retain other data storage devices .
num .
office furnishings .
provide the following num .
two book cases .
num .
a drafting table and stool .
num .
a supply cabinet .
num .
a water cooler having both hot and cold water dispensers and bottled water service .
num .
a type abc fire extinguisher having ulapproval .
num .
a numperson firstaid kit according to ansi znum num tick removal tweezers and num aerosol cans of insect repellent containing deet .
restock first aid supplies and insect repellant as needed .
num .
a wastepaper basket for each room .
num .
two num num foot bulletin boards .
num .
a num cubic foot refrigerator .
num num .
office equipment .
provide the following num .
a copier with automatic document feed num pages per minute copy speed variable reduceenlarge capability and letter legal and ledger size capabilities .
num .
a digital camera as specified in the special provisions .
num .
a video camcorder as specified in the special provisions .
num .
a printing adding machine .
num .
an electric typewriter elite type with numinch paper capacity .
num .
a paper shredder with a minimum throat of num inches and a feed capacity of at least num sheets .
num .
inspection equipment .
provide as specified in the special provisions .
num field office maintenance maintain the field office including furnishings equipment lavatories including toiletries and utilities for the duration of the contract or until no longer required by the re .
provide services for utilities specified in num .
provide for utility disconnection when the field office is no longer required by the re .
assume that the field office will be required for a minimum of num months after completion .
provide weekly janitorial and waste disposal service and snow removal service as needed .
provide num case of letter legal and ledger sized paper every num months .
repair or replace inoperable or defective communication office and inspection equipment within num hours .
the contractor is not responsible for replacing or repairing items that are lost or damaged due to misuse .
num telephone service telephone service consists of nonmonthly and nonfixed charges including their taxes for telephone lines and cellular phones provided for the field office and materials field laboratory .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit field office type ___ set up unit field office type ___ maintenance month telephone service lump sum the department will make payment for field office type ___ maintenance for each month or portion of a month that the field office is required except that the department will not make payment for any month or fraction of a month that the contractor is assessed liquidated damages as specified in num .
the department will make payment for telephone service for the actual costs of the nonmonthly and nonfixed charges including their related taxes as evidenced by paid bills submitted within num days of receipt from the service provider for telephone and cell phones .
section num materials field laboratory and curing facility num description this section describes the requirements for set up and maintenance of the departments materials field laboratory and curing facility .
num materials intentionally blank num num procedure num materials field laboratory do not provide or procure the materials field laboratory or associated equipment until the re notifies that this item is required .
within num days of re notification provide and maintain a materials field laboratory for the exclusive use of the department at a location approved by the me .
do not use buildings scheduled for demolition under the contract as a materials field laboratory .
the me will not conduct testing until the materials field laboratory is ready for use .
if the field laboratory is a temporary structure secure the necessary permits from the new jersey department of community affairs and remove the structure as directed by the re .
provide a uniform code type four fire permit according to the new jersey department of community affairs regulations .
the contractor may obtain information concerning the permit fees and the permit application process from the departments bureau of materials .
ensure that the materials field laboratory is weatherproof with a minimum ceiling height of num feet .
ensure that one of the rooms has a minimum area of num square feet .
ensure that there is an additional room or enclosure with a concrete floor with a minimum area of num square feet .
ensure that each room has at least four numprong electrical outlets having a minimum of two numampere numvolt circuits .
ensure that the materials laboratory doors and windows have locks and provide the keys to the me .
ensure that the materials field laboratory has one or more closets of sufficient capacity for the offices size .
provide the following for the materials field laboratory num .
utilities and lighting .
provide all utility services and connections including water sewer gas electricity telephone and broadband internet .
provide a separate telephone line for each telephone computer modem and fax machine specified in num .
provide a field office with sufficient natural and artificial light .
provide adequate insulation heat and airconditioning to maintain an ambient temperature of num to num f. num .
lavatory .
provide a lavatory as specified in num .
num .
parking .
provide num free parking spaces on a paved or hard surfaced area adjacent to the materials field laboratory .
num .
communication equipment .
provide the following communication systems a .
telephones .
provide num cordless phones with autoswitching .
b. fax machine .
provide num fax machine with builtin telephone autodial autoredial and autoreceive and outofpaper reception features .
c. cell phones .
provide cell phones as specified in the special provisions .
d. computer system .
provide a computer system as specified in the special provisions .
do not procure the computer system until reviewing the system requirements with the me .
ensure that the computer system is compatible with the departments construction management software and other specified software .
when the computer system is no longer required by the me the department will erase the hard drive and return the computer system to the contractor .
the department will retain other data storage devices .
num .
office furnishings .
provide furnishings as specified in num and the following num .
four desks with num desk chairs and num chairs .
num .
a work bench having a minimum area of num num feet and num stools .
num .
shelving having a minimum area of num square feet .
num .
office equipment .
provide the following num .
a copier with automatic document feed num pages per minute copy speed variable reduceenlarge capability and letter legal and ledger size capabilities .
num .
a printing calculator with trigonometric function capability .
num .
a paper shredder with a minimum throat of num inches and a minimum feed capacity of num sheets .
num num .
laboratory equipment .
provide the following a .
primary laboratory room .
equip the primary laboratory room with the following num .
a numinch diameter exhaust fan or alternative means for venting heat dust and fumes .
num .
two gas stoves each having at least num burners .
num .
either commercially bottled gas service or gas supplied by a utility with at least num connections to be located as directed by the me .
num .
a sink with hot and cold running water having adequate pressure and equipped with num drain boards and a draindisposal system capable of handling elutriable material .
num .
a metal stand to hold sieves used in washing elutriable material .
num .
two wheelbarrows .
num .
a light duty oilless air compressor listed by ul with a numgallon storage tank a startstop switch num pounds per square inchnum pounds per square inch a numvolt universal motor an asme safety valve and a numfoot air hose equipped with a quickchange blow gun kit and nozzle kit consisting of a highflow safety nozzle a numinch extension safety nozzle a rubber tip nozzle a needle tip nozzle and an air screen safety nozzle .
num .
an exhaust vent hood enclosed on num sides top and bottom of such size to enclose the operations of drying and weighing a recycled concrete aggregate sample and other operations in which a vapor or gas is emitted .
design and construct the hood so that any operation involving testing within the hood does not require the insertion of any portion of the testers body other than hands and arms .
ensure that the exhaust system is capable of producing an air speed of num to num feet per minute at the face of the opening .
num .
shovels and scoops for sampling soil aggregate and concrete .
num .
provide a nomograph .
supply the instruments necessary to measure air temperature relative humidity and wind speed including num battery operated psychrometers num concrete thermometers and num wind gauges .
obtain certification from an independent meapproved laboratory that all instruments are in good working order and have been calibrated as requested by the me .
b .
additional room or enclosure .
equip the additional room or enclosure with the following num .
two numinch diameter exhaust fans or alternative means for venting heat dust and fumes .
num .
a numday springdriven temperature recording device capable of producing a permanent record of the room temperature with a supply of recording charts and pens .
num .
install a concrete block weighing a minimum of num pounds and measuring approximately num num num inches with a num num num inch steel plate fastened to the top .
install the block on a firm foundation at a location directed by the me .
num .
two sounddampened and dustproof cabinets constructed of at least numinch plywood or other suitable material and of sufficient size to house the mechanical sample shaker and the mechanical sieve shaker .
num .
a separate cabinet for the purpose of housing and storing a nuclear density gauge .
ensure that the cabinet is constructed of numinch plywood or particle board and lead sheathing or any other acceptable materials to ensure that a radiation reading of no higher than num nanorads per hour is obtained by contact measurement of the outside wall of the storage cabinet .
this second cabinet must be securable and have a door equipped with a heavyduty lock with num keys provided .
before this cabinet is constructed obtain approval from the me of the exact location materials to be used for its construction and locking system .
num .
water tanks capable of storing three hundred num numinch concrete cylinders fully submerged and in an upright position .
provide a numinch water hose at least num feet in length .
equip the water tank with a heater capable of maintaining a water temperature of num num f. num .
laboratory testing equipment .
provide testing equipment and apparatus conforming to that listed in aashto t num including a mechanical washing machine t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num and tnum .
provide num units or the number specified by the me of the testing apparatus to satisfy the inspection and testing frequency anticipated .
in addition ensure that scales are electronic except for those required for aashto t num .
ensure that scales are inspected and certified by an independent scale company accredited according to the international organization of standardsinternational electrotechnical num commission num or a state or county office of weights and measures .
provide the me with a copy of the certification at the time of installation .
ensure that the scales are recertified annually or every num months if directed by the me .
num materials field laboratory maintenance maintain the materials field laboratory including furnishings equipment lavatories including toiletries and utilities for the duration of the contract or until no longer required by the me .
provide services for the utilities specified in num .
provide for utility disconnection when the field office is no longer required by the me .
provide weekly janitorial and waste disposal service and snow removal service as needed .
provide num case of letter legal and ledger sized paper every num months .
repair or replace inoperable or defective communication equipment office furnishings office equipment laboratory equipment and laboratory testing equipment within num hours .
the contractor is not responsible for cost of replacing or repairing items that are lost or damaged due to misuse .
num curing facility do not provide or procure the curing facility or associated equipment until the re notifies that this item is required .
within num days of re notification provide and maintain a curing facility for the exclusive use of the department at a location approved by the me .
do not use buildings scheduled for demolition under the contract as a materials field laboratory .
the me will not conduct testing until the curing facility is ready for use .
maintain the curing facility until no longer required by the me .
assume that the curing facility will be required for a minimum of num month after completion .
if the curing facility is a temporary structure secure the necessary permits from the new jersey department of community affairs and remove the structure as directed by the re .
ensure that the curing facility is weatherproof with a minimum ceiling height of num feet .
ensure that the curing facility has a concrete floor and a minimum area of num square feet .
the room shall have a minimum of three numprong electrical outlets .
ensure that the curing facility doors and windows have locks and provide all keys to the me .
provide the following for the curing facility num .
utilities and lighting .
provide all utility services and connections including water sewer gas and electricity .
provide a curing facility with sufficient natural and artificial light .
provide adequate insulation heat and airconditioning to maintain an ambient temperature of num to num f. num .
furnishings .
provide the following num .
one work bench having a minimum area of num num feet and num stools .
num .
one type abc fire extinguisher having ul approval .
num .
equipment .
provide the following num .
one sink with hot and cold running water .
num .
one wheelbarrow .
num .
one light duty oilless air compressor listed by ul with a numgallon storage tank a startstop switch num pounds per square inchnum pounds per square inch a numvolt universal motor an asme safety valve and a numfoot air hose equipped with a quickchange blow gun kit and nozzle kit consisting of a highflow safety nozzle a numinch extension safety nozzle a rubber tip nozzle a needle tip nozzle and an air screen safety nozzle .
num .
one numday springdriven temperature recording device capable of producing a permanent record of the room temperature .
num .
two numinch diameter exhaust fan or alternative means for venting heat dust and fumes .
num .
water tanks capable of storing num num numinch concrete cylinders fully submerged and in an upright position .
provide a numinch water hose at least num feet in length .
equip the water tank with a heater capable of maintaining a water temperature of num num f. num num curing facility maintenance maintain the curing facility including furnishings and curing facility equipment for the duration of the contract or until no longer required by the me .
provide services for utilities specified in num .
provide for utility disconnection when the curing facility is no longer required by the me .
provide weekly janitorial and waste disposal service and snow removal service as needed .
repair or replace inoperable or defective furnishings and curing facility equipment within num hours .
the contractor is not responsible for cost of replacing or repairing items that are lost or damaged due to misuse .
num nuclear density gauge provide for the departments exclusive use and for the duration of the project a nuclear density gauge calibrated to the manufacturers specifications with the following minimum features and capabilities num .
conformance to aashto t num .
num .
backscatter and direct transmission modes .
num .
numinch minimum length of probe .
num .
automatic warmup and self test .
num .
automatic data storage and data transfer features including an rsnum interface cable specifically configured to transfer data from the density gauge to the microcomputer system and with data communication software .
num .
count times of num num and num minutes .
num .
numpounds per cubic foot dry density precision in direct transmission at num pounds per cubic foot and at num minute with num percent accuracy .
num .
numpounds per cubic foot moisture precision at num minute with num percent accuracy .
num .
type a certified package .
the contractor may purchase a nuclear density gauge under the contractors united states nuclear regulatory commission usnrc license or lease from the gauge manufacturer on the departments usnrc license .
the contractor is barred from purchasing gauges on the departments usnrc license .
ensure that calibration and servicing of the gauge other than routine wipe tests is performed every num months .
num flexural beam testing equipment provide the following testing equipment and apparatus num .
a flexural beam tester according to aashto t num .
num .
twelve num num numinch reusable steel beam molds with handles according to aashto t num .
num .
leaf type feeler gauges and carpenters square .
num .
calipers capable of measuring inside and outside dimensions ranging from num to num millimeters in maximal calibrations of num millimeters .
num .
a handheld nummillimeter heavyduty angle grinder numv numa num rpm with an initial supply of num masonry grinding wheels .
provide additional grinding wheels within num hours of request .
maintain and calibrate the testing equipment annually .
num concrete compression testing equipment provide a concrete compression tester according to aashto t num .
ensure the testing equipment is maintained and calibrated annually .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit materials field laboratory setup unit materials field laboratory maintenance month curing facility setup unit curing facility maintenance month nuclear density gauge unit num flexural beam testing equipment unit concrete compression testing equipment unit the department will include the installation of telephone and cellular phone services in the materials field laboratory setup .
the department will make payment for maintenance of the materials field laboratory for each month or portion of a month it is required except that the department will not make payment for any month or fraction of a month that the contractor is assessed liquidated damages as specified in num .
the department will include the monthly fixed charges for telephones and cellular phones in materials field laboratory maintenance .
the department will make payment for monthly toll call charges and nonfixed charges including their related taxes for all telephone lines and cellular phones under telephone service as specified in num .
the department will make payment for curing facility maintenance for each month or portion of a month it is required except that payment will not be made for any month or fraction of a month that the contractor is assessed liquidated damages as specified in num .
section num construction layout and monuments num description this section describes the requirements for surveying and providing lines grades elevations and reference marks as necessary to construct the elements of construction .
this section also describes the requirements for constructing monuments and monument boxes .
num materials provide materials as specified concrete num reinforcement steelnum sandnum provide monument markers according to astm b num and monument boxes according to aashto m num class numa or numb .
num procedure num construction layout perform a site investigation within the project limits to locate existing property markers and monuments .
protect property markers and monuments from disturbance and destruction .
notify the re of the location of property markers and monuments that are in danger of being removed or disturbed .
do not remove or disturb existing property markers and monuments until obtaining re approval .
before removing a monument that is not owned by the department notify the agency to which the monument belongs of the need to remove the monument .
provide the re with copies of correspondence with the agency as well as the agencys written requirements or guidelines for setting monuments .
if a monument or marker is disturbed or removed without re approval the contractor is responsible for reimbursing the department for the cost to replace the monument .
perform layout for the construction of the contract using the control points and data shown on the plans .
perform layout under the direct supervision of a land surveyor .
preserve control points throughout the duration of the project .
reset control points that are damaged lost displaced or removed .
before beginning construction operations verify the vertical and horizontal controls provided in the plans using at a minimum thirdorder class i accuracy procedural standards and equipment .
notify the re in writing of discrepancies num or errors and obtain resolution before proceeding with the work .
upon request provide the re with survey notes and calculations related to the field control verification .
before beginning construction operations establish lines for row easement and other restrictions such as boundaries for environmentally sensitive areas to define the limits of construction and temporary operations .
do not encroach on private property except as allowed by easements .
provide the utilities with the layout and coordinate the work with utility relocations .
ensure that relocated utility facilities do not conflict with proposed construction including high voltage proximity act conflicts .
establish the exact location of the work from the control points .
reference the work to baselines that are established from the control points .
maintain baselines until completion .
provide and maintain offset baseline stakes for roadways ramps jughandles or turnarounds outside the limits of grading and construction .
set offset stakes at a maximum interval spacing of num feet .
where baselines have a radius of less than num feet provide offset stakes at a maximum interval spacing of num feet .
identify and mark each stake to show the offset distance from the baseline and provide grade sheets to the re showing the cut or fill to the finished profile lines with reference to the offset stakes .
provide grade sheets for construction of subbase that include calculations to establish the typical crosssection from the profile grade stake .
provide adequate and accurate offset lines during construction that requires occupation of the baseline points by construction operations .
provide the re with assistance as requested for verification of lines grades boundaries dimensions and elevations .
upon request provide the re with survey notes and calculations related to the alignment and horizontal and vertical control and field notes to document the row including easements and monument locations .
maintain survey notes in a bound field notebook in a professional manner .
if the department discovers survey errors the department will deduct the costs of checking and correcting these errors from any money due to the contractor .
num monument comply with the map filing law n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
and n.j.a.c .
num et seq .
set nondepartment monuments according to the requirements of the agency .
set department monuments at the specified location and elevation and ensure that the monuments are held firmly in place .
excavate so that concrete for the monument base and sides can be placed against undisturbed insitu material ensuring that the base is wider than the shaft .
if rock is encountered drill into the rock to provide a rock socket to the satisfaction of the re .
reuse excess excavated material as specified in num.a .
place concrete as specified in num.d and set the reinforcement steel and the monument marker at the time of the concrete pour .
ensure that the top surface of the monument is level and the disk is in the true position .
after the concrete has attained strength punch the disk .
after the monuments have been set survey the monuments .
submit the survey signed and sealed by the land surveyor to the re .
num monument box excavate so that concrete can be placed against undisturbed insitu material except place a layer of felt or tar paper along with a layer of sand around the top of the monument .
set the monument box frame so that the top of the box is flush with the proposed finished grade .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
backfill as needed .
reuse excess excavated material as specified in num.a .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit construction layout lump sum monument unit monument box unit num the department will adjust payment for construction layout based on the final contract amount and will calculate as follows e c cl c e cl o f b where cl adjusted payment for construction layout .
clb bid price for construction layout .
co original contract price .
cf final contract price .
e total cost of payment for construction layout performance bond and payment bond incentivedisincentives bonuspenalties and claim settlements .
section num soil erosion and sediment control and water quality control num description this section describes the requirements for providing pollution control measures to maintain water quality constructing and maintaining permanent sesc measures and constructing maintaining and removing temporary sesc measures .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num and no .
num temporary riprap num to num inches num soil aggregate inum num welded wire reinforcementnum temporary slope drain pipenum caution fence num seed mixtures num mulch num sod num miscellaneous landscape materialsnum geotextiles num inlet filter type num inlet filter type num sediment control bagnum haybalesnum polyethylene sheetingnum floating turbidity barriernum provide wood stakes and posts that are solid reasonably knotfree and conform to the nominal size shown on the plans .
for temporary slope drains provide pipe with a minimum of num inches in diameter .
use end sections and elbows of the same material as the pipe to which they are joined .
provide absorbent booms towels and blankets made from uvresistant spunbound polypropylene skin and filler .
num num construction num environmental manager assign a supervisorylevel employee experienced in all aspects of soil erosion and sediment control water quality control and work site waste control .
submit the name and applicable experience of this employee to the re for approval at least num days before beginning any construction operations except construction layout on the project .
submit written notification and obtain approval from the re before changing the environmental manager .
the environmental manager shall have the responsibility and sufficient authority for implementing the approved sesc and water quality methods of operations .
the environmental manager shall coordinate oversee and supervise sesc and water quality operations on the project .
this includes both onsite and offsite activities including those involving subcontractors .
the environmental manager shall oversee and supervise all site waste control operations for the project .
the environmental manager shall attend sesc and water quality meetings .
the environmental manager with the re shall inspect sesc and site waste control measures at least weekly .
perform additional inspections immediately after precipitation and other weather events that may damage sesc measures or cause uncontrolled erosion to occur .
during extended periods of precipitation perform inspections every num hours until the precipitation has ended .
submit original environmental compliance check list and inspection form to the re the same day that the inspection is performed .
perform corrective actions if required within num hours of the inspection and resubmit the environmental compliance check list and inspection form to the re within num days indicating that the corrective action has been completed .
num sesc measures construct sesc measures as required before starting construction operations .
with the approval of the re the contractor may fell trees or cut other vegetation using hand methods before constructing sesc measures .
coordinate temporary sesc measures with the permanent measures and with other construction operations to ensure effective and continuous erosion and sediment control .
construct temporary sesc measures to correct unforeseen conditions that develop during construction .
if the contractor fails to comply with sesc or site waste control provisions the re will suspend the work as specified in num .
maintain sesc measures regardless of construction season or other times when the project is closed down or suspended to ensure that the sesc measures function properly .
immediately correct or replace nonfunctioning sesc measures to meet the specified functionality .
if the contractor fails to maintain sesc or site waste control measures the re will suspend the work as specified in num .
ensure that clearing and grubbing does not interfere with the construction of permanent sesc measures or other operations .
when unstabilized areas caused by site development grading or other soil disturbing activities exist beyond num days seed and mulch the disturbed areas .
the re may limit the size of unstabilized areas due to clearing grubbing grading or other soil disturbing activities based on site conditions and the contractors ability to install and maintain sesc measures .
upon completion of soil disturbing activities permanently stabilize disturbed areas within num days as specified in num .
if seasonal limitations preclude permanent stabilization provide temporary sesc measures as approved by the re .
when excavation or embankment construction reaches the finished subgrade areas where pavement is to be placed are exempt from the above stabilization requirements .
roadways and haul roads actively used for daily conveyance of equipment as well as areas between temporary berms except median areas are also exempt .
employ construction methods to minimize airborne dust and prevent soils and other materials from being deposited on existing roadways .
apply water or other re approved materials to unpaved areas to control dust caused by hauling or other construction operations .
reuse as specified in num.a dirt and other materials that have been spilled washed or tracked onto existing roadways by hauling or other construction operations .
remove temporary sesc measures when necessary to allow for the installation of permanent measures or as permanent measures become functional .
notify the re num days before removing temporary sesc measures .
between substantial completion and completion remove temporary sesc measures unless the re directs that specific items remain in place .
num construct sesc measures as follows num .
caution fence .
install caution fence at locations shown on the plans to delineate wetlands and other environmentally sensitive areas .
space posts at least every num feet .
num .
silt fence .
install silt fence with geotextile buried securely in the existing soil .
join sections of the geotextile so that they work effectively as a continuous fence .
the contractor may install haybales instead of silt fence when approved by the re .
num .
heavyduty silt fence .
install heavyduty silt fence with geotextile securely buried in the existing soil .
join sections of the geotextile so that they work effectively as a continuous fence .
install fence posts at a slight angle toward the anticipated runoff source .
install the color of heavyduty silt fence in locations as shown in the plans .
do not substitute orange for black or black for orange .
num .
haybale .
embed haybales in the ground and place end to end to form a continuous line without gaps .
anchor haybales in place with wood stakes .
num .
haybale check dams with temporary stone outlets .
embed haybales into the ground and anchor in place with wood stakes .
place temporary riprap in the center of each flow line .
place temporary no .
num coarse aggregate immediately upgrade of each stone outlet .
place temporary riprap and no .
num coarse aggregate on geotextile .
when joining sections of geotextile overlap the sections a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
num .
temporary stone check dams .
construct temporary stone check dams in ditches to reduce flow velocity .
place no .
num temporary coarse aggregate immediately upgrade of each check dam .
place temporary riprap and no .
num coarse aggregate on the geotextile .
when joining sections of the geotextile overlap the sections a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
num .
temporary slope drains .
install temporary slope drains on embankment slopes to intercept surface runoff where concentrated runoff will cause excessive erosion of the slope .
stake the drainpipe to the slope or secure it with temporary riprap to prevent movement or displacement .
attach a flared end section at each end of the pipe and install elbows that conform with the existing changes in slopes .
construct a temporary berm using suitable material and place haybales at the top of slope in the vicinity of the slope drain to intercept runoff and channel the runoff to the slope drain .
embed the haybales into the ground and anchor them with wood stakes .
place temporary riprap loosely on geotextile at both ends of the pipe to prevent scour .
drape the geotextile over the top of the earth berm and anchor it as necessary .
when joining sections of the geotextile overlap the sections a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
num .
inlet filters .
provide type num and type num inlet filters as follows a .
type num .
for new inlet structures mold welded steel wire fabric around the inlet frames and grates or inlet structures and extend a minimum of num inches down each side of the new structures .
secure geotextile to the welded wire fabric .
place no .
num coarse aggregate against the inlet structures to hold the inlet filter in place for existing inlet structures place geotextile under the grates over the curb pieces and extend a minimum of num inches beyond .
place no .
num coarse aggregate behind each curb piece and on the geotextile to secure the fabric in place .
for existing or new inlets with curb pieces wrap the geotextile around a piece of lumber .
place the lumber against the vertical opening to allow for flood overflow .
remove inlet filters within num hours of a paving operation .
b .
type num .
remove the inlet grate and place the inlet filter in the opening holding out approximately num inches of the filter outside the frame .
replace the inlet grate to hold the filter in place .
empty the filter according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when removing the filter ensure that sediment does not enter into the drainage system .
clean out the filter dispose of the sediment as specified in num.b rinse and return the filter to its original shape and replace the filter inside the inlet .
num num .
temporary inlet sediment traps .
construct temporary inlet sediment traps when the elevation of the surface runoff is lower than the inlet structure .
create a numinch diameter opening in the inlet and place a num numfoot piece of type num inlet geotextile and no .
num coarse aggregate over the opening to prevent sediment from entering the inlet .
place temporary inlet sediment traps in each flow line upgrade of the inlet structure .
before raising the elevation of the surface runoff remove and dispose of the temporary inlet sediment trap and repair the opening in the inlet .
num .
temporary stone outlet sediment traps .
construct temporary stone outlet sediment traps with temporary basins and riprap spillways within existing new and temporary ditches .
place no .
num coarse aggregate immediately upgrade of the spillways .
place the riprap stones and coarse aggregate on geotextile that is anchored in the soil .
if sections of geotextile need to be joined overlap the sections a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
num .
floating turbidity barriers .
at least num days before installation submit floating turbidity barrier design and placement locations for department approval .
install floating turbidity barrier in streams or other waterbodies to contain discharge from drainage pipes and construction operations before beginning work in that area .
install floating turbidity barriers radially from the point of discharge of drainage pipes or from construction operations that could potentially impact the waterbody .
install floating turbidity barriers parallel and as close to the shore as possible while still enabling it to float .
ensure that at least num feet of each end of the floating turbidity barrier is anchored on shore .
clean out floating turbidity barriers and keep them free from debris .
ensure floating turbidity barriers remain in place until all of the work in the area is completed the cofferdam is removed if applicable and the adjacent ground area has established a firm stand of vegetation if applicable .
remove floating turbidity barriers in such a manner as to minimize the release of sediment and debris .
num .
dewatering basin .
at least num days before installation submit to the re for approval a plan detailing the size materials and location for all dewatering basins .
size dewatering basins to contain the expected discharge of water and sediment based on the flow rate of the pump to be used and the volume of area to be dewatered .
contain the turbid discharge from dewatering activities in a dewatering basin to control sediment and provide water filtration .
as specified in n.j.a.c numb or other applicable jurisdictional regulations provide filtration to release clean and clear water into adjacent streams or other waterbodies .
install floating turbidity barriers where the basin outfall flows into a receiving waterbody .
ensure that the outfall of the basin does not cause erosion to or scour of the area onto which the water is being discharged .
at the end of dewatering operations remove the dewatering basin .
restore the disturbed area to the original condition .
num .
sediment control bag .
at least num days before installation submit to the re for approval a plan detailing the size location details of aggregate base anticipated discharge flow and manufacturers catalog cuts .
if the outfall of the sediment control bag flows into receiving waterbody ensure that floating turbidity barriers are installed as specified in num .
install and maintain sediment control bags according to the manufacturers recommendations .
size sediment control bags to accommodate anticipated sediment and flow rates .
place the sediment control bag on the slope to allow water to flow downhill through the bag .
place the discharge hose into the neck of sediment control bag and fasten to ensure that water does not leak at the connection .
to increase the efficiency of filtration place the bag on an aggregate bed to maximize water flow through the surface area of the bag .
size aggregate to prevent puncture of sediment control bags .
ensure that the discharge from the sediment control bag does not cause erosion to or scour of the area onto which the water is being discharged .
when the sediment control bag is num percent full can no longer efficiently filter sediment or does not allow water to pass at a reasonable rate remove and replace .
remove sediment control bags according to the manufacturers recommendations and dispose as specified in num .
restore the disturbed area to the original condition .
num .
sediment control tank .
at least num days before installation submit sediment control tank design and proposed location for department approval .
design sediment control tanks to contain or control the expected discharge of water and sediment based on the flow rate of the pump to be used the volume of area to be num dewatered and the frequency of removal of water sediment or both .
provide a sediment control tank to capture sediment and floating debris from dewatering activities .
provide filtration to release clean and clear water into adjacent streams or other waterbodies .
relocate the tank as needed to dewater other locations .
inspect the tank daily for level of sediment debris and water .
remove tank contents before the tank reaches num percent of its capacity or when the tank no longer efficiently captures sediment or floating debris .
dispose of tank contents as specified in num.b .
if water from the tank is being discharged into a waterbody install floating turbidity barriers to corral the discharge area .
protect the discharge area from erosion and scour .
num .
construction driveway .
to minimize tracking of dirt and other materials onto existing roadways provide a construction driveway at each location where vehicles exit the work site as approved by the re .
construct driveways using no .
num coarse aggregate placed on geotextile .
ensure that the driveway is at least num feet wide .
the contractor may make driveways wider if approved by re .
maintain the driveway by top dressing or by excavating and top dressing as directed by the re with additional no .
num coarse aggregate .
when the driveway is no longer required remove the driveway backfill to the adjacent ground elevation and restore the disturbed area to the original condition .
num .
concrete washout system .
at least num days before the first concrete placement submit to the re for approval a plan for the concrete washout system .
design the concrete washout system to fully contain the concrete washout needs concrete slurry and the departments concrete testing of the work .
ensure that each concrete washout facility prevents discharge from concrete trucks and equipment cleaning from entering into inlets and into surface or groundwater .
ensure that the location of concrete washout facilities are no closer than num feet from environmentally sensitive areas such as streams wetlands or other areas shown on the plans .
use signs to designate concrete washout areas .
ensure that concrete washout facilities are limited to the designated areas .
ensure that the concrete washout system is in place before delivery of concrete to the site .
ensure that a secure noncollapsing nonwater collecting cover over each concrete washout facility is in place during precipitation so that precipitation does not accumulate and cause the washout areas to overflow .
if the concrete washout facility becomes num percent full discontinue pouring concrete until the concrete washout facility is cleaned out .
remove hardened concrete and reuse as specified in num.a .
allow slurry to evaporate or dispose of as specified in num.b .
if a lined basin is used replace the liner if it becomes damaged or compromised .
remove concrete washout facilities when no longer needed .
restore the disturbed area to original condition .
num .
absorbent boom .
install the absorbent boom inside turbidity barrier or as shown on plans to ensure that oil products do not escape the work site .
if an oil spill occurs remove absorbent boom after absorption of oil and dispose of as specified in num .
replace as necessary to continually protect the waterbody .
num .
oilwater separator .
at least num days before beginning the work submit to the re for approval a plan detailing the size location anticipated discharge flow and manufacturers catalog cuts of the oilwater separator before installation .
provide an oilwater separator for removal of free product generated in dewatering excavations in each area of petroleum contaminated groundwater .
use a selfcontained factory assembled oilwater separator meeting the following requirements num .
capable of removing free petroleum product as required by contractorobtained discharge permits .
num .
designed for intermittent varied or continuous flows of water oil or combinations of non emulsified oilwater mixtures .
num .
designed to minimize solids buildup in the separators oilwater collection chamber .
num .
capable of being moved about within the project limits as needed .
dispose of oils and sediments collected in the oilwater separators as specified in num .
num .
oilonly emergency spill kit .
before start of construction operations place oilonly emergency spill kits within the project limits with each kit capable of cleaning up at least num gallons of spill .
include the following num .
an instruction manual and emergency response guide .
num .
ten numinch numfoot oilonly absorbent booms .
num num .
ten numinch numfoot oilonly absorbent booms .
num .
one hundred num numinch oilonly absorbent pads .
num .
twenty temporary disposal bags and ties .
num .
a num pound bag of loose absorbent pellets .
num .
a wheeled container for the above .
if a spill occurs immediately contain the spill and notify the njdep hotline num and the re .
clean up and remediate the spill as directed by the njdep .
separately stockpile as specified in num the contaminated material and dispose of the contaminated material as specified in num .
submit an incident report to the re within num days after cleanup that includes a summary of the incident the cleanup and containment measures taken the time and date of the incident and the njdep case number .
replenish the kits to ensure that the specified number of complete kits are onsite at all times during construction operations .
num erosion control sediment removal remove sediment from sediment traps and dewatering basins when they are num percent filled .
remove sediment from silt fences stone outlet structures dams and haybales when the sediment reaches num percent of the height of the sesc measure .
remove the coarse aggregate and riprap from check dams when removing the sediment .
reuse the removed material as specified in num.a .
replace the coarse aggregate and riprap removed from check dams .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit caution fence linear foot silt fence linear foot heavyduty silt fence ___ linear foot haybale unit haybale check dam with temporary stone outlet linear foot temporary stone check dam cubic yard temporary slope drain linear foot inlet filter type num square foot inlet filter type num ___ x ___ unit temporary inlet sediment trap unit temporary stone outlet sediment trap square foot floating turbidity barrier type ___ linear foot dewatering basin unit sediment control bag square foot sediment control tank unit construction driveway ton concrete washout system lump sum absorbent boom linear foot oilwater separator unit oilonly emergency spill kit type ___ unit erosion control sediment removal cubic yard temporary riprap cubic yard the department will measure inlet filter type num by the square foot based on the dimensions of the drainage structure opening .
the department will calculate the square footage for each sediment control bag from the nominal size of each bag as provided by the manufacturer .
the department will make payment for top dressing of construction driveways with additional stone under construction driveway .
the department will make payment for riprap for maintenance replacement for the various soil erosion and sediment controls items under temporary riprap .
num the department will make payment for floating turbidity barrier used in conjunction with dewatering basin sediment control bag or sediment control tank under floating turbidity barrier .
section num traffic control num description this section describes the requirements for implementing controls to protect vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
traffic control includes providing installing placing relocating maintaining and removing traffic control devices .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified tack coat pg num tack coat cutback asphalt grade rcnum emulsified asphalt grade rsnum ssnum ssnumh grade cssnum or cssnumhnum hma nummnum num construction barriernum signsnum sign postsnum timber sign supports num top and side mounted delineatorsnum latex paint num temporary pavement marking tapenum.a removable black line masking tape num.b temporary pavement markersnum polymerized joint adhesivenum num equipment provide equipment as specified flashing arrow boardnum portable variable message sign num traffic control truck with mounted impact attenuatorsnum vibratory drum compactor num bituminous material distributor num hma plantnum hma trucks num num procedure num traffic control coordinator before starting work submit to the re the name training work experience and contact information of an employee assigned as the onsite traffic control coordinator tcc .
the tcc must be certified as having successfully completed the rutgers cait traffic control coordinator program or an equivalent course as approved by the njdot office of capital project safety .
the tcc must also successfully complete an approved traffic coordinator refresher course every num years .
the tcc is a fulltime position and the employee designated as tcc must be available on a numhour a day numdays a week basis .
the tcc shall have the responsibility for and authority to implement and maintain all traffic operations for the project on behalf of the contractor .
the tccs responsibilities and duties shall include the following num .
overseeing traffic control operations including those performed by subcontractors .
num num .
coordinating traffic control with subcontractors other contractors and utilities .
num .
ensuring that setup and removal is performed according to the contract .
num .
performing daily traffic control inspections and providing written reports documenting the inspections including detailed findings and corrections made .
num .
performing inspections at night and on weekends to ensure compliance with the tcp .
num .
ensuring that traffic control devices are correctly positioned and spaced .
num ensuring that signs are properly covered or uncovered .
num .
maintaining or replacing traffic control devices to ensure traffic control devices are in an acceptable condition and good working order .
maintenance also includes replacing lights bulbs and electrical components and refueling recharging or replacing batteries .
num .
ensuring that excavations and lateral dropoffs greater than num inches in depth are eliminated or protected by barrier or emergency escape ramps during nonworking periods .
num .
ensuring that routine road maintenance is performed including debris removal and road cleaning .
num .
ensuring that construction operations do not create flooding or icing conditions for lanes open to traffic .
num .
identify and correcting traffic control deficiencies immediately .
correct traffic control deficiencies directed by the re within num hours of notification .
num .
ensuring that vehicles equipment and material stored adjacent to the road are behind barriers or stored at least num feet from the traveled way .
num .
ensuring that contractor vehicles for material delivery enter or exit the traveled way in a safe manner .
provide additional employees to assist the tcc as approved by the re .
the re may request the tcc or additional employees to demonstrate their competency at any time .
notify the re before performing daily inspections to provide the re with the opportunity to observe the inspections .
num traffic control devices ensure that fhwa category num num num and num traffic control devices conform to the requirements of nchrp num .
ensure that traffic control devices meet or exceed an acceptable condition as described in the atssa guide quality standards for work zone traffic control devices .
traffic control devices need not be new but must be in good condition .
provide traffic control devices according to mutcd .
erect traffic control devices before beginning construction operations .
trim vegetation that obscures the sight distance of traffic control devices .
keep the traffic control devices clean and maintain in acceptable condition until no longer required .
relocate traffic devices as directed by the re .
place traffic control devices as directed to provide traffic control for department personnel doing inspections sampling testing and taking measurements required for the project .
num .
construction signs .
install anchor posts with soil anchor plates except when installing in rock or in concrete .
if construction signs are required for less than num days the contractor may place construction signs on portable sign stands instead of sign posts with the approval of the re .
when construction signs or existing signs do not reflect work zone traffic conditions cover the signs with black polyethylene sheeting .
ensure that the cover is opaque under all lighting conditions and completely conceals the entire front of the sign panel .
securely attach the cover to the back side of the sign without damaging the reflective sheeting .
do not tape the cover to the face of the sign .
ensure that the cover remains secure in all weather conditions .
overhead signs and large guide signs with areas greater than num square feet do not need a cover over the entire sign but require a cover over the conflicting information .
do not alter the face of a sign with revised messages .
remove construction signs when no longer required and restore the post hole to match the surrounding conditions .
num .
construction barrier curb .
the contractor may use type num alternate design a or b construction barrier curb interchangeably in any location where type num has been specified .
only use alternate design b joint class d as bridge parapets .
the contractor may use construction barrier curb type num alternate b in any location where type num has been specified .
the contractor may use construction barrier curb that is constructed using gray or white concrete .
do not place different types or colors of construction barrier curb in a continuous run .
do not use construction barrier curb having any of the following deficiencies num .
exposed steel at the connector flangeway .
num .
exposed reinforcement steel .
num num .
cracking through the cross section .
num .
an area of concrete missing larger than a numinch by numinch right triangle .
num .
debris in the keyway .
num .
nonfunctioning anchor bolt holes .
num .
nonfunctioning anchor rod hole .
num .
paint applied to the surface .
num .
objects protruding from the surface .
num .
previous repairs .
at least num days before delivering construction barrier curb to the project limit provide the re notice that the barrier curb is available for inspection .
the re will inspect the barrier curb and approve individual pieces for delivery to the project limits .
when installing construction barrier curb ensure that the barrier curb is pulled taut .
remove slack from the connection key .
anchor the barrier curb and grout the joints as required for the joint class .
if required ensure that anchor pins and anchor bolts do not project above the plane of the barrier curb .
before bolting barrier curb to a bridge deck provide the proposed method of layout and drilling to the re for approval .
replace construction barrier curb that does not meet the specified requirements .
do not patch or repair construction barrier curb .
provide top and side mounted flexible delineators on the construction barrier curb except on flared portions when other traffic control devices delineate the traveled path .
install flexible delineators as specified in num.g .
num .
flashing arrow board .
provide a flashing arrow board as specified in num .
num .
portable variable message sign pvms .
place the pvms at the locations directed by the re .
ensure that a designated representative familiar with the operation and programming of the unit is available on the project .
only display messages authorized by the department for the project .
repair or replace malfunctioning pvms within num hours of notification by the re .
num .
temporary crash cushion .
install inertial barrier systems as specified in num .
install crash cushions as specified in num .
immediately repair or replace crash cushions that become damaged or become inoperable .
maintain an adequate number of replacement parts to repair damaged units at all times .
keep the areas in front atop and around the crash cushions clear of snow accumulation of more than num inches in depth .
num .
traffic control truck with mounted crash cushions .
provide the re with a copy of the crash cushion manufacturers recommendations .
position the traffic control truck to ensure that there is adequate stopping distance after impact and to prevent errant vehicles from traveling around the truck and endangering workers .
when used in a fixed position place manual transmission vehicles in second gear and place automatic transmission vehicles in park .
ensure that the parking brake is set and the wheels are turned to avoid rolling into active traffic lanes .
do not use traffic control trucks in place of other temporary impact attenuators for more than num hours .
relocate the traffic control truck as specified by the tcp or as directed by the re .
do not use the truck to carry additional equipment materials or debris .
when using ballast ensure that it is secured to the truck .
submit working drawings for certification detailing the manner of securing the ballast signed and sealed by a professional engineer to ensure that it is capable of withstanding the impact forces for which the impact attenuator is rated .
num .
channelizing guide posts .
prepare the pavement surface to provide a clean sound area to affix the post .
apply an epoxy or butyl adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations and bond the base of the post to the pavement surface .
provide only numinch diameter tubular channelizing markers .
remove when no longer required .
num removable black line masking tape apply black line masking tape over existing traffic stripes according to the manufacturers recommendations and when the weather is favorable as determined by the re .
ensure that the black line masking tape completely covers existing stripes .
replace black line masking tape that becomes loose after placement within num hours .
when black line masking tape is no longer required carefully and completely remove without using heat solvents grinding sanding or water .
num num temporary pavement markers apply temporary pavement markers with butyl adhesive pads to clean dry pavement surfaces free of cracking checking or spalling .
if the layout locates a marker at a joint or defect relocate the marker longitudinally at least num inches beyond the joint or defect .
replace lost or damaged temporary pavement markers .
only remove temporary pavement markers that will be replaced by striping in the same day .
if striping can not be finished in the same day reinstall temporary pavement markers before opening the road to traffic .
num temporary pavement marking tape install tape according to the manufacturers recommendations when the weather is favorable as determined by the re .
immediately before marking the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
clean the surface num inches beyond the perimeter of the marking to be placed .
install tape on dry surfaces having a surface temperature between num f and num f when the ambient temperature is at least num f and rising .
when splicing is required install the tape using butt splices .
do not overlap the tape .
tamp the tape for initial adhesion and then apply pressure by driving a truck slowly over the tape several times .
maintain tape by replacing loose or damaged tape within num hours .
remove tape when no longer required .
num temporary traffic stripes and temporary traffic markings install temporary traffic stripes and markings when required for num days or less .
apply temporary traffic stripes and markings when the ambient and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising and the surface temperature is no more than num f. apply the traffic paint in a wet film thickness of num num mil .
apply glass beads of the correct gradation to the wet paint in a uniform pattern and at the rate of num pounds per gallon of paint .
num hma patch the re may direct the contractor to sawcut existing hma pavement to the depth of the area to be repaired .
sawcut lines parallel and perpendicular to the roadway baseline and num inches away at the closest point from the damaged area to be repaired .
remove loose material within the boundary of the repair and clean the area .
reuse removed material as specified in num.a .
ensure that the remaining pavement is not damaged .
apply polymerized joint adhesive or tack coat to the vertical surfaces of the openings .
ensure that the temperature of the hma when placed is at least num f. place hma in numinch maximum lifts and compact with a vibratory drum .
for small areas the re may approve hand compacting methods .
compact until the top of the patch is flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
num traffic direction a. flagger .
provide a flagger that has received formal training in flagging operations and the proper use of the stopslow paddle .
the flagger must meet mutcd qualifications and when requested demonstrate competency to the re .
immediately replace flaggers who fail to demonstrate competency with a competent flagger .
ensure that flaggers wear a num highvisibility retroreflective orange safety garment meeting ansiisea class num level num standards .
ensure that the flagger is equipped with a stopslow paddle meeting mutcd requirements and follows mutcd flagging procedures .
b .
police .
unless designated as local police at the preconstruction conference police will be onduty new jersey state police .
police are either provided by the re as employees of the state or by the local government as a vendor to the state .
the use of police services by the re does not relinquish or diminish the contractors responsibilities for work zone safety .
submit a request for police services to the re num hours before beginning construction operations that require police services .
activities requiring police services include num .
traffic direction through signalized intersections where the integrity of the existing traffic signal system is impacted or where an override of the signal is required .
num .
rolling slowdown or temporary closure of all lanes on state highways and interstates .
num emergency situations may prevent police from arriving at the scheduled date or time .
the re will not permit construction operations that by law require police services if police are unavailable .
the department will not accept claims for interruptions or delays resulting from any failure of police to arrive as requested .
the contractor may request police services to enhance the tcp .
submit a request for police services to the re num hours before beginning construction operations that require police services .
the re will determine the need for and direct the use of police for the following activities .
num .
night operations num .
tcp setup or removal on high speed and high volume roads and num .
major traffic pattern changes .
the re must notify state and local police of cancellations num hours in advance .
at least num hours before the scheduled start of work notify the re of any work cancellation for which police services were requested .
num emergency towing service at least num days before the start of construction operations submit to the re for approval an emergency towing service plan for removing abandoned vehicles and vehicles that are disabled but not as the result of an accident .
the police will arrange for towing services to remove vehicles that are disabled due to traffic accidents .
indicate in the plan the proposed manner of providing towing service including the type quantity and location of towing equipment to be used .
provide towing service to remove disabled and abandoned vehicles from the construction zone to the nearest location where the vehicle can be legally parked .
ensure that the towing service responds immediately upon notice of a disabled vehicle by the re or contractor personnel .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit breakaway barricade unit drum unit traffic cone unit construction signs square foot construction identification sign ___ x ___ unit construction barrier curb linear foot flashing arrow board ___ x ___ unit portable variable message sign unit temporary crash cushion inertial barrier system ___ modules unit temporary crash cushion ___ unit traffic control truck with mounted crash cushion unit channelizing guide post unit removable black line masking tape ___ linear foot temporary pavement markers unit temporary pavement marking tape ____ linear foot temporary traffic stripes ___ linear foot temporary traffic markings square foot hma patch ton traffic director flagger hour emergency towing service unit for traffic control devices measured by the linear foot or unit basis the department will make payment for the maximum quantity in service at one time as required by the contract .
the department will make payment for num percent of the contract bid price for traffic control devices that are measured on a linear foot or unit basis upon approved placement .
the department will prorate the balance of payment over the duration of the contract .
the department will measure temporary pavement marking tape by the linear foot of numinch wide strips .
num the department will measure removable black line masking tape by the linear foot for each numinch width of existing stripe that is to be covered .
the department will not measure replacement temporary pavement stripes and markers for payment .
except for unforeseen weather conditions if the contractor cancels work without providing at least numhour notice the department will deduct the cost of police services num hours for each police officer scheduled from the contract .
section num price adjustments num description this section describes the requirements for price adjustments for fuel and asphalt usage .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num fuel price adjustment the department will make monthly price adjustments for fuel usage for items listed in table num .
the department will calculate fuel price adjustments based on the monthly pay quantities of listed items using the fuel usage factors listed in table num .
price adjustments may result in an increased payment to the contractor for increases in the price index and may result in a reduction in payment for decreases in the price index .
if the asbuilt quantity of an item listed in table num differs from the sum of the quantities in the monthly estimates and the asbuilt quantity can not by readily distributed among the months that the item listed in table num was constructed then the department will determine fuel price adjustment by distributing the difference in the same proportion as the items monthly estimate quantity is to the total of the items monthly estimates .
table num fuel price adjustments items fuel usage factor excavation unclassified num gallons per cubic yard excavation regulated material num gallons per cubic yard excavation acid producing soil num gallons per cubic yard removal of pavement num gallons per square yard hma milling num or less num gallons per square yard hma milling more than num to num num gallons per square yard concrete milling num gallons per square yard hma profile milling num gallons per square yard breaking pavement num gallons per square yard rubblization num gallons per square yard subbase num gallon per cubic yard i___ soil aggregate num gallon per cubic yard soil aggregate base course ___ thick num gallon per square yard per inch soil aggregate base course variable thickness num gallon per cubic yard densegraded aggregate base course ___ thick num gallon per square yard per inch densegraded aggregate base course variable thickness num gallon per cubic yard concrete base course ___ thick num gallons per square yard concrete base course reinforced ___ thick num gallons per square yard num table num fuel price adjustments asphalt stabilized drainage course num gallons per ton opengraded ___ friction course num gallons per ton modified opengraded ___ friction course ___ num gallons per ton ultrathin friction course num gallons per ton hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ surface course num gallons per ton hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ intermediate course num gallons per ton mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ base course num gallons per ton stone matrix asphalt ___ surface course num gallons per ton concrete surface course ___ thick num gallons per square yard diamond grinding of concrete surface course num gallons per square yard diamond grinding existing concrete pavement num gallons per square yard concrete bridge approach num gallons per cubic yard concrete culvert num gallon per cubic yard concrete footing num gallon per cubic yard concrete wing wall num gallon per cubic yard concrete pier column protection hpc num gallon per cubic yard concrete pier columns and cap num gallon per cubic yard concrete abutment wall num gallon per cubic yard concrete pier shaft num gallon per cubic yard concrete pedestrian bridge num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge deck num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge deck hpc num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge sidewalk num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge sidewalk hpc num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge parapet num gallon per cubic yard concrete bridge parapet hpc num gallon per cubic yard castinplace concrete piles driven ___ diameter num gallon per cubic yard retaining wall location no.___ ___ num gallon per square foot if an item listed in table num has a payment unit which differs from that listed in table num the department will apply an appropriate conversion factor to determine the number of gallons of fuel used .
the department will calculate fuel price adjustment on a monthly basis using the following formula f mf bf g where f fuel price adjustment mf monthly fuel price index bf basic fuel price index g gallons of fuel for price adjustment the department will post the monthly fuel price index every month on the departments website httpwww.state.nj.ustransportationbusinesstrnsportpriceindex.shtm the basic fuel price index is the previous months fuel price index before receipt of bids .
the department will use the fuel price index for the month before the regular monthly estimate cut off date as the monthly fuel price index .
if the monthly fuel price index increases by num percent or more over the basic fuel price index do not perform any work involving items listed in table num without written approval from the re .
num num asphalt price adjustment the department will make monthly price adjustments for asphalt binder usage .
the department will calculate asphalt price adjustments based on the quantities of items containing asphalt binder constructed during a given month .
price adjustments may result in an increased payment to the contractor for increases in the price index and may result in a reduction in payment for decreases in the price index .
the department will calculate the asphalt price adjustment by the following formula a ma ba t where a asphalt price adjustment ma monthly asphalt price index ba basic asphalt price index t tons of new asphalt bindernum num .
the department will determine the weight of asphalt binder for price adjustment by multiplying the percentage of new asphalt binder in the approved job mix formula by the weight of the item containing asphalt binder .
for tack coat and prime coat the department will calculate asphalt price adjustments by the following formula a b ma baba c m g where a asphalt price adjustment b bid price for tack coatprime coat ma monthly asphalt price index ba basic asphalt price index c petroleum content of the tack coat and prime coat in percent by volume use num for cutbacks num for inverted emulsions num for rs or similar type emulsions m percentage of bid price applicable to materials only use num g gallons of tack coat and prime coat furnished and applied the monthly asphalt price index as determined by the department will be the average of quotations from suppliers serving the area in which the project is located and will be determined by the department each month .
the department will post the monthly asphalt price index every month on the departments web site httpwww.state.nj.ustransportationbusinesstrnsportpriceindex.shtm .
the basic asphalt rice index is the asphalt price index for the month before the opening of bids .
the department will use the asphalt price index for the month before the regular monthly estimate cut off date as the monthly asphalt price index .
if the monthly asphalt price index increases num percent or more over the basic asphalt price index do not perform work on items containing asphalt binder without written approval from the re .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit fuel price adjustment lump sum asphalt price adjustment lump sum num section num final cleanup num description this section describes the requirements for performing final cleanup .
num materials intentionally blank num procedure num final cleanup clean the project limits to the res satisfaction of rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment .
include borrow source areas and equipment and material staging areas occupied in connection with the work .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit final cleanup lump sum num division num earthwork section num clearing site num description this section describes the requirements for clearing site clearing site for bridges and other structures removing underground storage tanks installing monitoring wells sealing abandoned wells and demolishing buildings .
num materials provide materials as specified soil aggregate inum num concretenum caution fence num polyethylene sheetingnum provide a commercially available basement waterproofing .
num construction num clearing site a .
preparation .
construct sesc measures as specified in num before clearing site .
before beginning excavation or embankment construction clear the site within the limits of construction .
clear the ground surface of designated trees brush weeds roots matted leaves small structures debris and other objectionable material vegetation and growth .
b .
clearing and grubbing .
in cut sections grub out tree stumps within the limits of the total cut area .
in fill sections the contractor may leave tree stumps extending less than num foot above the original ground surface in those areas where the proposed subgrade or proposed finished grade in nonpavement sections is greater than num feet above the original ground surface .
grub out tree stumps that lie within num feet horizontally or vertically from any proposed structure pipe or duct .
do not remove trees shrubs and other landscape features that do not interfere with the work or are designated for preservation .
prevent damage or injury to existing trees plants and other vegetation that is to remain within or adjacent to the project limits .
at locations adjacent to operations performed by motorized equipment erect and maintain a numfoot high caution fence around trees shrubs and areas containing vegetation to be preserved .
backfill and compact depressions in excavation areas that lie below the finished subgrade to finished subgrade using the directed method as specified in num.c .
clear slopes of cuts embankments ditches channels waterbodies and structures both old and new of brush hedges weeds heavy vegetation and other objectionable material or growth .
clear to a maximum of num feet beyond the top of slopes of roadway excavation and num feet beyond the top of slopes of ditches and channels except do not clear outside row .
conduct clearing and removal activities in areas identified as containing regulated material according to the pre excavation plans as specified in num .
c. mailbox and sign relocation .
remove and reset residential and commercial mailboxes at locations acceptable to the owners and according to united states postal service usps requirements .
notify the usps before relocating usps mailboxes .
num remove local street and road signs and reset at locations and in the manner acceptable to local authorities .
ensure that tourist oriented directional signs and logo signs remain visible to motorists during and after stages of construction .
remove from the immediate work site and safely store existing signs that are to be reset .
d. plugging pipe .
seal abandoned pipes using concrete .
construct the plugs to a depth equal to the diameter of the pipe or num feet whichever is less .
e. removing pipe inlets and manholes .
excavate for the removal of existing pipe inlets and manholes as specified in num.b .
backfill with excavated material and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
the re may require use of the density control compaction method as specified in num.d except that the re may increase the frequency of measurements .
reuse removed drainage structures as specified in num.a .
unless designated for resetting on the project dispose of inlet and manhole castings as specified in num .
f. removing sidewalks driveways curbs and gutters .
sawcut full depth at the limits of removal .
remove sidewalks driveways vertical curbs sloping curbs barrier curbs and gutters designated for removal and reuse as specified in num.a .
obtain re approval of methods to remove barrier curb before beginning work .
repair damage to adjacent pavement courses caused by removal operations .
g. removing electrical material and equipment .
remove existing foundations and junction boxes that are abandoned under the contract to a minimum depth of num feet below the finished grade .
remove foundations or junction boxes that interfere with the installation of a new system and backfill as specified in num.c .
reuse concrete from foundations and junction boxes as specified in num.a .
dispose of castings as specified in num .
remove other electrical material and equipment that are designated for removal and dispose of as specified in num .
obtain re approval of methods of removal and ensure remaining electrical equipment is left undamaged .
salvage and deliver to the department removed aboveground electrical material as required .
num clearing site bridge and clearing site structure submit a demolition plan detailing the methods and equipment to be used to the re for approval num days before demolition operations .
remove the substructures of existing structures to at least num feet below the natural stream bottom and remove those parts outside of the stream to at least num feet below natural ground surface .
where such portions of existing structures lie wholly or in part within the limits of a new structure remove them to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure .
when removing creosote timbers in waterbodies surround the removal area with absorbent booms in addition to sesc measures .
dispose of absorbent booms as specified in num .
dismantle with minimal damage steel bridges and wood bridges that are to be salvaged for the department as specified in the special provisions .
matchmark steel members unless such matchmarking is waived by the department .
remove salvageable material in sections or pieces and store at specified places within the project limits .
before placing the new work complete blasting or other operations necessary for the removal of an existing bridge or structure that may damage new construction .
prevent damage to existing structures designated to remain .
if portions of the existing structure scheduled to remain are damaged by removal activities submit a repair plan to the re for approval .
repair damaged portions of existing structures according to the approved repair plan .
num temporary shielding submit working drawings for certification for a system to protect vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic or environmentally sensitive areas from falling debris construction materials or other objects .
temporary shielding requirements are in addition to forms and falsework required for construction .
design the temporary shielding system to conform to the following num .
withstands loads of at least num pounds per square inch or greater if heavier loads are anticipated or if required by railroads .
num .
prevents small particles and dust from escaping the shield .
num num .
seals the underside of the deck and extends outside of the deck and outside of the fascia stringers to enclose the soffits and parapets .
num .
if parapet removal or parapet construction is required provide an outrigging to enclose the soffit and parapet .
num .
does not bolt or weld the temporary shielding system to the beams .
num .
does not reduce the underclearance of the bridges to less than num feet over roadways and num feet over railroads or as specified in the contract .
if existing underclearance is less than these values does not further reduce the underclearance .
show elements of the temporary shielding system including design calculations and the sequence of operations and when applicable bonding and grounding over electrified rail lines .
include with the working drawings a plan for removing material dust or debris that has fallen into active traffic lanes railroads and environmentally sensitive areas .
install the temporary shielding according to the certified working drawings before performing any construction operations over vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic or ecologically sensitive areas .
the re will not allow the installation of temporary shielding over active traffic lanes and pedestrian areas .
when applicable comply with the railroads maintenance of traffic requirements rules and regulations .
remove and reinstall the temporary shielding as required by construction staging .
do not allow dropped materials to accumulate on the temporary shielding and remove dropped materials promptly .
if debris falls from the shielding promptly clean it up and repair the damage .
do not remove any portion of the shielding without the approval of the re .
num removing underground storage tanks refer to the special provisions for the locations and types of underground storage tanks to be removed .
excavate test pits as necessary to confirm locations types and sizes of underground storage tanks as specified in num .
use information gathered from the test pits to complete and submit the njdeps underground storage tank facility certification questionnaire and notice of intent to close an ust system .
upon completion of tank removal submit a minimum of num site investigation report per parcel .
submit copies of site investigation reports to the re the bureau of landscape architecture and environmental solutions and the departments environmental consultant .
remove and dispose of underground storage tanks and piping systems sample and analyze soils and water recycle or dispose of contaminated soils and install and seal monitoring wells according to n.j.a.c numb and n.j.a.c nume and federal state and local laws rules and regulations and the following num .
permits and approvals .
submit documents to obtain the permits and approvals necessary for this work .
register unregistered tanks that are regulated by n.j.a.c numb .
submit the underground storage tank facility questionnaire and notice of intent to close an ust system to the re for review before submitting it to the njdep .
obtain njdep approval before commencing removal operations .
notify the re num days before the removal of underground tanks to allow the department to obtain the epa identification number epa id for the tank contents .
ensure that the waste disposal or recycling facility planned for receipt of the material is properly permitted for acceptance .
submit a copy of the facility permit to the re num days before disposal or recycling .
num .
removal operations .
monitor the site with an explosimeter to indicate the presence and concentration of flammable vapors and gas .
if this test reveals that unsafe working conditions exist notify the re and immediately suspend removal operations until it is determined that conditions are acceptable for resuming work .
remove liquids and sludge contained in the underground storage tanks and piping before removing the tanks and associated piping systems from the ground and dispose of the removed contents according to njdeps n.j.a.c num .
avoid leakage from the tanks onto the surrounding soil by properly pumping the contents of the tanks into permitted transport vehicles .
if leakage or spillage occurs immediately notify the re .
notify the njdeps environmental action hotline and the county health department within num minutes .
remediate leaks or spillage to the njdeps satisfaction according to their investigation and corrective action requirements .
num perform tank removal operations with the least disturbance to the soil surrounding the tanks .
erect caution fence around excavations .
ensure tanks are free of vapors before transporting offsite .
dispose of excavated tanks and piping systems as specified in num .
if there is evidence of discharge in the excavated hole notify the re and contact the njdeps environmental action hotline .
excavate and dispose of petroleum contaminated soil from the limits of the tank removal .
perform field tests to determine the extent of petroleum contaminated soils according to njdep requirements and to determine if additional soils must be excavated .
conduct post excavation soil sampling and analysis at the limits of the excavation .
before backfilling remove and dispose of contaminated water not associated with ground water .
if directed immediately backfill the excavated hole as specified in num .
num .
temporarily storing excavated soil .
temporarily store excavated soil in stockpiles as specified in num.b .
construct stockpiles on polyethylene sheeting .
locate stockpiles where excavation equipment can place the soil from the excavation directly onto a stockpile .
segregate material of differing types and degrees of contamination to prevent crosscontamination of materials .
cover stockpiles with polyethylene sheeting of the same thickness as the underlying polyethylene sheeting .
secure cover polyethylene sheeting in place at all times .
overlap joints in the cover polyethylene sheeting a minimum of num inches and secure the joints .
maintain the cover sheeting and replace damaged cover polyethylene sheeting as needed .
provide protection for the stockpile to control the migration of contaminants .
dispose of excavated material within num days of being stockpiled as specified in num .
clean equipment used to move excavated material at the end of each working day or before removing the equipment from the project limits .
install nonvegetative sesc measures to limit the movement of the excavated material from equipment cleaning areas .
temporarily store the material collected during equipment cleaning in stockpiles .
num .
transporting recycling and disposing of contaminated soil .
transport the contaminated soil to an approved recycling or disposal facility .
sample material as per the recycling or disposal facility requirements .
submit num copy of the documentation of the disposal facilitys acceptance of the contaminated soil including the weigh ticket slips to the re within num days of acceptance at the disposal facility .
num monitoring wells install wells using a njdep certified well driller .
if directed by the re perform ground water sampling and analyses according to n.j.a.c .
nume .
upon receipt of re approval seal monitoring wells according to n.j.a.c .
num et seq .
num sealing abandoned wells fill and seal abandoned wells within the limits of clearing site or as shown on the plans .
fill dug wells as specified in num .
seal drilled wells according to n.j.a.c .
numd et seq .
provide a copy of the well abandonment records submitted to njdep to the re .
if proposing an alternate method to seal the abandoned wells obtain written approval from the njdep and from the re .
num demolition refer to num of the special provisions for occupied properties and vacation dates and availability dates .
demolish and remove the required buildings in place .
only remove small structures and appurtenances outside the area to be cleared that are designated for removal .
existing laws ordinances and regulations shall govern the parking loading and operation of trucks on existing highways or streets .
num the department assumes no responsibility for the condition of the various buildings or loss of fixtures equipment materials or other objects between the submittal of the proposal and the time of actual possession of the buildings .
on a daily basis remove and dispose of as specified in num materials including fixtures equipment debris and rubbish and do not store removed materials within the project limits .
do not sell materials within the project limits .
where others have removed buildings arrange to disconnect and terminate remaining utility services .
remove foundation walls and steps to at least num feet below ground level .
remove detached buildings and fixtures wood and debris from the site and dispose of as specified in num .
remove heating oil tanks according to n.j.a.c .
numb and n.j.a.c .
nume and federal state and local laws rules and regulations .
confine demolition operations to the limits shown and perform work as specified by the following num .
demolition safety plan .
submit a demolition safety plan to the re for approval num days before demolition .
include the following provisions in the plan num .
type and location of warning signs keep out signs and barricades .
num .
type and location of barrier around operations and openings in the ground .
num .
type and location of lights and footway shelter platforms in the vicinity of pedestrian walkways .
num .
methods for controlling dust from demolition operations .
follow the demolition safety plan until the re approves the removal of protective devices .
for demolition of buildings having more than num floors submit an additional plan to the re for approval at least num days before beginning demolition .
include the demolition methods to be used and methods of protecting adjacent building and structures .
num .
utility disconnections .
before demolishing any building arrange to disconnect and terminate all utilities and facilities that are connected to the building as specified by the municipalities and companies owning or controlling them .
if only a portion of an occupied structure is to be demolished conduct demolition and related operations so that service is not interrupted to the portion of the structure that is not demolished .
where it is necessary to reconnect any facilities to the undemolished portion of the structure make reconnections permanent .
notify in writing the municipalities and companies concerned when such disconnections terminations or reconnections are required and provide copy to re .
perform this work according to the municipalities and companies standard practices and requirements and under their supervision otherwise arrange for the work to be performed with their forces .
num .
rodent control and extermination .
before beginning demolition operations retain a qualified sanitation inspector to conduct a survey for evidence of current rodent activity .
initiate a control program by a certified pest control operator if the survey indicates that it is necessary .
apply exterminating materials according to n.j.a.c num et seq .
at least num days before beginning demolition of any structures the pest control operator shall begin ridding the structure and adjacent areas within the project limits of rodents or their carcasses and to prevent their migration to other adjacent areas .
where there is no competing water supply the contractor may use liquid anticoagulant baits at the discretion of the certified pesticide applicator .
place toxic bait in the form of a numpound paraffinized block in each manhole or inlet of storm or combination drains located on the same street as the building to be demolished and within the same block including the entire intersections of the nearest cross streets .
place bait in suitable locations within the drainage structures as determined by the pest control operator .
fasten the bait block in its location with wire .
inspect and renew toxic bait in structures or drains as necessary after initial baiting .
remove and dispose of carcasses to the satisfaction of the re .
num after the initial treatment and each followup inspection submit a signed statement from the pest control operator reporting the amount and type of bait placed in each location and stating the visible results obtained from the rodent control program .
ensure that the pest control operator is aware of the antidote noted on the rodenticide label .
num .
demolition operations .
before demolishing buildings remove and dispose of chemicals miscellaneous cylinders drums above ground and underground heating oil tanks asbestos and garbage from the building according to applicable federal state and local laws rules and regulations .
remove and recycle materials that are required to be recycled by the federal state and local laws rules and regulations .
before beginning demolition operations pump out and clean basements wells cesspools and outbuildings within the areas to be cleared in a sanitary manner .
after being disinfected as required by the health authorities backfill to adjacent ground level as specified in num .
maintain wells cisterns cesspools and other openings in the ground outside the area to be cleared without hindering their functionality .
cap well casings securely and permanently as specified in num and cut off and cap pipes leading into or out of the well .
leave adjacent buildings in a safe condition and do not deface mar or jeopardize them in any way .
repair or restore damaged buildings to the satisfaction of the re .
ensure that the phases of demolition are performed within the designated limits and without hazard to adjacent properties or to the public .
do not set any structure on fire .
do not demolish or disturb chimneys common to adjacent properties other than to give them the necessary support for their continued stability .
if necessary repoint and cap them .
when demolishing a portion of a building shore brace and support the remaining part so that the integrity and support of all remaining walls floors roofs and their supporting members are maintained and continued in such a way that shoring bracing and support is outside the row .
board up and seal the remaining portion of such a partially demolished building along the row and weatherproof the new closure and its connections to the remaining portion of the severed building .
material for closure shall consist of adequately braced studding of num numinch timbers placed no more than num inches on center with wood facing or equal nailed to the studding and without any holes appearing therein .
cover the wood facing with num layers of smooth finished num pounds per roll roofing material according to astm d num and having an overlap of at least num inches .
num .
backfilling .
backfill and compact subsurface areas including cellars using the directed method as specified in num.c .
the re may require compaction using the density control method as specified in num.d .
use all available excavated material from within the project limits before bringing additional material for backfill to the project limits .
if sufficient material is not available backfill with inum soil aggregate .
if excavated material or inum soil aggregate are recycled material place the recycled material at least num foot above the water table .
ensure backfilling and grading establishes proper drainage .
before placing the first lift break existing cellar floors and other surfaced areas into pieces having areas of less than num square feet with welldefined cracks through the full depth of the floors or make holes of more than num square foot area through the floors on approximately numfoot centers to provide vertical drainage .
remove wooden cellar floors .
clean point and apply num coats of waterproofing material to party wall foundations before backfilling against .
if necessary grade around the ground surface to eliminate water pockets .
backfill and level cellars and all other subsurface spaces to the adjacent ground elevation .
num asbestos removal refer to the special provisions for asbestos removal requirements .
num disposal of removed materials and debris dispose of or recycle removed materials and debris according to solid waste management act n.j.s.a .
numenum and n.j.a.c num et seq .
and according to the solid waste management plan developed by the solid waste management num district of origin .
submit proper documentation from the disposal facility to the re and the county of origin within num days of acceptance at the disposal facility .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit clearing site lump sum clearing site bridge ___ lump sum clearing site structure ___ lump sum clearing site tank removal unit disposing and recycling of contaminated soil tanks ton monitoring well unit post excavation soil sampling and analyses unit composite soil sampling and analyses unit ground water sampling and analyses unit sealing of abandoned well unit demolition ___ parcel ___ unit removal of asbestos ___ parcel ___ unit temporary shielding lump sum a unit of post excavation soil sampling and analyses is each sample collected and analyzed .
the department will not include payment for post excavation soil sampling and analysis in clearing site tank removal .
the department will make payment for post excavation soil sampling and analysis under post excavation soil sampling and analyses .
the department will make payment upon receipt of a copy of sampling log chain of custody form and analytical report .
a unit of clearing site tank removal is each tank removed .
the department will not make payment without the site investigation report and tank disposal receipt .
a unit of composite soil sampling and analyses is each composite sample collected and analyses performed .
the department will not include payment for composite soil sampling and analysis in monitoring wells .
the department will make payment for composite soil sampling and analysis under composite soil sampling and analysis .
the department will make payment for a unit upon receipt of a copy of sampling log chain of custody form and analytical report .
a unit of groundwater sampling and analyses includes sampling and analyses at each point sampled .
the department will not include payment for ground water sampling and analysis in monitoring wells or clearing site tank removal .
the department will make payment for ground water sampling and analysis under ground water sampling and analysis .
the department will make payment for a unit upon receipt of a copy of sampling log chain of custody form and analytical report .
the department will reduce payment for demolition of buildings or removal of asbestos accordingly by the deletion of any building as listed in the supplement for analysis of the lump sum price bid attached to the proposal .
section num excavation num description this section describes the requirements for stripping excavating removing pavement reusing excavated material for backfill and embankments and disposing of excess material .
num num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num or num num pulverized limestonenum topsoil stabilization mattingnum silt fencenum haybalesnum polyethylene sheetingnum num construction num stripping before beginning the operations obtain the res approval for stripping operations scheduled between november num and march num .
the re will base approval on the contractors alternate method for stabilizing disturbed areas when seeding is not feasible due to seasonal constraints .
strip vegetation and underlying soil to a depth of num to num inches below the existing ground surface .
confirm the thickness of stripping with the re based on field conditions .
temporarily store in stockpiles as specified in num.b stripped material including excess that is determined suitable for the future use of the department .
the department will sample and analyze stripped material in stockpiles to determine suitability for use as topsoil .
store suitable stripped material within the project limits until placement .
reuse or dispose of unsuitable stripped material as specified in num .
num excavating test pits before beginning construction operations locate existing subsurface structures and utilities that may be affected by or interfere with the proposed construction .
obtain utility locations as specified in num .
if directed by the re excavate to obtain the utility location .
excavate as specified in num and as directed by the re .
excavate test pits or portions of a test pit by hand when in close proximity to utilities or when directed .
backfill test pits with excavated material in numinch lifts and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
num excavating unclassified material a. excavating .
the department as the generator is solely responsible for the designation of excavated material .
unclassified excavation consists of excavation and management of material of whatever nature encountered except for regulated material or acid producing soil .
excavate using equipment and methods that remove material to the specified excavation limits without disturbing the material outside of the excavation limits .
while excavating protect facilities and structures from damage and disturbance .
ensure that material outside excavation limits is not disturbed .
if any material outside the excavation limits becomes disturbed restore the area as directed by the re .
excavate and grade to ensure proper drainage .
do not excavate more than num feet in depth without stabilizing the slope either by temporarily seeding and mulching or by topsoiling permanently seeding and mulching as specified in num .
submit alternate methods for stabilizing slopes when seeding is not allowable due to seasonable constraints .
obtain re approval of alternate methods before beginning embankment construction .
repair damaged seeded areas as specified in num .
notify the re if excavation to the finished grade section results in unstable subgrade or slopes .
obtain re approval before removing unstable material and backfilling the area with suitable material .
backfill with excavated material and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
if a slope failure develops during excavation immediately cease operations .
determine the limits of unstable material and start backfilling immediately .
once the slope has been stabilized resume excavation by re approved methods .
num the re will check elevations of the roadbed subgrade as specified in num.c .
ensure that the elevation is within num inch of the specified elevation .
use excavated material on the project as directed by the re or as specified in num .
num .
wet areas .
if required submit a dewatering plan including method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas .
obtain re approval for dewatering operations before beginning the work .
excavate wet areas down to firm bottom within the lateral limits .
test the bottom of the excavation area at frequent intervals as the excavation progresses by taking soundings samples or other tests to determine when firm bottom is reached .
the department may require the contractor to take additional borings or samples to determine if unsuitable material remains or is entrapped within the excavation limits .
excavate using equipment and methods to the specified elevation without disturbing the material below that elevation .
if the methods and equipment disturb the material below the specified elevation immediately stop operations .
resume excavation using alternate methods and equipment as approved by the re .
the re may allow the use of dikes well points or other means for dewatering the excavation areas if cofferdams are not shown on the plans .
if permits are required for this work submit a copy of approvals as specified in num to the re before proceeding with the work .
num .
foundation and bridge areas .
excavate for footings to the limits shown in the plans causing minimal disturbance to the remaining embankment .
if the underlying material is disturbed compact it using the directed method as specified in num.c .
backfill and compact the remaining excavated area using the density control method as specified in num.d .
restore the embankment to the final section .
remove boulders or rock fingers projecting into the bottom of the excavation to a minimum depth of num inches below the bottom of footing .
backfill the space with coarse aggregate and compact it using the directed method as specified in num.c .
in areas where the footing rests partly on soil and partly on rock excavate the rock to num feet below the footing .
backfill the space with coarse aggregate and compact it using the directed method as specified in num.c .
in areas where the footing rests entirely on rock excavate to a firm level roughened surface .
clean out seams and fill them with concrete or mortar before placing concrete for foundations .
if shale is encountered at the bottom of the footing and the footing is not poured the same day leaving the shale exposed to air or water undercut the shale at least num inches .
seal the undercut with the same class of concrete as the overlying footing to the bottom of the footing elevation and provide a rough finish .
if during the course of the excavation rock is shattered below the foundation elevation remove the shattered rock and fill the void with the same class of concrete as the overlying footing .
the re may order in writing changes in dimensions or elevation of footings as necessary to secure an acceptable foundation .
after completing the excavation to the elevation of the bottom of the footing obtain the res approval before beginning footing construction or placement of coarse aggregate .
when specified place coarse aggregate following the completion of the excavation .
shape the material on which the coarse aggregate is to be placed to an even surface .
place coarse aggregate in numinch lifts and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
num .
rock areas .
the contractor may remove entire boulders extending beyond the specified limits of excavation .
backfill and compact space created outside the specified limits by such boulder removal using the directed method as specified in num.c .
ensure that undrained pockets are not left in the surface of the rock .
after completing the excavation of each lift of rock slope construction and before beginning the next lift scale the completed slopes to remove loose rock fragments .
the re will examine rock slopes during the excavation to identify possible unstable conditions and to determine the need for stabilization .
provide assistance and equipment necessary for such examination .
num if it is determined that inplace stabilization is required use rock bolting or other stabilization techniques as directed .
before drilling and blasting remove existing overburden to the top of rock .
take necessary precautions in drilling and blasting operations to preserve the rock remaining in the specified finished slope in a natural undamaged condition .
conduct blasting operations according to the following a. blasting plan .
submit a blasting plan at least num days before commencing drilling and blasting operations and before each subsequent shot thereafter .
include the full details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls to be used for both the presplitting and production blasting .
additionally include the following minimum information num .
station limits of proposed shot .
num .
plan and section views of proposed drill pattern including free face burden blasthole spacing diameters and angles lift height and subdrill depth .
num .
loading diagram showing type and amount of explosives primers initiators and location and depth of stemming .
num .
manufacturers data sheets for explosives primers and initiators to be employed .
num .
initiation sequence of blastholes including delay times and delay system .
num .
planned security measures for storage of explosives .
num .
safety plan for personnel and public .
num .
copy of blasting license .
num .
name and qualifications of blasting supervisor .
the blasting plan submittal is for quality control and record keeping purposes .
a review of the blasting plan does not relieve responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the plan when implemented in the field .
b. blasting test sections .
before commencing fullscale blasting operations demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed blasting plan by drilling blasting and excavating short test sections up to num feet in length to determine which combination of method hole spacing and charge works best .
the re may direct additional test sections when field conditions warrant .
conform to the requirements for controlled and production blasting operations when blasting in conjunction with the test shots .
do not drill ahead of the test shot area until the test section has been excavated and the results evaluated .
if the results of the test shots are unsatisfactory revise methods to achieve the required results .
unsatisfactory test shot results include an excessive amount of fragmentation beyond the shown lines and grade excessive flyrock or violation of other requirements .
if at any time during the progress of the work the methods of drilling and blasting do not produce the desired result of a uniform slope and shear face within the tolerances specified drill blast and excavate in short sections not exceeding num feet long until a technique is arrived at that produces the desired results .
c. safety .
handle explosive materials and conduct blasting operations as specified in num .
use only standard explosives blasting agents detonating cord delays blasting caps and other blasting accessories prepared and packaged by explosive manufacturing firms .
restrict access to the entire blast area for a minimum of num minutes following a blast to guard against rock fall before commencing work in the cut .
the re will prohibit or halt the blasting operations if it is apparent that through the methods being employed the required slopes are not being obtained in a stable condition or the safety and convenience of the traveling public is being jeopardized .
d. methods of drilling and blasting .
num presplitting .
presplitting is a controlled blasting method for constructing a shear plane along a specified cut slope through the controlled use of explosives and accessories in properly aligned and spaced drill holes .
num after removing the overburden and weathered rock drill slope holes for presplitting along the line and in the plane of the cut slope .
drill slope holes between num and num inches in diameter .
control operations to ensure that the drill holes do not deviate from the plane of the slope by more than num inches and do not deviate within the plane of the slope by more than num inches .
ensure that the drilling equipment for drilling the presplit holes has mechanical devices affixed to accurately determine the angle at which the drill steel enters the rock .
the re will not allow presplit hole drilling if these devices are either missing or inoperative .
do not space slope holes more than num feet on centers and adjust spacing as required to produce a uniform and stable shear plane between slope holes .
under certain conditions to produce a uniform and stable shear plane the re may also require auxiliary holes which are identical to the slope holes but are not loaded with explosives .
the contractor may extend the length of the slope holes to the full depth of the cut to a maximum of num feet if hole alignment is maintained .
otherwise drill and blast slope holes in lifts .
if presplitting in lifts the re will allow a maximum offset of num inches to accommodate the drill head .
arrange lifts so that the toe of the finished cut slope coincides with the toe of slope .
before placing explosives or blasting agents ensure that the hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth .
provide explosives for use in presplit holes with a maximum diameter less than num the diameter of the presplit hole and ensure that explosives do not touch the side of the hole .
use only standard explosives manufactured especially for presplitting in presplit holes unless otherwise approved .
do not load bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil in the presplit holes .
use an amount of explosives in the presplit hole that produces the shearing without causing overbreak .
ensure that the top of the load is far enough below the collar to avoid overbreak at the surface .
extend the detonator cord downline from the collar to the bottom of the bore hole and from the collar to the detonator trunkline or electric blasting caps .
prime the explosive charge according to the recommendations of the manufacturer of the commercial explosive or blasting agent .
if using fractional portions of standard explosive cartridges firmly affix them to the detonating cord so that the cartridges do not slip down the detonating cord or bridge across the hole .
do not space fractional cartridges along the length of the detonating cord farther than num inches on center .
adjust spacing to give the desired results .
assemble continuous column cartridge type of explosives used with detonating cord and affix them to the detonating cord according to the explosive manufacturers recommendations .
provide a copy of these instructions to the re .
the contractor may make the bottom charge of a presplit hole larger than the line charges but not so large as to cause overbreak .
place the top charge of the presplitting hole far enough below the collar and reduce the charge sufficiently to avoid overbreaking and heaving .
stem the upper portion of presplit holes from the topmost charge to the hole collar .
stemming materials shall consist of drill cutting or numinch clean stone chips .
the contractor does not need to stem below the topmost charge unless the department determines that the rock is very seamy and incompetent in which case the contractor may need to full stem such zones .
the contractor may detonate presplit holes instantaneously or on short delays between each hole .
ensure that delay detonating does not exceed num milliseconds between holes .
detonate presplit holes before detonating any production holes .
extend presplitting a minimum of num feet ahead of the production blasting limits but not more than num feet beyond the exposed presplit face .
num production blasting .
production blasting is a method of drilling and blasting to produce a high degree of fragmentation of the rock mass to be excavated .
num drill the adjacent line of production holes inside the presplit lines so as to avoid damage to the presplit face .
if necessary the contractor may drill the first line of production holes parallel to the presplit face to reduce overbreak of this face .
the contractor may vary hole diameter spacing delay patterns explosives blasting agents and other variables to obtain a fragmentation acceptable to the re provided that the existing presplit face is not damaged .
b .
temporarily storing .
temporarily store soil in stockpiles in welldrained areas no closer than num feet from streams wetlands floodplains other waterbodies and as shown on the plans .
construct stockpiles on polyethylene sheeting .
overlap joints in the underlying polyethylene sheeting a minimum of num inches .
contain stockpiles with haybales or silt fence placed continuously at the perimeter of the stockpiles .
construct stockpiles to heights not exceeding num feet and with side slopes no steeper than numhnumv .
segregate material of differing types and levels of contamination depending on reuse or disposal .
protect and maintain the stockpile and embankment until reuse or disposal .
provide protection for the stockpile to control the stormwater runoff erosion and unauthorized contact .
where the material in the stockpile is saturated pitch the bottom polyethylene sheeting towards a discharge basin to collect water drained from the stockpile .
manage the collected water in the same manner as that generated during dewatering operations .
maintain the polyethylene sheeting or replace it as needed for as long as the stockpile remains .
periodically inspect stockpiles to ensure that material is not released into the surrounding environment .
when temporarily storing soil is not possible within the project limits the contractor may temporarily store soil at a site provided by the contractor outside the project limits as approved by the re and meeting the requirements of num and num .
if the stockpile remains exposed for more than num days temporarily seed as specified in num and mulch stockpiles as specified in num or num .
when the stockpile is removed restore the area to the original condition .
c. measuring elevation .
using contractor established grade stakes set outside the pavement box and at breaklines the re will check elevations within the roadbed limits using a stringline drawn taut between these stakes .
ensure that grade stakes indicate the vertical cut or fill measurement referenced to the finish grade .
the re will check elevations longitudinally every num feet and transversely at the edges breaklines and the center of each lane and shoulder .
the re may direct additional grade stakes in areas with rapid changes in grade so that intermediate longitudinal checks can be made .
num excavating regulated material the department as the generator is solely responsible for the designation of excavated material .
regulated material excavation consists of excavation and management of material of whatever nature encountered that is classified as regulated or hazardous in the njdep solid waste regulations n.j.a.c num et seq .
or n.j.a.c num .
areas of known regulated material are identified on the plans .
handle regulated material according to applicable federal state and local laws rules and regulations and as specified herein .
dispose of regulated material as specified in num .
num .
preexcavation plans .
submit num copies of the following plans to the re num days before beginning construction operations .
update and resubmit plans to identify changes in the condition or operation of the work .
if the contractor fails to follow the preexcavation plans the re will suspend the work .
a. sitespecific health and safety program hasp .
perform a hazard assessment of each proposed work task and make independent evaluations regarding the appropriate level of health and safety requirements .
employ a certified industrial hygienist cih or certified safety professional csp to develop and oversee the sitespecific hasp .
the cihcsp shall prepare the sitespecific hasp to protect the contractors employees the subcontractors employees the departments employees and consultants and the public from contamination present in the areas requiring excavation as shown on the plans .
ensure that the sitespecific hasp complies with federal state and local laws rules and regulations num including the health and safety requirements of osha num cfr num and num cfr num .
implement the sitespecific hasp as approved by the re at the beginning of construction operations .
ensure that the cihcsp reviews sitespecific data and addresses the proposed activities to the level of detail needed to ensure that sitespecific data appropriate regulations and a description of the site conditions are incorporated into the sitespecific hasp .
describe workplace and emergency procedures so that the project is constructed in a safe manner .
the sitespecific hasp shall govern all facets of the project and encompass the activities of all persons who enter or work on the project .
incorporate procedures that conform to federal state and local laws rules and regulations pertaining to employee working conditions where appropriate national institute for occupational safety and health osha uscg epa and njdep .
include requirements for a health and safety coordinator to monitor the working conditions during excavation procedures and during the handling of regulated material to ensure conformance with the approved sitespecific hasp .
the cihcsp shall evaluate the need for air monitoring during excavation and loading operations of regulated material .
if deemed necessary the cihcsp or an assigned coordinator suitably trained and approved by the cihcsp for the work required shall implement the air monitoring program .
the cihcsp shall include in the sitespecific hasp applicable training and qualifications documentation for each health and safety coordinator .
the contractor shall provide initial and annual training and medical monitoring for contractor employees scheduled to work in or with regulated material and per the res request up to num department employees or their authorized representatives as specified in osha num cfr num .
provide the initial training for state employees or their authorized representatives num days before excavating .
b .
materials handling plan .
develop a materials handling plan mhp for regulated material encountered moved and disposed of or recycled during construction .
ensure the mhp includes the following num .
techniques to be used in managing regulated material to protect adjoining properties and workers and visitors to the project limits against exposure to regulated material and to prevent release of regulated material to the environment .
num .
standard operating procedures for excavation stockpiling transporting measurement and disposal of regulated material .
num .
current receiving facility certification and permits .
num .
qualifications of the licensed hauler .
num .
proposed routes to receiving facilities and weighing facilities .
num .
waste characterization forms .
num .
a sampling and analysis protocol for characterizing the regulated material for onsite reuse and offsite disposal .
include the name address and telephone number of the contact for the proposed environmental laboratory and the name and experience of the proposed environmental sampling technician .
the proposed environmental laboratory and proposed environmental sampling technician are subject to the res review and approval .
num .
requirements of the receiving facility to accept the regulated material .
implement the mhp as approved by the re at the beginning of excavation .
perform planning administrative and control functions required to implement the mhp .
c. pollution prevention and control plan .
develop a pollution prevention and control ppc plan describing the methods of preventing discharge of regulated stormwater ground water sediments and free product during stormwater control excavation and dewatering operations .
prepare the ppc plan according to federal state and local laws rules and regulations relative to regulated discharges .
implement the re approved ppc plan before beginning excavation .
detail methods personnel equipment and reporting requirements on how to discharge regulated stormwater groundwater sediments and free product during stormwater control excavation and dewatering operations into a dewatering basin stormsewer system or other approved system .
specify methods and equipment for collecting pumping treating monitoring and disposing of liquids generated by stormwater control .
specify measures to prevent stormwater runon and runoff and measures for num dewatering of excavations dewatering of sediments decontaminating personnel and equipment and storing fuels and chemicals .
include detailed water collection treatment monitoring discharge activities and reporting requirements .
provide daily construction reports to identify water collection treatment monitoring and discharge activities personnel and equipment and relevant quantities .
when dewatering in areas of petroleum contamination provide an oilwater separator with the dewatering basin or sediment control tank as specified in num .
num .
excavating .
excavate regulated material as specified in num and as shown on the plans .
num .
temporarily storing .
temporarily store regulated or hazardous material in stockpiles within the project limits and as shown on the plans .
construct stockpiles on polyethylene sheeting .
for hazardous material if a stockpile area is not available within the project limits sample and analyze materials insitu for disposal .
excavate and place the hazardous regulated material directly into trucks and haul it directly to the approved disposal facility .
cover stockpiles with polyethylene sheeting .
secure the cover in place at all times .
overlap joints in the polyethylene sheeting a minimum of num inches and place securing materials along the joints .
maintain the cover and replace damaged polyethylene sheeting as needed .
clean equipment used for the movement of excavated material at the end of each working day or before removing it from the project limits .
install nonvegetative erosion control features to limit the movement of the excavated material from equipment cleaning areas .
temporarily store the excavated material from equipment cleaning in stockpiles .
if regulated material is not designated for reuse onsite dispose of regulated material within num days of being stockpiled as specified in num .
do not reuse hazardous regulated material .
dispose of hazardous regulated material as specified in num within num days of being stored in stockpiles .
num .
sampling and analysis .
collect transport and analyze environmental samples required for facility acceptance of the material .
perform sampling testing and inspections conducted in areas containing regulated material according to the sitespecific hasp .
perform sampling testing and data management procedures according to njdep field sampling procedures manual njdep technical requirements for site remediation njdep management of excavated soils guidelines appendix num of the njdep waste classification form and epa requirements .
do not sample or analyze any part of the project limits for purposes of redelineating designations of excavation .
num .
document control .
provide the following items a. soilsediment usage tracking log .
complete a tracking log for each working day involving excavation stockpile transport and disposal of regulated material .
monitor and record the following information on the tracking log num .
date .
num .
location maps showing excavation and placement including depth of material .
num .
type volume and characteristics of regulated material removed .
num .
names and signatures of personnel responsible for preparing and executing the tracking log .
submit copies of daily tracking logs to the re on a weekly basis .
b .
materials and handling reports .
submit weekly reports to the re documenting the excavation stockpiling sampling offsite management and onsite placement of regulated material .
indicate the location and dates of excavation stockpiling sampling offsite management and onsite placement of regulated material .
explain changes to or variations from the mhp .
additionally include dates of planned excavation sampling and offsite management of regulated material for the coming months .
provide a final report documenting the management of regulated material including the location and dates of excavation stockpiling sampling offsite management and onsite placement of regulated material .
include plans depicting placement of regulated material .
submit num copies of the final report to num the re within num days of completing excavations of regulated material offsite management of regulated material and embankmentbackfill operations reusing regulated material .
c. sampling logs and analytical reports .
submit to the re num copies of the sampling logs chain of custody and analytical reports after each soil analysis is performed within num days of analysis .
d. ppc logs .
maintain a ppc log for water collection monitoring and handling activities and make the log available to the re upon request .
in the ppc log note daily water removal treatment and discharge volumes effluent sampling activities and results discharge or spill incidents and sampling and reporting activities .
num excavating acid producing soil aps the department as the generator is solely responsible for the designation of excavated material .
acid producing soil aps excavation consists of excavation and management of high acid producing soil with a ph below num or soil containing iron sulfides .
areas of known aps are shown on the plans .
dispose of aps as specified in num.b .
num .
preexcavation plans .
submit a materials handling plan as specified in num .
num .
excavating .
excavate aps material as specified in num and as shown on the plans .
num .
temporarily storing .
temporarily store aps in separate stockpiles as specified in num.b within the project limits and as shown on the plans .
construct stockpiles on polyethylene sheeting .
contain stockpiles using silt fence haybales or other nonvegetative erosion control features to limit movement of soil and possible acidic runoff .
cover stockpiles with polyethylene sheeting .
secure and maintain cover in place .
overlap joints in the polyethylene sheeting a minimum of num inches and place securing materials along the joints .
maintain the cover and replace damaged polyethylene sheeting as needed .
ensure that no stockpile is left uncovered and exposed to the air or precipitation for more than num hours to minimize oxidation .
clean equipment used for the movement of aps at the end of each working day and before removing it from the project limits to prevent spreading of aps to other areas within the project limits and to prevent tracking aps offsite .
install nonvegetative erosion control features around the equipment cleaning area to limit the movement of the aps and possible acidic runoff .
temporarily store the aps from equipment cleaning in the aps stockpile .
num .
sampling and analysis .
test stockpiled soil at a njdep certified laboratory for aps according to the njdep technical manual for stream encroachment .
within num days of stockpiling submit num copies of the results to the re .
num .
acid soil remediation .
when reusing excavated aps as backfill or embankment in areas to be vegetated place aps at the bottom .
remediate the soil by covering the aps with a layer of pulverized limestone applied at a rate of num tons per acre or num pounds per num square feet of surface area and as follows num .
where establishing turf cover the limestone layer with a minimum of num inches of compacted soil with a ph of num or more .
num .
where planting trees or shrubs cover the limestone layer with a minimum of num inches of compacted soil with a ph of num or more .
num .
do not place aps within num inches of a slope or bank surface such as berms stream banks ditches etc .
or structure to prevent potential lateral leaching .
immediately following remediation place topsoil fertilizer seed and mulch over aps not under pavement for permanent erosion control .
dispose of excess aps as specified in num.b .
num .
document control .
perform document control as specified in num except that ppc logs are not required .
num removing pavement before removing hma concrete or composite pavement wet sawcut .
wet sawcut joint areas and overlying hma courses full depth parallel to the centerline of the joint for the width designated .
use a saw capable of providing a neat cut for the full depth in a single pass .
num do not use equipment that involves a ball weight or punch to break or remove the concrete within num feet of a transverse joint or within num feet of any structure or pavement that is to remain in place .
break up or remove the concrete within restricted areas so as not to damage the adjacent joint structure pavement or other structure that is to remain .
contain debris from the breaking of concrete base and concrete surface courses within the work site .
use necessary containment devices to protect adjacent vehicular or pedestrian traffic from flying debris .
reuse or dispose of material as specified in num .
num reuse or disposal of excess material a. reuse .
before using other excess materials reuse regulated material as shown on the plans or with re approval .
the contractor may use excavated material if the requirements specified in num are met to construct items requiring soil aggregates .
submit written notification at least num days before reuse .
with approval reuse excavated soil to widen or flatten slopes of embankment to fade embankments into cuts or as approved at other locations .
the contractor may reuse broken concrete hma pieces and millings in the lower portion of inum soil aggregate .
spread out pieces in layers with the pieces lying flat and not arching with spaces between the pieces filled with soil .
use pieces with a maximum individual size of num cubic feet with a numfoot maximum dimension on any side .
do not place the broken concrete hma pieces and milling within num feet of the final subgrade less than num feet above the highest seasonal high ground water table or within num feet of any underground utility .
compact material using the directed method as specified in num.c .
dispose of excavated material that will not be reused as specified in num.b .
b .
disposal .
dispose of excess regulated material as specified in num .
dispose of excess aps at approved landfills according to applicable federal state and local laws rules and regulations .
for excavation not designated as regulated material or aps provide the following before removing the excess excavation from the project limits .
num .
at least num days before disposing submit the disposal procedure and location to the re for approval .
do not dispose of excavation on property proposed to be or used for parks playgrounds and other recreational purposes educational facilities environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands historic sites or within sight of a state highway during all seasons .
num .
on a department provided form obtain the property owners notarized authorization of the acceptance of the excess material and where it is being placed .
once material leaves the project limits the contractor is responsible for ensuring that the handling procedures placement method and disposal location are according to applicable federal state and local laws rules and requirements including permits that may be issued for the project .
if the disposal of excess material results in a violation notice from any governmental authority immediately correct the violation .
indemnify and defend the department for any violation incurred penalty assessed or any claims suits losses demands or damages of whatever kind or nature arising out of or claimed to arise out of the improper disposal of excess materials .
if the contractor does not correct the violation to the satisfaction of the governmental authority that issued the violation notice the contractor is responsible for assessed penalties including costs incurred by the department to remedy the violations .
dispose of other material or debris as specified in num .
num disposal of regulated material load transport and dispose of regulated material that the re determines to be excess unusable or unsuitable for the project according to federal state and local laws rules and regulations and as specified in num.b .
pay fees associated with removal and disposal of regulated materials .
submit the results of material sampling and analysis waste facility applications and acceptance documentation and fee payment requirements to the re at least num days before planned removal of regulated material .
submit to the re a bill of lading for each truckload of regulated material removed from the project limits .
ensure that the bill of lading and waste manifest include the following information num num .
transport subcontractor name address permit number and telephone number .
num .
type and quantity of material removed .
num .
weight of vehicle with weigh slip .
num .
recycling or disposal facility name address permit number and telephone number .
num .
date removed from the project limits .
num .
signature of transport vehicle operator .
the re will sign the bills of lading for the department as the generator of the project limits .
submit num copy of the bill of lading to the re by the end of each working day that the transport vehicle leaves the site .
the licensed hauler shall transport the regulated material to the disposalrecycling facility with no unauthorized stops in between except as required by regulatory authority .
the hauler shall use appropriate vehicles and operating practices to prevent spillage or leakage from occurring during transport .
remove excess soil adhering to the wheels or under carriage of the vehicles before leaving the project limits .
if soil or water escapes to the public roads immediately clean the road to restore it to the original condition and immediately notify the re .
do not transport regulated material over public roads if they contain free liquid or are sufficiently wet to be potentially flowable during transport .
submit num copy of the documentation of the disposal facilitys acceptance of the regulated material including the weight ticket slips to the re and the county of origin within num days of acceptance at the disposal facility .
immediately submit written notification to the re if problems arise regarding the facility chosen to accept the regulated material for offsite management that would require the return of waste or if the chosen facility has violated any environmental regulation that may result in regulatory enforcement action .
propose an alternate disposal facility and obtain the res written approval of offsite management at such facility .
num disposal of regulated material hazardous load transport and dispose of hazardous regulated material for the project according to federal state and local laws rules and regulations and as specified in num.b .
pay fees associated with removal and disposal of hazardous regulated materials .
submit the results of material sampling and analysis waste facility applications and acceptance documentation and fee payment requirements to the re at least num days before planned removal of hazardous regulated material .
for each truckload of hazardous regulated material removed from the project limits submit to the re a bill of lading and waste manifest that include the following information num .
transport subcontractor name address epa id number and telephone number .
num .
type and quantity of material removed .
num .
weight of vehicle with weigh slip .
num .
recycling or disposal facility name address permit number and telephone number .
num .
date removed from the project limits .
num .
signature of transport vehicle operator .
num .
waste manifest tracking number .
the re will sign the manifest as the generator and will forward questions or concerns to the bureau of environmental program resources for resolution .
the manifest will verify the type and quantity of hazardous regulated material being transported offsite .
the uniform hazardous waste manifests are required by the federal resource conservation and recovery act rcra num cfr subpart b parts num to num and n.j.a.c numg for all offsite shipments of hazardous regulated materials .
the department is the generator of the waste .
the department will obtain an epa identification number epa id and supply this information to the re for inclusion on the uniform hazardous waste manifest .
the re will provide the contractor with an epa id if the project contains hazardous regulated material .
complete the manifest form in accordance with all applicable regulations and mail to the bureau of environmental program resources at num parkway avenue po box num trenton nj num to ensure that the final disposition tsd to generator copy of the manifest is mailed back to the office responsible for the record keeping requirements .
the re will keep a copy of the original manifest for the contract files .
the bureau of environmental program resources will distribute the original manifests in accordance with the regulations and also for retention of the manifests per regulatory requirements .
num the contractor is responsible for all manifest discrepancies .
immediately report discrepancies to the re and resolve to the satisfaction of the re .
the re will forward a copy of manifest discrepancy letters to the bureau of environmental program resources .
the licensed hauler shall transport the hazardous regulated material to the disposalrecycling facility with no unauthorized stops in between except as required by regulatory authority .
the hauler shall use appropriate vehicles and operating practices to prevent spillage or leakage from occurring during transport .
remove excess soil adhering to the wheels or under carriage of the vehicles before leaving the project limits .
if soil or water escapes to the public roads immediately clean the road to restore it to the original condition and immediately notify the re .
do not transport hazardous regulated material over public roads if they contain free liquid or are sufficiently wet to be potentially flowable during transport .
submit num copy of the documentation of the disposal facilitys acceptance of the hazardous regulated material including the weight ticket slips to the re and the county of origin within num days of acceptance at the disposal facility .
immediately submit written notification to the re if problems arise regarding the facility chosen to accept the hazardous regulated material for offsite management that would require the return of waste or if the chosen facility has violated any environmental regulation that may result in regulatory enforcement action .
propose an alternate disposal facility and obtain the res written approval of offsite management at such facility .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit stripping acre excavation test pit cubic yard excavation unclassified cubic yard presplitting square yard excavation regulated material cubic yard soil sampling and analyses regulated unit excavation acid producing soil cubic yard soil sampling and analyses acid producing soil unit acid producing soil remediation square yard removal of pavement square yard disposal of acid producing soil ton disposal of regulated material ton disposal of regulated material hazardous ton if excavated materials are used to construct work using soil aggregates other than inum the department will deduct the volume of material used from excavation unclassified .
the department will make payment for the soil aggregate under the item constructed .
if the use of excavated materials for soil aggregates other than inum results in the need for inum soil aggregate obtained from offsite to complete the embankments provide a volume of inum soil aggregate at no cost to the department equal to the volume of soil aggregate constructed or equal to the volume of material required to complete the embankment whichever is less .
when presplitting is shown on the plans the department will not include payment under excavation unclassified .
the department will make payment for presplitting under presplitting .
the department will not make payment for excavation regulated and excavation acid producing soil until the contractor submits the required daily soilsediment tracking logs .
a unit of soil sampling and analyses regulated and soil sampling and analyses acid producing soil is each sample collected and analyzed .
the department will not include payment for soil sampling and analysis in excavation regulated and excavation acid producing soil .
the department will make payment for soil sampling and analysis under soil sampling and analyses regulated and soil sampling and analyses acid producing soil .
the department will make payment upon receipt of a copy of the sampling log chain of custody form and analytical report .
num the department will make payment for disposal of regulated material and disposal of regulated material hazardous using certified weigh tickets .
the department will make payment for sesc measures as specified in num .
the department will make payment for temporary seeding under fertilizing and seeding type ___ as specified in num .
section num embankment num description this section describes the requirements for constructing embankments and for preparing areas on which embankments are placed .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified soil aggregate inum inum inum inum and inum num num equipment provide equipment as specified pneumatictired compactornum dynamic compactor num steel wheel roller num padfoot rollernum num construction num constructing embankment before beginning embankment excavate and stabilize side ditches and install perimeter sesc measures as specified in num .
ensure that the ground surface is not frozen and is free from snow ice and mud before constructing embankment .
do not backfill or begin constructing embankment against a structure until the forms can be removed as specified in num.g .
where existing pipes and conduit have insufficient soil cover during embankment construction protect the pipes and conduit from damage by the equipment and operations .
backfill and compact low areas holes channels and ditches using the directed method as specified in num.c before constructing embankment .
when placing more than num inches of embankment on existing pavement break the pavement into pieces that are a maximum of num feet in any dimension .
when constructing an embankment against an existing slope or when constructing an embankment in stages bench the existing slope against which the embankment is to be placed as the embankment is constructed in lifts .
for each lift bench a minimum of num feet into the existing slope to allow the new embankment to integrate with the existing slope .
compact benched areas with the new embankment .
if the re determines that the moisture content of the existing ground previously constructed embankment or embankment material may adversely affect embankment construction cease embankment construction until the moisture content is corrected .
num construct embankment to ensure adequate surface drainage is provided at all times .
construct the center of the roadbed higher than the sides and keep the surface uniformly graded and compacted .
at the end of each working day construct temporary stabilized berms and slope drains along the top edges of the embankment to intercept surface runoff .
during embankment construction allocate adequate space in the embankment for excavated material .
begin constructing embankment by placing initial lifts in the deepest portion of the embankment .
continue placing lifts approximately parallel to the finished pavement grade line .
if constructing embankments with material that is obtained from more than num source do not comingle materials .
when constructing embankment for the specified materials the following apply num .
concrete or hma .
the contractor may use concrete or hma pieces to construct embankment if approved by the re .
ensure that hma or concrete pieces are at least num feet above the water table when constructing embankment .
num .
soil aggregate and rock .
if inum soil aggregate is composed of soil aggregate and rock fill the rock voids with soil aggregate .
if constructing embankments outside the row or easement construct the top num inches with inum soil aggregate that contains no aggregate exceeding num inches in any dimension .
num .
rock .
obtain re approval before placing rock in embankments .
do not place rock in embankment in areas where piles or guide rail posts are to be driven or drainage structures or utilities are to be constructed .
before placing rock on compacted embankment constructed of soil grade the existing embankment surface to slope from the centerline to the sides at the rate of approximately num inch to the foot and thoroughly compact the surface of the embankment .
place rock to form the base of embankments for the full width of the embankment .
place rock in uniform lifts to a depth that does not exceed num times the approximate size of the largest rock but limited to a maximum lift depth of num feet .
reduce the size of rocks larger than num feet in any dimension .
distribute rock by blading or dozing to ensure proper placement in the embankment and to keep voids pockets and bridging to a minimum .
do not dump rock in final position .
ensure that the exterior numfoot portion of the top and sides of rock in embankment contains no rock exceeding num inches in any dimension .
fill voids in the exterior numfoot portion with granular material .
do not place rock in embankment within num feet of the finished subgrade elevation .
when planting trees in the embankment ensure that the exterior numfoot portion of the top and sides of rock in embankment contains no rock exceeding num inches in any dimension .
fill voids in the exterior numfoot portion with granular material .
construct the balance of the embankment with soil aggregate .
place and grade material in lifts not exceeding num inches and then compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
when constructing embankment abutting structures before the abutments and wingwalls are completed allow ample space for construction of the abutting structure .
construct the embankment abutting the structure at a slope of numhnumv or flatter .
when the abutting structure is complete finish placing the embankment to the structure .
place embankment around and adjacent to arches rigid frame bridges culverts and piers simultaneously on both sides to the same elevation .
do not place embankment with pieces larger than num inches in any dimension within num feet of structures utilities and drainage facilities .
place and compact material used for embankment as specified in table num table num placing and compacting methods placement condition method inum num foot above water table or on unstable ground enddumping inum num foot above water table inum granular material control fill inum primarily rock or nongranular material directed inuminum density control num during embankment construction route construction equipment both loaded and empty over the lifts with the travel distributed evenly over the entire width of the embankment .
before placing subsequent lifts regrade and compact areas rutted by traffic .
the re will check the elevation of the subgrade as specified in num.c .
the allowable tolerance from the shown elevations is num inch .
stabilize slopes either by temporarily seeding and mulching or by topsoiling permanently seeding and mulching as specified in num .
do not construct embankment more than num feet high without stabilizing the slope .
submit alternate methods for stabilizing slopes when seeding is not allowable due to seasonable constraints .
obtain re approval of alternate methods before beginning embankment construction .
num placing and compacting methods a. enddumping method .
do not begin enddumping until the re tests the bottom of the excavation to determine that the wet material has been removed down to firm bottom or the lower limit as shown on the plans .
do not interrupt enddumping except as necessary to allow for testing and measuring .
when interrupted for more than num hours do not enddump until the re retests the bottom of the excavated area and determines it to be in satisfactory condition .
sequence excavation and enddumping to ensure that wet material does not reenter the excavated area .
enddump the embankment material only to an elevation that allows the use of compacting equipment .
construct the remainder of the embankment using the control fill method as specified in num.b .
fill and advance the embankment wedge so that the remaining wet material is forced to the sides of the excavation and is not entrapped under the embankment .
remove wet material that accumulates at the sides of the excavated area as the embankment wedge advances .
remove wet material spilled or otherwise deposited on the top or sides of the embankment during this operation .
when widening an existing embankment place embankment material along and outward from the existing embankment in close coordination with the excavation to prevent entrapping wet material between the existing and new sections of embankment and displacing unstable materials that may be under the existing embankment .
prevent settlement of or damage to existing roadways utilities or other facilities .
repair or replace roadways utilities or other facilities to the preconstruction condition .
b .
control fill method .
num .
control strip .
construct a control strip to determine compaction requirements .
construct a new control strip for each change in the character or source of the material or for any change in the compaction equipment .
each control strip is to remain in place and become a portion of the completed embankment .
obtain re approval of the subgrade or course upon which a control strip is to be constructed before constructing the control strip .
construct a numsquare yard or greater control strip consisting of num equally thick lifts not exceeding num inches each .
compact each of the first num lifts of the control strip using the directed method as specified in num.c .
compact the third lift of the control strip with a minimum of num passes of the compaction equipment .
continue compacting until additional passes result in no appreciable increase in density .
the me will determine density of the control strip according to aashto t num direct transmission method .
provide a final lift surface that is smooth dense and free from ruts and roller marks .
after the contractor completes compaction of the control strip the me will perform a minimum of num tests at random locations to determine the average inplace dry density of the control strip .
if the average dry density of the material in the control strip is equal to or greater than num percent of its maximum density as determined according to aashto t num method c including the replacement option then the re will approve the compaction equipment and its method of use for compaction of embankment of the same materials and thicknesses on the project .
if the control strip fails to achieve the required density remove and construct a new control strip .
revise compaction operations for subsequent control strips to achieve the required density .
num .
embankment .
continue constructing the embankments in the same manner as the approved control strip .
if an area is inaccessible to the compacting equipment used to construct the control strip compact each lift to a num density of at least num percent of the maximum density as determined according to aashto t num method c. the me will determine the density of such inaccessible areas from the average of num randomly located measurements according to aashto t num direct transmission method .
c. directed method .
place embankment materials except rock in lifts not exceeding num inches thick .
place rock as specified in num .
compact each lift as specified in table num .
table num compaction requirements embankment material equipment passes per lift pneumatictired roller num minimum sand sand and gravel dynamic compactor number of passes to optimize density pneumatictired roller num minimum silt clay padfoot roller num minimum numwheel numton roller num minimum rock dynamic compactor vibratory roller with numton min .
static weight at drum num to num if an area is inaccessible to the compacting equipment specified in table num compact each lift following the density control method as specified in num.d .
d. density control method .
if required submit a dewatering plan including the method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas .
dewater areas according to the dewatering plan before and during embankment construction if areas are below the water table .
construct embankment in lifts not exceeding num inches thick after compaction .
do not blend inum soil aggregate to meet gradation requirements at the placement site .
compact embankment materials to a density of at least num percent of maximum density .
for bridge foundations without piles determine maximum density according to aashto t num method d including the replacement option .
for other instances determine maximum density according to aashto t num method c including the replacement option .
the me will determine the compacted density of embankments by taking the average of num randomly located measurements for each course or at a minimum of each numfoot increment of elevation according to aashto t num direct transmission method .
if any individual measurement is less than num percent of the maximum density or the average is less than num percent of the maximum density continue compaction or take corrective action until the me verifies that the required density is achieved .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit breaking pavement square yard ___ soil aggregate cubic yard the department will not include payment for breaking pavement in ___ soil aggregate .
the department will make payment for breaking pavement under breaking pavement .
payment for inum soil aggregate will not include quantities of inum soil aggregate constructed from material excavated or reused from the project .
the department will make payment for sesc measures as specified in num .
the department will pay for temporary seeding under fertilizing and seeding type ___ as specified in num .
num division num subbase and base courses section num subbase num description this section describes the requirements for constructing num or more courses of subbase .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified soil aggregate inum num num equipment provide equipment as specified pneumatictired compactornum dynamic compactor num steel wheel roller num padfoot rollernum num construction num subbase a .
preparing subgrade .
before placing subbase ensure that the subgrade has been graded and compacted to within a tolerance of num inch of the required elevation .
the re will check elevations of the roadbed subgrade as specified in num.c .
do not prepare the subgrade during freezing weather when frozen or when it is unstable .
correct damage to the subgrade caused by construction activities and maintain the corrected subgrade until the subsequent course is placed .
b .
spreading and grading .
do not place subbase material when the subgrade is frozen or unstable .
notify the re if the finished subgrade is unstable and obtain re approval before removing unstable material .
backfill the area with suitable material and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
spread the subbase material with equipment except in limited or restricted areas where the use of hand spreading is allowed .
if approved by the re enddump the subbase material .
spread the subbase material in a manner that does not break down material and eliminates segregation ruts and ridges .
c. compacting .
place the subbase in numinch maximum lifts and compact within a tolerance of num inch of the required elevation .
for subbase courses greater than num inches thick construct the subbase course in num or more lifts of approximately equal thickness .
begin compacting at the sides and gradually progress to the center .
on superelevated curves compact from the lower to the upper edge parallel to the centerline and uniformly overlap each preceding track until the entire surface has been compacted .
if constructing concrete base or surface courses directly on subbase the me will measure the compaction using the density control method as specified in num.d .
if constructing aggregate base course or hma on the subbase the me will measure compaction using the control fill method as specified in num.b .
correct damage to the subbase caused by construction activities and maintain the corrected subbase until the subsequent course is placed .
do not allow traffic on the subbase .
remove all standing storm water and obtain the res approval before constructing subsequent courses .
num the re will check elevations of the roadbed subbase as specified in num.c to ensure that subbase elevations are within a tolerance of num inch .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit subbase cubic yard section num aggregate base course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing aggregate base courses .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified dganum soil aggregate inum num where inum soil aggregate is specified the contractor may substitute dga with the approval of the re .
num equipment provide equipment as specified pneumatictired compactor num dynamic compactor num steel wheel roller num padfoot roller num num construction num aggregate base course a .
preparing subgrade or subbase .
before placing base course on subgrade or subbase prepare surfaces as specified in num .
b. density control strip .
obtain re approval of the underlying surface before constructing the density control strip .
before constructing the aggregate base course construct a density control strip using the same type of material from the same source as the aggregate base course .
construct additional density control strips if a change is made in the type or source of material if a significant change occurs in the composition of the material from the same source or if a change is made in the type of compaction equipment used as determined by the me .
provide at least num square yards for each density control strip .
construct a density control strip for each thickness specified for the aggregate base course .
ensure that the moisture content for the test strip material is within num percent of its optimum moisture content according to aashto t num method c including replacement option .
place and spread aggregate base course as specified in num.b .
place the base course and compact within a tolerance of num inch of the required elevation .
ensure that no compacted lift exceeds a thickness of num inches .
for base courses greater than num inches thick construct the base course in num or more lifts of approximately equal thickness .
compact the density control strip using the same type and weight of equipment that will be used for compaction of the aggregate base course .
compact the density control strip with a minimum of num passes of the compaction num equipment .
a pass is defined as num passage of each compacting element in use of the compaction equipment over the entire surface of the course .
after each pass of the compaction equipment transverses the density control strip the me will make num density determinations according to aashto t num .
continue compacting until no appreciable increase in density is obtained by additional passes .
after the contractor completes compaction of the control strip the me will take at least num density tests at random locations to determine the average inplace dry density of the density control strip .
if the average density of the material in the density control strip is equal to or greater than num percent of its maximum density as determined according to aashto t num method c including replacement option then use the value of this average as the reference maximum density for courses of the same materials and thicknesses .
establish a density control strip satisfying the num percent density requirement according to aashto t num method c before constructing additional base courses .
if this density level in the density control strip is not achieved the re will reject the compaction equipment its method of use or both .
if approved by the re the density control strips may remain in place and become a portion of the completed base course .
the re will check elevations as specified in num.c of the roadbed base course to ensure that base course elevations are within num inch .
c. aggregate base course placement .
construct the aggregate base course in the same manner as the approved density control strip .
if less than num contiguous square yards of aggregate base course is being constructed place and spread the aggregate base course as specified in num.b .
place the base course and compact within a tolerance of num inch of the required elevation .
compact the base course areas as specified in num.d and ensure that no compacted lift exceeds a thickness of num inches .
for base courses greater than num inches thick construct the base course in num or more lifts of approximately equal thickness .
d. thickness requirements .
the re will measure thickness by test holes or by calculating the difference in elevations between the base course and the underlying layer .
refill test holes with base course material and recompact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
if the total thickness of base course differs from specified thickness by more than num inch correct deficient areas as follows num .
scarify the base course to a depth of num to num inches .
num .
ensure that remaining material is contaminant free .
num .
add or remove base course material to obtain the required grade while the existing surface is in a loose scarified condition .
num .
compact using the same method used for the density control strip .
e. compaction acceptance testing .
the me will divide the base course into lots of approximately num square yards or num cubic yards .
the me will test each lot of completed base course for compliance .
the me will determine the num locations for density tests using a table of random numbers .
the me will make num density determination at each of the selected locations .
to determine acceptability use the following procedure num .
formula .
calculate q using the following formula range of lot density average lot density num of the reference maximum density q where average lot density is the average dry density of num randomly selected locations in the lot and the range of lot density is the absolute difference between the lowest and highest dry density values recorded at these same num locations .
the reference maximum density is determined by the method specified in num.b .
num .
criteria .
q must be equal to or greater than num .
if a lot is unacceptable rework or recompact the lot .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit soil aggregate base course ___ thick square yard soil aggregate base course variable thickness cubic yard densegraded aggregate base course ___ thick square yard densegraded aggregate base course variable thickness cubic yard section num asphaltstabilized drainage course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing asphaltstabilized drainage course .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified asphaltstabilized drainage course num num equipment provide equipment as specified hma paver num hma compactornum vibratory drum compactor num bituminous material distributor num hma plantnum hma trucks num num construction num asphaltstabilized drainage course a .
paving plan .
at least num days before the start of placing the asphaltstabilized drainage course submit a detailed plan of operation to the re for approval as specified in num.a .
b .
weather limitations .
comply with the weather limitations as specified in num.b .
c. transportation and delivery of hma .
transport and deliver hma as specified in num.d .
d. spreading and grading .
ensure that the prime coat has been applied as specified in num .
place asphalt stabilized drainage course at a laydown temperature of at least num num f. spread and grade asphaltstabilized drainage course in num lift as specified in num.e .
e. compacting .
compact as specified in num.f .
ensure that the temperature is num num f before beginning compacting .
f. thickness requirements .
ensure that the thickness of the drainage course is within num inch of the specified thickness and that the elevation of the compacted course is within num inch of the required elevation .
the re will check elevations of the asphaltstabilized drainage course as specified in num.c .
num g. protecting .
protect the drainage course from damage and contamination .
remove and replace damaged and contaminated areas .
only allow equipment on the drainage course that is necessary for the construction of the subsequent pavement course .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit asphaltstabilized drainage course ton the department will measure asphaltstabilized drainage course by the ton as indicated on the certified weigh tickets excluding unused material and material used to replace damaged or contaminated .
the department will make payment for prime coat as specified in num .
section num concrete base course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete base course .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concretenum curing materials num epoxy grout num.b reinforcement steelnum tie bars epoxycoatednum joint ties epoxycoatednum dowel bars epoxycoatednum joint sealers num num equipment provide equipment as specified sealer application systemnum pavement formsnum spreading and finishing machinenum vibratornum slip form paver num straightedge num pavement sawnum hotair lancenum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num concrete base course prepare the underlying material as specified in num .
at least num days before placing the concrete base course submit a detailed plan of operation to the re for approval as specified in num.a .
comply with the concrete placing num limitations as specified in num.c .
when shown on the plans install longitudinal joint ties tie bars and contraction joint assemblies as specified in num .
when shown on the plans install dowel bars as specified in num.c .
when shown on the plans install reinforcement steel as specified in num .
place concrete for concrete base course as specified in num.d .
ensure that the concrete is not exposed for more than num minutes after finishing .
the re will direct a suspension as specified in num of concrete operations if the curing procedure is delayed or is not followed .
apply wet burlap and white polyethylene sheeting as specified in num.f.num .
maintain the curing material for num days .
protect concrete as specified in num.i for the duration of the curing period .
construct wood bridging for pedestrian crossovers at street intersections and at other established pedestrian crosswalks .
sawcut relief joints as specified in num.g .
saw and seal contraction joints as specified in num.h .
the re may randomly test thickness by taking num core as specified in num per slab .
if the thickness of any core measures less than the value of the design thickness minus num inch remove and replace the deficient area between transverse joints using re approved methods .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit concrete base course ___ thick square yard concrete base course reinforced ___ thick square yard the department will make payment for underlayer preparation as specified in num .
when concrete curb is constructed monolithically with the base course the department will make payment for concrete curb under the various curb items scheduled in the proposal .
section num rubblizing concrete pavement num description this section describes the requirements for rubblizing existing concrete pavement and seating before placing a hma overlay .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified dganum num equipment provide equipment as specified resonant method breaking equipmentnum.a smooth drum vibratory roller num.b multihead method breaking equipment num.b zgrid rollernum.a smooth drum vibratory roller num.b provide breaking equipment as required by the tcp capable of operating within num foot of barrier curbs and structures .
num num construction num rubblizing a .
existing subsurface facility investigation .
obtain re approval of the method of inspecting existing subsurface facilities for existing conditions .
inspect the existing subsurface facilities within the limits of rubblization .
b .
installing drainage system .
ensure that the entire underdrain system is installed at least num days before beginning rubblization .
c. removing existing hma surfaces .
before beginning rubblization remove existing hma overlays and hma surface patches from the concrete pavement surfaces to be rubblized .
remove existing fulldepth hma repairs and fill the void with dga .
d. sawcutting joints .
if the limit of the rubblization is not at an existing joint or if the concrete being rubblized abuts concrete pavement to be rubblized in a subsequent stage sawcut the concrete fulldepth .
e. rubblization plan .
submit a rubblization plan to the re num days before beginning rubblizing operations that includes the following num .
condition of existing subsurface facilities as determined in num.a .
num .
rubblization method and associated equipment .
num .
seating method and associated equipment .
num .
rubblizing and paving sequence for the project .
num .
method for locating grade corrections and placing dga as specified in num.j .
num .
method for protecting subsurface facilities .
num .
dust mitigation measures .
num .
method for performing a survey of the condition of the existing subsurface facilities after the rubblization operations .
do not begin test strip until the re accepts this plan .
submit an adjusted rubblization plan before making adjustments to the operation .
f. test strip .
before beginning rubblization the re will designate a numfoot long full lane width or an area of approximately num square yards for the test strip .
rubblize the test strip using varying intensities of energy until a technique is established that will rubblize the pavement as specified .
at a location determined by the re excavate a full depth numfoot wide test pit for the full width of the test strip to determine that the breaker is producing pieces of the specified sizes .
the re may require additional test holes .
use dga to backfill excavated areas .
place dga in lifts and compact using the density control method as specified in num.d .
if required results are not being obtained cease rubblizing operations and submit an alternate rubblization plan capable of obtaining the specified results to the re .
resume rubblizing operations upon acceptance of the alternate plan .
repeat this procedure as necessary to obtain the specified results .
g. rubblizing .
rubblize the pavement fulldepth in a manner that eliminates all slab action by fracturing into pieces num inches or less in any dimension in the top third of the pavement and num inches or less in any dimension in the bottom twothirds of the pavement .
prevent rubblized debris from entering an active traffic lane .
rubblize in partial widths when necessary to maintain traffic as shown on the plans .
in areas where the roadway must be overlaid num lane at a time extend initial rubblization a minimum of num inches beyond the width of the pavement to be overlaid .
for the resonant method begin at a free edge or previously broken edge and progress toward the opposite shoulder or longitudinal centerline of the road .
when necessary overlap passes to achieve rubblization .
continuously monitor rubblization to ensure that the operation is achieving the specified results .
notify the re of adjustments that may be required .
the re may require additional test holes to ensure that pieces are free of bond with reinforcement and to ensure that the pavement is being rubblized to the specific dimensions .
h. seating .
seat rubblized pavement with rollers operating at a speed not exceeding num miles per hour .
seat rubblized pavement using the applicable method num num .
resonant method .
roll the rubblized pavement with a minimum of num passes over the entire width of the rubblized pavement with a vibratory roller .
num .
multihead method .
roll the entire width of the rubblized pavement with num passes of a zgrid roller followed by num passes of a smooth drum vibratory roller .
the re may require additional passes in order to seat the rubblized pavement and provide a smooth surface that is ready for the hma overlay .
if the rubblized pavement becomes unstable due to excess moisture cease rolling until the re allows the operation to resume .
i .
removing exposed reinforcement steel and transverse joint assemblies .
for reinforced concrete pavement leave debonded reinforcement steel in place unless exposed .
cut exposed reinforcement steel num inch below the surface and remove .
remove exposed transverse joint assemblies .
remove exposed joint filler expansion materials or other similar items .
patch deficiencies left by removing joint assemblies as specified in num.j .
j. patching and leveling with dga .
at the direction of the re remove unstable material full depth and replace with dga .
compact dga in lifts using the directed method as specified in num.c .
if the seated rubblized pavement is more than num inch below grade correct with dga as approved by the re .
place dga and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
k. repairing subsurface facilities .
if damage occurs to subsurface facilities during rubblization immediately cease operations notify the re and repair the damage as directed by the re .
l. final subsurface facility survey .
perform a final survey of the subsurface facilities after completion of rubblization and submit to the re .
repair damage as directed by the re .
m. protecting rubblized pavement from damage .
protect the rubblized pavement from contamination and damage .
correct areas of the rubblized pavement damaged by construction operations or contamination before placing hma .
only allow equipment on the rubblized pavement that is necessary for the construction of the subsequent pavement course .
ensure that no more than num hours elapse between rubblizing the pavement and the placement of the first lift of the hma overlay .
if precipitation occurs before placing the hma overlay the re may extend the time restriction to allow the rubblized pavement to dry .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit rubblization square yard the department will measure excavation unclassified in unstable areas by the cubic yard of material actually excavated in the work .
the department will make payment for excavation unclassified as specified in num .
the department will measure dga used for dga patching and leveling by the cubic yard of material actually used in the work .
the department will make payment for dense graded aggregate base course variable thickness ___ as specified in num .
num division num pavements section num hot mix asphalt hma courses num description this section describes the requirements for constructing base course intermediate course and surface course of hma .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified tack coat num pg num num prime coat cutback asphalt grade mcnum or mcnum tack coat cutback asphalt grade rcnum emulsified asphalt grade rsnum ssnum ssnumh grade cssnum or cssnumhnum hmanum joint sealer hotpoured num polymerized joint adhesivenum use hma specified for the roadway surface as patching material for hma pavement repair .
the contractor may use a commercial type of cold mixture as patching material for filling core holes if hma surface course is not being placed when coring .
the contractor may use an approved hma surface course to fill core holes provided the material remains hot enough to compact .
num equipment provide equipment as specified materials transfer vehicle mtv num hma pavernum hma compactor num vibratory drum compactornum bituminous material distributornum sealer application systemnum milling machinenum hotair lancenum hma plantnum hma trucksnum mechanical sweeper num provide a thinlift nuclear density gauge according to astm d num .
install a paver hopper insert with a minimum capacity of num tons in the hopper of the hma paver .
num construction num preparing existing pavement a .
milling of hma .
mill hma to the specified depth profile and cross slope .
operate milling machine to produce milled material that passes a numinch sieve .
use automatic grade controls to control the line and grade of the milling machine .
use either a stringline or ski reference system .
replace teeth in the milling drum that become dislodged broken or unevenly worn .
perform milling operation including removal of the milled material in a manner that prevents dust and other particulate matter from escaping into the air .
num ensure that the milled area is free from gouges continuous grooves ridges and delaminated areas and has a uniform texture consisting of discontinuous longitudinal striations .
ensure that the striations do not deviate more than num inch in num feet from a line parallel to the center of the traveled way and do not exceed num inch in depth .
check at least every num feet to ensure that the depth of milling is within num inch of the indicated depth .
mill hma to the depth specified without damaging underlying hma .
if hma below the specified milling level becomes dislodged or delaminated remove and replace .
when profile milling ensure the cutting depth is sufficient to remove ruts and corrugations and to scarify the remaining surface .
using a mechanical sweeper clean the milled area before opening to traffic and before subsequent construction or resurfacing .
reuse millings and sweepings as specified in num.a .
if the milled area is opened to traffic ensure that water can drain from the surface and does not become trapped .
if the longitudinal edge height of a milled surface exceeds num inches slope the edge to provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
at transverse edges of milled areas provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
in areas inaccessible to the milling machine remove hma with other equipment .
the department will provide the time interval for resurfacing the milled areas in the special provisions .
b .
milling of concrete .
mill concrete pavement to numinch depth at the locations shown on the plans without damaging the underlying pavement .
ensure that the milled area is free from gouges continuous grooves ridges and delaminated areas and has a uniform texture consisting of discontinuous longitudinal striations .
ensure that the striations do not deviate more than num inch in num feet from a line parallel to the center of the traveled way and do not exceed num inch in depth .
perform milling operations including removal of the milled material in a manner that prevents dust and other particulate matter from escaping into the air .
mill num inch of concrete and any remaining hma not removed by previous milling operations at locations shown on the plans .
based on the condition of the remaining pavement the re may direct additional areas to be milled .
if milling transition areas for hma overlays mill the transition from num to num inch in depth over a length of num feet .
construct a keyway at the terminal transverse limit of the area to be milled by sawcutting and removing the material within this area by hand methods so as to produce a vertical face .
using a mechanical sweeper clean the milled area before opening to traffic and before subsequent construction or resurfacing .
reuse millings and sweepings as specified in num.a .
if the milled area is opened to traffic ensure that water can drain from the surface and does not become trapped .
if the longitudinal edge height of a milled surface exceeds num inches slope the edge to provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
at transverse edges of milled areas provide a smooth transition from the milled surface to the remaining pavement .
in areas inaccessible to the milling machine remove concrete with other equipment .
c. sealing cracks in hma surface course .
seal cracks that are num inch wide or wider .
clean cracks to a depth of num inch using a random crack saw carbidetipped rotaryimpact router commercial powerdriven wire brush or by other re approved means .
provide acceptable protective screening if the cleaning operation causes damage to or interference with traffic in adjacent lanes .
immediately before applying sealant clean cracks and dry further with a hotair lance .
at least num day before beginning the work submit to the re a copy of the manufacturers recommendations for heating and applying the sealant .
seal cracks with hotpoured joint sealant according to the manufacturers recommendations .
cut sealant into small pieces to facilitate slow and uniform melting with constant stirring .
ensure that the temperature of the sealant in the field application equipment does not exceed the recommended safe heating temperature .
do not heat sealant material at the pouring temperature for more than num hours and do not reheat .
pour sealant into the cracks so that upon completion of the work the surface of the sealant is flush with or not more than num inch lower than the surface of the adjacent hma surface course .
if the sealant subsides to a lower level perform another pouring .
when more than num pour is required to fill the cracks perform succeeding pours num immediately after shrinkage of the previous pouring .
if spilling or overfilling occurs immediately squeegee the crack .
if the re determines that the overfilled crack or spilled sealant creates a slippery hazardous or otherwise undesirable condition initially correct the area by sprinkling a light application of abrasive sand or grit material to absorb the excess material restore skidresistance and abate the condition caused by the overpour .
after the excess material has been absorbed hand sweep the area clean and restore to its original condition or texture to the res satisfaction .
do not allow traffic or construction equipment over the poured cracks until the sealant has hardened sufficiently to resist pickup .
the re may direct sprinkling of dry sand over poured areas to provide additional pickup resistance .
d. repairing hma pavement .
sawcut existing hma pavement to a maximum depth of num inches or to the full depth of bound layers whichever is less .
sawcut lines parallel and perpendicular to the roadway baseline and num inches away at the closest point from the damaged area to be repaired .
for larger areas the contractor may use a milling machine for removal of hma pavement .
remove material within the boundary of the sawcuts to form rectangular openings with vertical sides and clean the area .
shape and compact the underlying surface to produce a firm level base .
ensure that the remaining pavement is not damaged .
apply polymerized joint adhesive or tack coat to the vertical surfaces of the openings .
backfill with hma as specified for the roadway surface .
ensure that the temperature of the hma when placed is at least num f and compact as specified in num.f .
compact areas not accessible to rollers with a vibratory drum .
compact until the top of the patch is flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
reuse removed material as specified in num.a .
num tack coat and prime coat clean the surface where the hma is to be placed of foreign and loose material .
immediately before beginning paving operations ensure that the surface is dry .
do not place tack coat or prime coat unless the weather restrictions as specified in num.b are met .
do not apply tack coat or prime coat to asphaltstabilized drainage course .
for curbs gutters manholes and other similar structures do not apply tack coat or prime coat .
clean the exposed surfaces of these structures and apply a uniform coating of polymerized joint adhesive to contact surfaces before paving .
in areas inaccessible to distributor spray bars use hand spraying equipment for tack and prime coat .
do not allow traffic on tack coated or prime coated surfaces .
treat surfaces as follows num .
tack coat .
uniformly spray tack coat when placing hma on paved surfaces .
apply tack coat only to areas to be paved in the same day .
apply tack coat as specified in table num table num tack coat application material spraying temp f gallons per square yard season cutback asphalt rcnum num to num num to num oct num to apr num emulsified asphalt rsnum num to num num to num all year ssnum ssnumh num to num num to num all year cssnum cssnumh num to num num to num all year correct uncoated or lightly coated areas .
blot areas showing an excess of tack coat with sand or other similar material .
remove blotting material before paving .
ensure that the material is not streaked or ribboned .
before paving allow tack coat to cure to a condition that is tacky to the touch .
num .
tack coat num .
when precipitation has occurred within num hours before application the re will determine whether to allow the work to proceed or to wait until the surface is completely dry .
only apply tack coat that can be paved over in the same day .
apply tack coat num at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard and num at a spraying temperature of num f. adjust the spraying temperature and application rate to produce a uniform coating with no excess material .
correct uncoated or lightly coated areas and remove excess tack coat from affected areas .
ensure that the material is not streaked or ribboned .
num .
prime coat .
apply prime coat of cutback asphalt on unpaved surfaces as follows table num prime coat application cutback asphalt spraying temp f gallons per square yard season mcnum num to num num to num all year mcnum num to num num to num all year apply prime coat at least num hours before placement of the hma and when the base courses are not saturated or frozen .
unless the prime coat is under asphaltstabilized drainage course the re may waive the application of prime coat if more than num inches of hma is placed on the unbound aggregate course before the roadway is opened to traffic .
take measures to prevent prime coat from entering into the drainage system or extending beyond the area to be paved .
num hma courses a .
paving plan .
at least num days before beginning placing the hma surface course submit a detailed plan of operation to the re for approval that includes the following num .
asphalt paving construction technologist apct certified by the society of asphalt technologists of new jersey inc .
the department will accept the equivalent certification by the midatlantic regional technician certification program .
num .
size and description of crew .
num .
number type and model of equipment .
num .
lighting plan for nighttime operations as specified in num .
num .
method of locating and maintaining joint locations if sawing and sealing .
num .
manufacturers recommendations for heating and applying joint sealant .
num .
paving procedures for maintaining continuous operation as specified in num.d .
num .
manufacturers recommended laydown temperature for modified binders .
num .
paving sequence .
ensure that the hma surface course is constructed for the full width of the traveled way shoulder and auxiliary lanes as a single paving operation .
num .
schedule hours of operation and production rates for the project .
num .
plant locations .
num .
method of maintaining hma temperature during transportation .
num .
method of constructing and compacting joints as specified in num.e .
num .
quality control plan outlining the use of the thin lift nuclear density gauge quality control cores and the control of the compaction process .
do not begin paving until the re approves this plan .
submit an adjusted pavement plan before making adjustments to the paving operation .
b .
weather limitations .
do not place hma if it is precipitating .
do not allow trucks to leave the plant when precipitation is imminent .
the contractor may resume operations when the precipitation has stopped and the surface is free of water .
when placing hma ensure that the base temperature meets the minimum temperature requirements specified in table num .
table num minimum base temperature lift thickness inches t minimum base temperature f t num num num t num num t num num num c. test strip .
construct a test strip for contracts with more than num tons of hma .
test strips are not necessary for temporary pavement .
ensure that the tack coat or prime coat has been placed as specified in num before placing hma .
transport and deliver spread and grade and compact as specified in num.d num.e and num.f respectively and according to the approved paving plan .
construct a test strip for the first num to num square yards placed for each job mix formula .
while constructing the test strip record the following information and submit to the re num .
ambient temperature .
measure ambient temperature at the beginning and end of each days paving operation .
num .
base temperature .
measure the surface temperature of the existing base before paving .
num .
hma temperature .
measure the temperature of the hma immediately after placement .
num .
roller pattern .
provide details on the number of rollers type and number of passes used on the test strip .
num .
nuclear density gauge readings .
obtain the maximum density from the plant and input it into the nuclear density gauge .
use the nuclear density gauge to read the bulk density and percent air voids .
num .
quality control core density test results .
take num randomly selected quality control cores to test for the bulk specific gravity and the maximum specific gravity .
use drilling equipment with a watercooled diamondtipped masonry drill bit that shall produce numinch nominal diameter cores for the full depth of the pavement .
remove the core from the pavement without damaging it .
after removing the core remove all water from the hole .
fill the hole with hma or cold patching material and compact the material so that it is num inch above the surrounding pavement surface .
compare the nuclear density gauge readings and the core test results to establish a correlation .
use this correlation as a guide for the continued use of the nuclear density gauge for density control .
upon completion of the test strip the contractor may continue paving .
if the contractor does not continue paving the department will accept the test strip as num lot regardless of size .
if the test strip does not meet requirements make adjustments and construct a second test strip .
if the second test strip does not meet requirements suspend paving operations until written approval to proceed is received .
before making adjustments to the paving operations notify the re in writing .
d. transportation and delivery of hma .
deliver hma using hma trucks in sufficient quantities and at such intervals to allow continuous placement of the material .
do not allow trucks to leave the plant within num hour of sunset unless nighttime lighting is provided as specified in num .
the re will reject hma if the hma trucks meet the requirements specified in num .
the re will suspend construction operations if the contractor fails to maintain a continuous paving operation .
before the truck leaves the plant obtain a weigh ticket from a fully automatic scale .
before unloading submit for each truckload a legible weigh ticket that includes the following num .
name and location of the hma plant .
num .
project title .
num .
load time and date .
num .
truck number .
num .
mix designation .
num .
plant lot number .
num .
tare gross and net weight .
a certified weighmaster shall sign and affix a seal to the weigh tickets .
in the event of breakdown of an automatic printer system the re will accept weigh tickets showing the tare gross and net weight of each truck as entered and certified by a weighmaster for a period not exceeding the necessary repair time as certified by a licensed repairman .
when using an automated batching plant obtain weigh tickets from the printer used in conjunction with an automated batching and mixing system .
the printed ticket shall show the individual weights of the various components of the hma in a batch the total weight of each batch and the sum of all batch weights in the truckload .
at the completion of each days work a producers representative shall certify that the total net weight supplied to each contract was correct .
num e. spreading and grading .
if using a stringline reference system ensure that the system is in place and approved by the re before placing hma .
ensure that the underlying surface meets line and grade as specified in num.c .
before placing hma ensure that the tack coat or prime coat has been placed as specified in num .
obtain re approval of the underlying surface far enough in advance of spreading hma to allow num days paving operations .
ensure that the certified apct is present during paving operations .
ensure that an mtv independently delivers hma from the hma trucks to the hma paver .
before beginning ensure that the temperature of the screed on the hma paver is heated to at least the laydown temperature of the hma .
using the mtvs and hma pavers construct paving courses in lifts of at least num times the nominal maximum aggregate size of the hma being constructed .
ensure that the grade and profile are maintained .
where directed use hma having a nominal maximum aggregate size of num inch or less in transition run out areas .
on areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make use of a paver impractical spread rake and lute hma with hand tools .
for these areas dump spread and screed the hma to obtain the required compacted thickness .
construct joints as follows num .
longitudinal joints .
perform paving with the springloaded end plates of the paver in the down position .
the longitudinal joint in num lift shall offset that in the lift immediately below by approximately num inches .
offset the joint in the surface course from the lane lines by num inches .
when constructing a joint between lanes of opposing traffic offset the joint by num inches into either lane .
a. echelon paving .
if a single paver does not spread the hma the entire width of the roadway use num or more pavers in echelon .
ensure that the trailing paver follows within num feet of the lead paver .
extend the screed and end gate of the trailing paver num inch over the uncompacted hma placed by the lead paver .
ensure that the uncompacted hma elevation from the trailing paver is equal to that from the lead paver at the joint .
the contractor may construct either a butt joint or a wedge joint .
do not rake the joint .
b .
cold joint paving .
if echelon paving is not possible construct the pavement using cold longitudinal joints .
when constructing the first lane compact so the line and grade of the edges of the hma are not displaced .
construct longitudinal joints parallel to the centerlines within a tolerance of num inches per num linear feet .
if this tolerance is not met trim or mill the edge of the hma mat as necessary .
before paving the abutting lane ensure longitudinal joints are free from dust and debris .
for surface course only uniformly apply polymerized joint adhesive to longitudinal cold joint .
apply a numinch thick coating of polymerized joint adhesive over the entire joint face .
apply slowly to ensure an even coating thickness .
when maintaining traffic with a lift thickness greater than num inches construct a wedge joint .
the re will permit a butt joint for lift thickness num inches or less when maintaining traffic or for lift thickness greater than num inches when maintaining traffic is not required .
maintain a uniform width and depth of overlapped material at all times .
position the paver so that the hma overlaps the edge of the lane previously placed by num to num inches .
leave the material sufficiently high to allow for compaction .
lute back overlapped material pushing the material off of the cold hma and onto the hot hma mat directly over the joint .
remove excess material instead of broadcasting it across the new lift .
when compacted ensure that the new mat at the joint is even or slightly higher maximum num inch than the previously placed adjoining mat .
if the newly compacted mat results in a depression at the joint of num inch or more lower than the previously placed adjacent hma lift suspend all paving operations until corrective action is taken to prevent reoccurrence .
num .
transverse joints .
construct transverse joints to provide a smooth riding surface .
when using a bulkhead to form the joint ensure that the bulkhead forms a straight line and vertical face .
if a bulkhead is not used to form the joint make the joint by sawing the compacted hma for a sufficient distance behind the end of the placement to ensure full thickness and a smooth surface at the joint .
remove the full lift thickness of hma ahead of the sawed joint .
in either case paint the joint face with polymerized joint adhesive before the fresh material is placed against it .
unless prohibited by field conditions cross roll to obtain thorough compaction of these joints .
num f. compacting .
compact with the minimum number of rollers as specified in the table num .
table num compaction requirements laydown rate r ydnumday minimum number of rollers r num num num r num num r num num orient the drive axles of the roller towards the paver during compaction operation .
operate rollers at a slow uniform speed not exceeding num miles per hour .
if necessary to prevent adhesion of the hma to the rollers keep the wheels moistened with water mixed with very small quantities of detergent .
begin compacting at the sides and progress gradually to the center .
on superelevated curves compact from the lower to the upper edge parallel to the centerline and uniformly overlap each preceding track until the entire surface has been compacted .
continue rolling until roller marks are eliminated and the air voids conform to the specified requirements .
along forms curbs headers walls and other places not accessible to the rollers compact the hma by a vibratory drum compactor .
remove and replace hma that becomes loose broken or otherwise defective or that shows an excess or deficiency of asphalt binder material .
when paving in echelon keep the rollers for the first lane approximately num inches from the unconfined edge adjacent to the second paving operation .
after hma from the second paver is placed against the uncompacted edge of the mat from the first paver compact the hma on both sides of the joint .
prevent lateral or vertical displacement of the unconfined edge during the compaction operation .
ensure that the edge of the drums of the rollers extends over the free edge of the mat by at least num inches .
when compacting the butt or wedge joint while paving the adjacent lane place the roller on the newly placed hma and overlap the joint by approximately num inches .
if a test strip was not required establish a correlation between the nuclear density gauge and the cores as specified in num.c.num .
to adjust correlation with the thin lift nuclear density gauge take num additional core every week during the paving operation .
the re may approve additional coring with valid cause presented by the contractor .
on a weekly basis provide results of both the nuclear density and core testing to the re .
provide core and nuclear density results that include the bulk specific gravity the maximum specific gravity according to aashto t num and the percent air voids .
failure to submit the core and nuclear density test results from the previous weeks paving will result in suspended paving operations .
g. opening to traffic .
remove loose material from the traveled way shoulder and auxiliary lanes before opening to traffic .
open hma courses to traffic or construction equipment including paving equipment only after the surface temperatures meet the following requirements num .
when using pg num or pg num do not allow traffic or construction equipment on the hma course until the surface temperature is less than num f. num .
when using pg num do not allow traffic or construction equipment on the hma course until the surface temperature is less than num f. h. air void requirements .
mainline lots are defined as the area covered by a days paving production of the same job mixed formula between num and num tons for the traveled way and auxiliary lanes .
the re will combine daily production areas less than num tons with previous or subsequent production areas to meet the minimum lot requirements .
when the maximum lot requirement is exceeded in a days production the re will divide the area of hma placed into num lots with approximately equal areas .
ramp pavement lots are defined as approximately num square yards of pavement in ramps .
the re may combine ramps with less than the minimum area into a single lot .
if num or more ramps are included in a single lot the re will require additional cores to ensure that at least num core is taken from each ramp .
num other pavement lots are defined as approximately num square yards of pavement in shoulders and other undefined areas .
the me will calculate the percent defective pd as the percentage of the lot outside the acceptable range of num percent air voids to num percent air voids .
the acceptable quality limit is num percent defective .
for lots in which pd num the department will award a positive pay adjustment .
for lots in which pd num the department will assess a negative pay adjustment .
the me will determine air voids from num cores taken from each lot in random locations .
the me will determine air voids of cores from the values for the maximum specific gravity of the mix and the bulk specific gravity of the core .
the me will determine the maximum specific gravity of the mix according to njdot bnum and aashto t num except that minimum sample size may be waived in order to use a numinch diameter core sample .
the me will determine the bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture by testing each core according to aashto t num .
the me will calculate pay adjustments based on the following num .
sample mean x and standard deviation s of the n test results xnum xnum xn .
n x x x x n num num num num num num num num n x x x x x x s n num .
quality index q .
s x q l num num .
s x qu num num .
num .
percent defective pd .
using njdot st for the appropriate sample size the department will determine pdl and pdu associated with ql and qu respectively .
pd pdl pdu num .
percent pay adjustment ppa .
calculate the ppa for traveled way and ramp lots as specified in table num .
table num ppa for mainline lots and ramp lots quality ppa pd num ppa num num pd num pd num ppa num num pd surface pd num ppa num num pd pd num ppa num num pd intermediate and base pd num ppa num num pd calculate the ppa for other pavement lots as specified in table num .
table num ppa for other pavement lots quality ppa pd num ppa num num pd all courses pd num ppa num num pd num .
outlier detection .
the me will screen all acceptance cores for outliers using a statistically valid procedure .
if an outlier is detected replace that core by taking an additional core at the same offset and within num feet of the original station .
the following procedure applies only for a sample size of num .
num num .
the me will arrange the num core results in ascending order in which xnum represents the smallest value and xnum represents the largest value .
num .
if xnum is suspected of being an outlier the me will calculate num num num num x x x r x num .
if xnum is suspected of being an outlier the me will calculate num num num num x x x r x num .
if r num the value is judged to be statistically significant and the core is excluded .
num .
retest .
if the initial series of num cores produces a percent defective value of pd num for mainline or ramp lots or pd num for other pavement lots the contractor may elect to take an additional set of num cores at random locations chosen by the me .
take the additional cores within num days of receipt of the initial core results .
if the additional cores are not taken within the num days the me will use the initial core results to determine the ppa .
if the additional cores are taken the me will recalculate the ppa using the combined results from the num cores .
num .
removal and replacement .
if the final lot pd num based on the combined set of num cores or num cores if the contractor does not take additional cores remove and replace the lot and all overlying work .
the replacement work is subject to the same requirements as the initial work .
i. thickness requirements .
thickness requirements will apply when fulldepth uniformthickness hma pavement construction is shown .
the size and the assigned number of thickness lots will match those of the surface course air void lots .
the re will not include areas consisting of different hma mixtures or thicknesses in the same lot .
the me will test for thickness using the fulldepth cores taken for surface course air voids evaluated according to njdot bnum .
the me will base acceptance on total thickness and thickness of the surface course .
num .
total thickness .
the me will calculate the percent defective pd as the percentage of the lot that is less than the design thickness .
the me will consider num percent defective as the acceptable quality limit .
for lots where pd num the department will award a positive pay adjustment .
for lots where pd num the department will assess a negative pay adjustment .
the department will base total thickness acceptance on the percentage of the lot estimated to fall below the specified thickness as follows a .
sample mean x and standard deviation s of the n test results xnum xnum xn .
calculate as specified in num.h.num .
b .
quality index qi .
ql x tdess and tdes is the design thickness .
c. percent defective pd .
using njdot st for the appropriate sample size determine the percentage of material pd falling below the design thickness associated with ql lower limit .
d. percent pay adjustment ppa .
the department will determine the pay adjustment based on the quantity of the surface course ppa .
table num pay equations for thickness quality ppa pd num ppa num num pd pd num ppa num num pd e. retest .
if the initial series of num cores produces a percent defective value of pd num the contractor may elect to take an additional set of num cores at random locations chosen by the re .
take the additional cores within num days of receipt of the initial core results .
if the additional cores are not taken within the num num days the me will use the initial core results to determine the ppa .
if the additional cores are taken the me will recalculate the ppa using the combined results from the num cores .
f. removal and replacement .
if the final lot pd num based on the combined set of num cores or num cores if the contractor does not take additional cores remove and replace or mill and overlay the lot .
the replacement work is subject to the same requirements as the initial work .
num .
surface course thickness .
the me will evaluate the surface course solely to determine whether a remove andreplace or an overlay condition exists not for pay adjustment .
the me will calculate the percent defective pd as the percentage of the lot that is less than the allowable thickness for the nominal maximum aggregate used in the surface course .
the me will accept pavement lots with pd num and will reject pavement lots with pd num .
the me will base surface thickness acceptance on the percentage of the lot estimated to fall below the allowable thickness as follows a .
sample mean x and standard deviation s of the n test results xnum xnum xn .
calculate using the formula as specified in num.h.num .
b .
quality index q. ql x talls where tall is the minimum allowable thickness .
table num surface course thickness requirements hma mix design size designation minimum allowable compacted lift thickness tall num mm num inch num mm num inches num mm num inches c. percent defective .
using njdot st for the appropriate sample size determine the percentage of material pd falling below the allowable thickness associated with ql lower limit .
d. retest .
if the initial series of num cores produces a percent defective value of pd num the contractor may take an additional num cores at random locations determined by the me .
take the additional cores within num days of receipt of the initial core results .
if the additional cores are not taken within the num days the me will use the initial core results to determine the ppa .
when the additional cores are taken the me will recalculate the ppa using the combined results from the num cores to obtain the total pd .
e. removal and replacement .
if the surface course fails to meet the acceptance requirement the department will require removal and replacement of the lot .
the replacement work is subject to the same requirements as the initial work .
j .
ride quality requirements .
the department will evaluate the hma surface course using the international roughness index iri according to astm e num .
the department will use the measured iri to compute the appropriate pay adjustment pa .
the pa may be positive for superior quality work or negative for defective work .
the department will calculate the pa as specified in table num and will base pa on lots of nummile length for each lane ramp and shoulder .
num .
smoothness measurement .
the department will test the longitudinal profile of the hma surface course for ride quality with a class num inertial profiling system according to aashto mp num approved according to aashto pp num .
the department will test the full extent of the pavement in the direction of travel in each wheel path .
the single iri value reported for each nummile lot of pavement is the average of num runs .
num .
control testing .
perform control testing during hma placement to ensure compliance with the ride quality requirements specified in table num .
num .
preparation for iri testing .
provide the necessary traffic control when the department performs iri testing .
perform required mechanical sweeping of the surface course before iri testing .
to facilitate auto triggering on laser profilers place a single line of preformed traffic marking tape perpendicular to the num roadway baseline at the beginning and end of each lane shoulder and ramp to be tested .
submit the actual stationing for each traffic marking tape location to the re .
num .
acceptance .
the department will determine acceptance and make payment adjustments based on the following a .
pay adjustment .
the pay equations in table num express the pay adjustment in dollars per lot of num mile .
for lots of any other length the department will scale the pay adjustment up or down in proportion to the actual length of the lot .
iri numbers are in inches per mile .
table num pay equations for ride quality for num mile more than one lift iri num pa num num iri num pa num num iri iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num iri num remove replace one lift iri num pa num num iri num pa num num iri iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num freeways limited access highways iri num remove replace more than one lift iri num pa num num iri num pa num num iri iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num iri num remove replace one lift iri num pa num num iri num pa num num iri iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num highways other than freewayslimited access iri num remove replace iri num pa num num iri num pa num num iri iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num other roadways iri num remove replace iri num pa num num iri num pa iri num num ramps and shoulders iri num remove replace b. retest provision .
after testing if the iri exceeds the remove and replace value rrv in table num the department will retest the lot .
the department will average the iri values from the initial test and the retest to determine the final result .
if there is definitive evidence that the initial test is invalid the department will disregard the initial test and will consider the retest as the initial test .
if there is no evidence that the original test was invalid the department will average the iri values from the initial test and the retest to determine the final result .
num c. removal and replacement .
if the average iri is greater than the rrv after a retest is performed remove and replace the lot .
any replacement work is subject to the same requirements as the initial work .
on contracts where only a small percentage less than num percent of paving lots falls under the rrv the department may allow the contractor to submit a plan for corrective action .
if the contractors plan for corrective action is not approved the department may require removal and replacement or may allow the lot to remain in place and the lot will be subject to the pay adjustment as computed in table num .
if the contractors plan for corrective action is approved and the lot is reworked the department will test and evaluate it as a new lot that must meet the same requirements as the initial work .
corrective action locations are not eligible for bonus payments .
num sawcutting and sealing of joints in hma overlays before paving over concrete pavement identify joint locations and maintain references throughout paving operations .
ensure that the hma overlay is sawcut directly over the existing concrete pavement joints .
make sawcuts between num and num days after placement of the overlay .
existing transverse joints that are offset at the longitudinal joint by more than num inch measured between the centers of the joints require separate sawcuts terminating at the longitudinal joint .
for fulldepth hma replacement of an underlying concrete slab sawcut the overlay directly over the hmaslab interfaces .
sawcut as specified in table num table num sawcuts in hma overlays total overlay thickness t inches width of cut inches depth of cut inches t num num to num num t num num to num num sawcut the transverse joints the full width of the traveled way and num feet into the shoulder .
if the surface course is not to be constructed within num days of placing the base or intermediate course within num days make a numinch wide sawcut num inches deep over the joints .
the re will not require sealing or cleaning of these sawcuts .
when placing the surface course make a num to numinch sawcut the full depth of the surface course .
if cracks appear in a base or intermediate course before placing the surface course sawcut the surface course directly over the crack rather than directly over the joint .
after sawcutting immediately collect the slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface and dispose of as specified num .
clean sawcuts with a numpoundspersquareinch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
immediately after blowing seal sawcuts .
seal joints with hotpoured joint sealer prepared according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not heat joint sealer at the pouring temperature for more than num hours and do not reheat .
fill the sawcuts so that after cooling the level of the sealer is not more than num inch above or less than num inch below the surface .
do not spread sand or other fine material on the sealed joints .
before opening to traffic allow joint sealer to cure to prevent pickup .
num core samples upon completion of an hma lot drill cores at random locations determined by the re at least num hours after paving .
take cores in the presence of the re .
use drilling equipment with a watercooled diamondtipped masonry drill bit that shall produce numinch nominal diameter cores for the full depth of the pavement .
remove the core from the pavement without damaging it .
after removing the core remove all water from the hole .
fill the hole with hma or cold patching material and compact the material so that it is num inch above the surrounding pavement surface .
for test strip lots and the first traveled way lot deliver cores within num hours of completing the lot .
deliver all other acceptance cores within num days of completing the lot .
num after each air void lot is placed drill cores so that the full depth of the course is recovered for air void acceptance testing .
if thickness acceptance testing is required as specified in num.i drill the surface course air void cores for the full depth of pavement .
the department will test the fulldepth cores for surface course air voids surface course thickness and total thickness .
mark the department assigned core number on the side of the sample .
place cores and corresponding forms in a ventilated container capable of being locked and sealed by the re .
ensure that the container provides protection to prevent damage during transit .
before sealing the container the re will record the seal number on the laboratory form .
transport the sealed boxes to the department laboratory .
the department will not accept damaged cores for testing .
if the department rejects any core drill a replacement core at the same offset and within num feet of the original station and deliver to the laboratory within num hours .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit hma milling num or less square yard hma milling more than num to num square yard concrete milling square yard hma profile milling square yard hot mix asphalt pavement repair square yard sealing of cracks in hot mix asphalt surface course linear foot polymerized joint adhesive linear foot tack coat gallon tack coat num gallon prime coat gallon hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ surface course ton hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ intermediate course ton hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ base course ton sawing and sealing joints in hot mix asphalt overlay linear foot core samples hot mix asphalt unit the specified depth of the milling is measured from the original surface to the top of the high spots of the textured surface .
the department will measure hot mix asphalt pavement repair before overlay by the square yard of area bounded by the sawcuts .
the department will measure tack coat tack coat num and prime coat by the volume delivered converted to the number of gallons at num f as calculated by the temperaturevolume correction factors specified in num .
the department will measure hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ surface course hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ intermediate course and hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ base course by the ton as indicated on the certified weigh tickets excluding unused material .
when nominal maximum aggregate size numinch hma surface course is directed for use in transition run out areas the department will include this weight with the weight for hot mix asphalt ___ ___ ___ surface course .
the department will not include payment for polymerized joint adhesive in the various paving items .
the department will make payment for polymerized joint adhesive under polymerized joint adhesive .
the department will not make payment for quality control cores or additional cores for retest under core samples hot mix asphalt .
num section num hma friction course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing opengraded friction courses ogfc and modified open graded friction course mogfc .
ogfc or mogfc may be used as a porous surface .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified tack coat num pg num num opengraded friction coursenum modified opengraded friction course num use hma specified for the roadway surface as patching material for hma pavement repair .
use a commercial type of cold mixture as patching material for filling core holes .
the contractor may use an approved hma surface course to fill core holes provided the material remains hot enough to compact .
num equipment provide equipment as specified materials transfer vehicle mtv num hma paver num hma compactornum hma plantnum hma trucks num do not dust truck beds with mineral fillers fine aggregates slag dust or other fine graded material .
num construction num installing ogfc and mogfc a .
paving plan .
at least num days before the start of placing the hma surface course submit to the re for approval a detailed plan of operation as specified in num.a .
b .
weather limitations .
do not place ogfc or mogfc if it is precipitating .
do not allow trucks to leave the plant when precipitation is imminent .
the contractor may resume operations when the precipitation has stopped and the surface is free of water .
do not pave if the ambient temperature is below num f. c. test strip .
construct a test strip as specified in num.c .
the department will not require quality control cores or nuclear density testing .
d. transportation and delivery of hma .
transport and deliver hma as specified in num.d .
e. spreading and grading .
apply tack coat num as specified in num .
place ogfc at a laydown temperature of num f. place mogfc at the laydown temperature recommended by the binder manufacturer .
ensure that the ogfc and mogfc meet the thickness and tolerance requirements specified in tables num and num .
spread and grade ogfc and mogfc as specified in num.e .
do not apply polymerized joint adhesive or tack coat to longitudinal joints .
f. compacting .
immediately after spreading and strikeoff compact friction courses with a minimum of num pass of a nonvibratory numaxle roller .
the re may direct additional passes to eliminate roller marks .
the contractor may use a vibratory roller if it is operated in static mode .
num orient the drive axles of the roller towards the paver during the compaction operation .
operate rollers at a slow uniform speed not exceeding num miles per hour .
if necessary to prevent adhesion of the ogfc or mogfc to the rollers keep the wheels moistened with water mixed with very small quantities of detergent .
remove and replace ogfc or mogfc that becomes loose broken or otherwise defective or that shows an excess or deficiency of asphalt binder material .
when paving in echelon keep the rollers for the first lane approximately num inches from the unconfined edge adjacent to the second paving operation .
after ogfc or mogfc from the second paver is placed against the uncompacted edge of the mat from the first paver compact the ogfc or mogfc on both sides of the joint .
prevent lateral or vertical displacement of the unconfined edge during the compaction operation .
ensure that the edge of the drums of the rollers extends over the free edge of the mat by at least num inches .
when compacting the butt or wedge joint while paving the adjacent lane place the roller on the newly placed hma and overlap the joint by approximately num inches .
g. opening to traffic .
open to traffic as specified in num.g .
h. thickness requirements .
when required for thickness determination drill cores as specified in num .
the department will calculate total thickness as specified in num.i .
the department will not evaluate surface thickness .
i .
ride quality requirements .
the department will evaluate the surface course placed in the traveled way as specified in num.j .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit opengraded ___ friction course ton modified opengraded ___ friction course ton the department will measure opengraded ___ friction course and modified opengraded friction ___ course by the ton as indicated on the certified weigh tickets excluding unused material .
the department will make payment for tack coat as specified in num .
the department will make payment for core samples hot mix asphalt as specified in num .
section num ultrathin friction course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing an ultrathin friction course of gapgraded hma placed on a polymer modified asphalt tackseal coat .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified polymer modified tack coatnum ultrathin hma num num num equipment provide equipment as specified ultrathin pavernum hma compactornum vibratory drum compactor num hma plantnum hma trucks num num construction num ultrathin friction course a .
paving plan .
at least num days before the start of placing the ultrathin friction course submit a detailed plan of operation to the re for approval as specified in num.a .
b .
weather limitations .
do not place ultrathin friction course if it is precipitating .
do not allow trucks to leave the plant when precipitation is imminent .
the contractor may resume operations when the precipitation has stopped and the surface is free of water .
do not pave if the base temperature is below num f. c. test strip .
construct a test strip as specified in num.c .
the department will not require quality control cores or nuclear density testing .
d. transportation and delivery of hma .
transport and deliver hma as specified in num.d .
do not use an mtv .
e. spreading and grading .
ensure that the surface where the ultrathin friction course is placed is clean of foreign and loose material .
clean the surface of existing pavement using a selfpropelled power broom equipped with a vacuum collection system before placing the ultrathin friction course .
ensure that the surface is dry when the paving operations are about to start .
apply polymer modified tack at a temperature of num to num f. continuously monitor rate of spray ensuring a uniform application rate over entire width to be overlaid .
apply at the rate of num num quarts per square yard .
do not allow traffic equipment tools or any other disturbance to the polymer modified tack coat before placing the ultrathin friction course .
ensure that the temperature of the ultrathin friction course behind the screed is at least num f. within num seconds of applying the polymer modified tack coat place ultrathin friction course at a rate of num to num pounds per square yard .
construct longitudinal joints as specified in num.e.num .
if constructing a cold longitudinal joint construct a butt joint and do not use polymerized joint adhesive .
construct transverse joints as specified in num.e.num .
f. compacting .
compact as specified in num.f .
use a minimum of two numton steelwheel rollers .
g. opening to traffic .
remove loose material from the traveled way before opening to traffic .
do not allow construction equipment or traffic on the ultrathin friction course until the mat cools to a temperature of less than num f. h. thickness requirements .
when required for thickness determination drill cores as specified in num .
the department will calculate total thickness as specified in num.i .
the department will not evaluate surface thickness .
i .
ride quality requirements .
the department will evaluate the surface course placed in the traveled way as specified in num.j .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ultrathin friction course ton the department will measure ultrathin friction course by the ton as indicated on the certified weigh tickets excluding unused material .
the department will make payment for core samples hot mix asphalt as specified in num .
section num stone matrix asphalt sma num description this section describes the requirements for constructing stone matrix asphalt sma surface course .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified smanum num equipment provide equipment as specified materials transfer vehicle mtv num hma pavernum hma compactor num vibratory drum compactornum hma plantnum hma trucksnum provide a thinlift nuclear density gauge according astm d num .
num construction num sma a .
paving plan .
at least num days before the start of placing the sma submit to the re for approval a detailed plan of operation as specified in num.a .
b .
weather limitations .
do not place sma if it is precipitating .
do not allow trucks to leave the plant when precipitation is imminent .
the contractor may resume operations when the precipitation has stopped and the surface is free of water .
do not pave if the base temperature is below num f. c. test strip .
construct a test strip as specified in num.c .
d. transportation and delivery of hma .
transport and deliver hma as specified in num.d .
e. spreading and grading .
place sma at a laydown temperature of at least num f. spread and grade sma as specified in num.e .
ensure that the screed is operated in the vibratory mode .
if constructing a cold longitudinal joint construct a butt joint .
do not rake the joint .
num f. compacting .
compact as specified in num.f .
ensure that the compaction is completed before the mix cools down to num f. if vibratory compaction causes aggregate breakdown or forces liquid asphalt binder to the surface operate rollers in static mode only .
g. opening to traffic .
open to traffic as specified in num.g .
h. air void requirements .
drill cores as specified in num .
the department will evaluate air void requirements as specified in num.h .
i. thickness requirements .
when required for thickness determination drill cores as specified in num .
the department will evaluate thickness as specified in num.i .
j .
ride quality requirements .
the department will evaluate the surface course placed in the traveled way as specified in num.j .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit stone matrix asphalt ___ surface course ton the department will measure stone matrix asphalt ___ surface course by the ton as indicated on the certified weigh tickets excluding unused material .
the department will make payment for core samples hot mix asphalt as specified in num .
the department will make payment for polymerized joint adhesive as specified in num .
the department will make payment for tack coat as specified in num .
section num concrete surface course num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete surface courses .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified sandnum concrete num quicksetting patch materials num epoxy grout num.b curing materialsnum tie bars epoxycoatednum joint ties epoxycoatednum tie bolts epoxycoatednum dowel bars epoxycoatednum preformed joint filler num joint sealer hotpourednum num num equipment provide equipment as specified sealer application systemnum pavement formsnum spreading and finishing machinenum vibratornum slip form paver num grinding machine num straightedge num mechanical sweeper num pavement sawnum hotair lancenum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num underlayer preparation when placing concrete on an aggregate base or subbase prepare the underlying surface to num inch of the required elevation within num days of placing concrete .
do not grade and compact the underlying surface when the ambient temperature is below num f when frozen or when it is unstable .
compact using the directed method as specified in num.c to produce a firm and even surface .
the re will check the elevations as specified in num.c .
correct damage to the underlying surface and maintain the corrected surface until the concrete is placed .
immediately before placing concrete spray the underlying surface with water to ensure that the underlying surface is damp to a depth of at least num inch without forming wet or unstable spots .
num concrete surface course a. concreting plan .
at least num days before placing the concrete surface course submit to the re for approval a detailed plan of operation that includes the following num .
certified concrete construction technologist as certified by the njaci .
num .
size and description of crew .
num .
number type and model of equipment .
num .
lighting plan for nighttime operations as specified in num .
num .
method of setting forms .
when using slipform paving provide method for locating joints .
num .
plant locations and hauling equipment .
num .
paving procedures for maintaining continuous operation .
num .
paving sequence production and schedule for the project .
num .
method of constructing joints including dowel joint tie and tie bar placement .
num .
method of curing the concrete .
if using wet burlap provide the location where burlap will be presoaked .
num .
method of sawcutting and sealing joints .
num .
method for constructing and maintaining concrete washout system .
include placement location .
do not begin paving until the re approves this plan .
submit an adjusted concreting plan before making adjustments to the paving operation .
b .
weather limitations .
comply with the limitations of placing as specified in num.c except do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is above num f. if within the num hours preceding the scheduled concrete placement the national weather service refer to httpwww.nws.noaa.gov locally forecasts a num percent chance or greater of precipitation during the scheduled concrete placement postpone the placement of bridge decks and pavement .
c. installing longitudinal joint ties .
if paving adjacent to existing concrete pavement drill numinchdeep holes into the side of the existing slab .
clean holes with a numpoundspersquareinch water blast to remove remaining num debris in the drilled cavity and then blow out holes with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
immediately after blowing fill the hole with epoxy grout and insert the joint ties according to the manufacturers recommendations .
support the joint ties in position until the grout has set .
d. concrete placing methods .
appoint sufficient number of personnel who are certified by the njaci as concrete construction technologist or by aci as concrete transportation construction inspectors to monitor daily operations for concrete placement .
the certified personnel are responsible for ensuring proper dimensions of forms position of reinforcement steel proper handling placement consolidation and finishing of concrete and proper curing of the concrete .
when placing concrete on asphaltstabilized drainage course spread sand over the surface to ensure that the surface voids are filled .
num .
fixed form method .
a .
setting forms ties bars and joint assemblies .
set forms tie bars and joint assemblies for the entire area to be paved at least num day before placing concrete .
set forms at grade in full contact with the underlying surface .
ensure that concrete does not seep beneath the form .
stake forms into place with at least num pins for each numfoot section .
lock form sections together to prevent movement in any direction .
install longitudinal tie bars through the forms and secure in place .
ensure that concrete does not seep around the bar .
if longitudinal joint ties can not be installed before placing concrete install joint ties as specified in num.c or use tie bolts as an alternate .
install joint assemblies and secure in place with anchor stakes .
ensure that devices for contraction joint assemblies are capable of holding dowels firmly in place during the entire construction operation .
place dowels across joint assemblies parallel to and level with the surface course .
place numinch preformed joint filler along curb and around structures and other objects protruding into the slab .
check the alignment and grade elevations of the forms and joint assemblies and make corrections before placing the concrete .
ensure that the forms do not deviate from the required alignment by more than num inch .
reset or remove and replace forms that settle or deflect under the spreading and finishing equipment .
clean the top and face of forms and oil the face before placing concrete .
b .
placing concrete .
obtain re approval of forms and joint placement before placing concrete .
place concrete across the formed area to minimize rehandling .
ensure that concrete is not discharged into windrows or piles .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
if a slab is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete slab and replace .
terminate each days paving at a transverse joint .
if concrete becomes segregated during placement suspend operations and correct handling operations .
to prevent bowing or misalignment of the transverse joints place concrete simultaneously on both sides of transverse joints without disturbing the joints .
c. consolidation strike off and finishing .
consolidate concrete using vibrators .
ensure that consolidating operations do not segregate the concrete or disturb the transverse joint assemblies joint ties the underlying surface or side forms .
immediately after consolidating the concrete strike off the surface to ensure that a uniform ridge of concrete of between num and num inches is maintained in front of the screed along the entire width of the pavement .
immediately after strike off begin finishing operations to achieve the specified line and grade of the surface .
ensure that the finishing equipment is maintained true without lift wobble or other disturbances that could affect the specified line and grade .
use hand methods to finish variablewidth areas or areas that would make the use of finishing equipment impractical .
if the finishing equipment breaks down the contractor may use hand methods to screed and finish the concrete to the next joint assembly .
at expansion joint assemblies advance the finishing equipment avoiding damage to or misalignment of joint assemblies .
if advancing the finishing equipment over expansion joints causes concrete segregation num or damage to or misalignment of the joint assemblies stop the finishing equipment when the screed is approximately num inches from the joint assembly .
remove segregated concrete from the joint lift the screed and set directly on top of the joint and resume advancement of the finishing equipment .
if screeding operations produce a surface containing voids bubbles or other imperfections then hand finish the surface with a metal float .
do not add water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations .
texture the surface of shoulders with a broom after finishing the concrete .
d. control testing and surface correction .
after advancing finishing equipment check the concrete surface with a straightedge parallel to the centerline of the traveled way .
correct surface deviations determined by control testing before the concrete sets .
correct major deviations using the finishing equipment .
correct minor deviations and any defects caused by the control testing using a metal float .
do not add water to the concrete surface to assist in surface correction .
e. removing forms .
remove forms no sooner than num hours after completing concrete placement .
if using mineral admixtures in the concrete remove forms no sooner than num hours after completing concrete pavement .
repair voids and honeycombed areas .
num .
slipform method .
the contractor may construct concrete pavement using the slipform paving method .
to control the operation of the slipform paver num day before placing concrete set string lines at least num feet beyond the length to be paved .
mark joint locations of the entire area to be paved num day before placing concrete .
install and anchor each joint assembly before placing concrete and ensure that each joint assembly is sufficiently secured to the underlying surface to prevent movement during paving .
place numinch preformed joint filler along the curb and around structures and other objects protruding into the slab .
place the concrete for the full depth of the slab with a slipform paver in num pass of the machine .
consolidate the concrete for the full width and depth of the concrete pavement .
before finishing the concrete install longitudinal tie bars and joint ties .
ensure that surface deformations caused by the installation of longitudinal tie bars and joint ties is corrected by the finishing operation .
finish the concrete in such a manner that a minimum of hand finishing is necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous concrete pavement .
operate the slipform paver with a continuous forward movement and coordinate all operations of mixing delivering and spreading concrete to provide uniform progress and to minimize stopping and starting of the paver .
texture the surface of shoulders with a broom after finishing the concrete .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
if a slab is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete slab and replace .
terminate each days paving at a transverse joint .
correct concrete edge deformities greater than num inch before the concrete has taken initial set .
modify operations to prevent recurrence .
e. curing .
ensure that the concrete is not exposed for more than num minutes after finishing .
the re will direct a suspension as specified in num of concrete operations if the curing procedure is delayed or is not followed .
apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num or wet burlap and white polyethylene sheeting as specified in num.f.num .
maintain the curing material for num days .
f. protecting concrete surface course .
protect concrete as specified in num.i for the duration of the curing period .
construct wood bridging for pedestrian crossovers at street intersections and at other established pedestrian crosswalks .
g sawcutting relief joints .
relief joints are a preliminary step in the construction of transverse and longitudinal joints .
the contractor may begin sawcutting relief joints as soon as hardened concrete can support operations without spalling and must finish within num hours of placing concrete .
sawcut transverse relief joints above the joint assembly and sawcut longitudinal relief joints if more than num lane was paved in num paving operation .
sawcut num inch wide relief joints to a depth of num of the thickness of the concrete pavement .
do not sawcut expansion joints or butt joints created by num separate paving operations .
num h. sawcutting and sealing joints .
after completion of diamond grinding operations as specified in num and before opening to traffic as specified in num.k sawcut numinchwide transverse and longitudinal joints to a depth of num inch at relief joints and butt joints .
after sawcutting immediately remove sawing slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface .
clean sawcuts with a numpoundspersquareinch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
seal sawcuts immediately after blowing .
seal joints with joint sealer before opening to traffic .
seal joints when the ambient temperature is between num and num f. pour joint sealer in the sawcuts ensuring that joint sealer is not spilled on the surface of the concrete .
if spillage occurs immediately remove spilled joint sealer from the surface of the concrete .
fill joints to ensure that the joint sealer is num to num inch below the adjacent surface .
do not allow traffic over the poured joints until the joint sealer has hardened to resist pickup .
i. thickness requirements .
the me will divide the concrete pavement into lots of approximately num square yards .
the me will divide each lot into num equal sections .
the re will direct the contractor to drill num core as specified in num from a randomly selected location within each section .
the me will test these cores for thickness as specified in astm c num .
the department will determine conformance with thickness requirements as follows and will assess the greater of the num pay reductions or direct the contractor to remove and replace the lot num .
average core thickness .
if the average core thickness is greater than or equal to the specified core thickness the department will not apply a payment reduction .
if the average thickness is less than the specified thickness but is greater than or equal to the specified thickness minus num inch the department will determine payment reduction by the following formula s a s t t t ppr where ts specified thickness .
ta average thickness .
ppr percent payment reduction num .
individual core thickness .
when more than num individual cores in the lot are less than the specified thickness minus num inch the department will reduce the payment for the lot by num percent .
num .
remove and replace .
if the average thickness is less than the specified thickness minus num inch the re will require that the lot be removed and replaced .
j .
ride quality requirements .
ensure that diamond grinding is completed before testing ride quality .
the department will evaluate ride quality acceptance as specified in num.j using the other roadways equations .
k. opening to traffic .
ensure that diamond grinding is completed before opening to traffic .
the re will determine when the concrete surface is to be opened to traffic or construction equipment .
do not allow construction vehicles or equipment on the concrete pavement within num days of placing or until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as determined by num test cylinders that are field cured according to aashto t num .
for concrete containing fly ash opening to traffic is governed solely by the numpoundsper squareinch compressive strength requirement and not by time elapsed .
num core samples drill cores before performing diamond grinding operations .
drill cores in the concrete pavement at locations as directed by the re for thickness testing .
drill numinch diameter cores through the entire thickness of the concrete pavement .
use a watercooled diamondtipped masonrytype drill bit capable of obtaining a valid test sample through the entire pavement thickness .
identify each core by painting the re supplied number on the side of the sample and accompany each with a laboratory form supplied by the re .
transport samples to the department laboratory .
after removing the core from the pavement pump water from the hole and use a quicksetting patch to fill the hole flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
num num diamond grinding perform wet grinding operations in a longitudinal direction that is parallel to the pavement centerline .
do not overlap longitudinal passes more than num inches .
continuously remove grinding slurry from the pavement surface .
ensure that the surface of the ground pavement has a corduroy texture consisting of grooves between num and num of an inch in width .
ensure that the peaks of the ridges are between num and num of an inch in width and are approximately num of an inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves .
using a mechanical sweeper clean the area before opening to traffic and before subsequent construction or resurfacing .
dispose of slurry and sweepings as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit underlayer preparation square yard concrete surface course ___ thick square yard contraction joint assembly unit expansion joint assembly unit core samples concrete unit diamond grinding of concrete surface course square yard the department will not include payment for contraction joint assemblies and expansion joint assemblies in concrete surface course ___ thick .
the department will pay for contraction joint assemblies and expansion joint assemblies under contraction joint assembly and expansion joint assembly respectively .
num division num concrete pavement rehabilitation section num concrete slab stabilization num description this section describes the requirements for stabilizing concrete slabs by drilling injection holes and pumping a pozzolan grout or highdensity polyurethane under the slab .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified quicksetting patch material type numanum pozzolan groutnum.a highdensity polyurethane grout num.b num equipment provide equipment as specified grout pumping unitnum mixernum injection device num lift monitoring equipmentnum deflection testing equipment num grinding machine num num construction num pozzolan grout a .
weather limitation .
do not perform slab stabilization when the pavement surface temperatures are below num f or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
if proper slab stabilization can not be achieved due to excessive temperatures or direct sunlight perform work at night .
b .
drilling holes .
drill the hole pattern for grout injection as noted in the plans or as determined by the re in consultation with the contractor .
drill a minimum of num holes on either side of the transverse joint .
drill holes between num and num inches in diameter vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate the concrete pavement .
ensure that the subbase penetration does not exceed num inches .
clean holes with air or water to create a small cavity or remove obstructions caused during drilling allowing initial spread of grout .
c. testing of grout .
the re will perform flow cone testing of the grout at the beginning of pumping and at random times throughout pumping .
ensure that the grout is mixed so that the flow cone test result is num to num seconds .
d. void filling .
ensure that the movement of the concrete slab does not exceed num inch .
if the pavement has been lifted in excess of the specified amount the re may require removal and replacement or grinding to the correct grade .
pump grout into each hole until the maximum pressure is built up or material is observed flowing from hole to hole .
ensure that the maximum pressure is num pounds per square inch .
monitor the pressure using a gauge in the grout line .
protect the gauge from the grout slurry .
ensure that mixed material is not held in the mixer or pump hopper for more than num hour after initial mixing .
dispose of material held longer than num hour as specified in num .
the re may reduce this time if the grout becomes unsuitable for use in less than num hour .
num ensure that water displaced from the void structure by the grout is allowed to flow out freely .
excessive loss of the grout through cracks or joints or from back pressure in the hose or in the shoulder area will not be allowed .
if it is determined that continued grout injection at a specific location is no longer feasible due to major voids the re may direct the contractor to cease grout injection at that location .
upon completion of undersealing fill drill holes full depth with a type numa quicksetting patch material .
ensure that the patch is flush with the surface of the pavement .
do not allow traffic on the slabs for num hour after initial set .
e. repairing cracks .
if transverse cracks develop between adjacent injection holes the re may direct repair of the cracks using retrofit dowel bars as specified in num or removal and replacement of the entire panel .
if radial cracks develop from the injecting holes immediately cease work and correct the operation .
the re may require repair or replacement of the damaged panel .
num highdensity polyurethane grout a .
contractors experience .
at the preconstruction meeting submit the name experience and material manufacturers certification of a manufacturers representative to the re .
ensure that experience includes a minimum of num projects on which slab stabilization operations were successfully completed using highdensity polyurethane .
ensure that the manufacturers representative is at the work site during all highdensity polyurethane slab stabilization .
the contractor may not begin the work until the re approves the manufacturers representative .
b .
weather limitations .
do not perform slab stabilization if the underlying material is frozen .
c. drilling holes .
drill the hole pattern for grout injection as noted in the plans or as determined by the re in consultation with the contractor .
drill a minimum of num holes per side of transverse joint .
ensure that the minimum horizontal distance between holes is between num and num feet .
ensure that holes do not exceed num inch in diameter drilled vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate below the concrete pavement and into the voids and subbase beneath the slabs .
ensure that base penetration does not exceed num inches .
clean holes to remove any obstructions caused during drilling to allow flow of highdensity polyurethane .
d. slab stabilization .
during stabilization operations ensure the upward movement of the pavement does not exceed num inch .
if the pavement has been lifted in excess of the allowable amount the re may require removal and replacement or grinding to the correct grade .
after drilling the holes inject highdensity polyurethane under the slabs .
as the polyurethane chemically reacts it will expand and harden to create the necessary lifting forces .
using the pumping equipment control the amount of rise by regulating the rate of injection of the material .
when the nozzle is removed from the hole remove any excessive material from the area and seal the holes with highdensity polyurethane .
immediately clean up material extruded during the pumping operations as the work progresses .
do not allow traffic on the slabs for num hour after initial set .
e. slab lifting .
when lifting concrete pavement to correct surface defects such as faulted and settled concrete slabs lift the concrete slab in increments of num inch until the pavement is raised to the required elevation .
f. repairing cracks .
if transverse cracks develop between adjacent injection holes the re may direct repair of the cracks using retrofit dowel bars as specified in num or removal and replacement of the entire panel .
if radial cracks develop from the injecting holes immediately cease work and correct the operation .
the re may require repair or replacement of the damaged panel .
num deflection testing perform deflection testing of joints between midnight and num a.m .
the re may stop testing earlier if there is evidence of slab lockup due to thermal expansion of the slabs .
the re may allow testing to continue after the hour specified if the slabs are not interlocked or under compression .
perform deflection testing after stabilization to determine the success of grouting .
use an applied load of between num and num poundsforce .
place the center of the loading plate within num inches of the slab corner .
ensure that the num deflections are normalized to a numpound nominal load .
if joints and cracks have deflection values greater than num mils regrout an additional time in an attempt to reduce the deflection to below num mils .
the re may require deflection testing before grouting .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit slab stabilization pozzolan grout bag slab stabilization polyurethane grout pound slab stabilization deflection testing unit the department will measure the quantity of slab stabilization pozzolan grout by the number of num pound bags of cement used in the manufacture of grout .
section num partial depth concrete pavement repair num description this section describes the requirements for constructing partial depth concrete pavement repair .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified quick setting patch type numa or numbnum white polyethylene sheeting num use aggregate with maximum size no greater than num inch in the quick setting patch .
num equipment provide equipment as specified pavement sawnum mobile mixer num smallbatch mixernum num construction num partial depth concrete pavement repair a .
preparation .
sawcut repair areas to a depth of num inch around the perimeter of each repair area before removing the deteriorated concrete .
remove loose and disintegrated concrete from the areas to expose a sound concrete surface .
remove at least num inch of sound concrete .
clean and roughen the area by sandblasting .
ensure that the remaining concrete is not damaged .
use only pneumatic or hand tools to remove the disintegrated material and to prepare and shape the areas to be repaired .
do not use hammers that exceed num pounds .
remove concrete adjacent to exposed reinforcement steel by hand chipping .
do not damage or debond the reinforcement steel .
if corroded reinforcement steel is uncovered clean the steel by sandblasting waterblasting or wire brushing .
if the concrete is debonded from the reinforcement steel or the steel is exposed remove the concrete adjacent to the reinforcement steel to provide a numinch clearance .
if during removal of concrete more than num of the slab depth is removed cease operations at that repair and immediately notify the re .
the re may then direct that a full depth concrete pavement repair be constructed .
num b .
concrete placement .
place and consolidate patch materials as specified for concrete in num.d.num.b and num.d.num.c except that mechanical finishing is not required .
float finish and texture with a broom .
cover the repair with white polyethylene sheeting .
overlap sections of white polyethylene sheeting at least num inches .
extend the polyethylene sheeting num feet beyond the edges of the repair .
c. opening to traffic .
do not open repair to traffic until compressive strength as measured by the average of num test cylinders is more than num pounds per square inch .
if the required compressive strength is not met by the time the roadway must be opened to traffic open to traffic .
remove and replace the repair during the next available roadway closure .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit partial depth concrete repair square yard section num full depth concrete pavement repair num description this section describes the requirements for constructing full depth concrete pavement repairs with concrete or hma .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num cutback asphalt mcnum num hmanum concrete class anum concrete class v or enum epoxy grout num.b curing materials num reinforcement steelnum joint ties epoxycoatednum dowel barsnum preformed joint filler num use an approved num or num nominal maximum size hma surface course mix for patching areas after form removal .
use an approved hma nummnum base course for full depth hma pavement repairs .
if class v concrete is used and the item flexural beam testing equipment is not provided in the contract deliver the flexural beam test specimens for testing num hour before the scheduled testing time to the location provided in the special provision or to where directed by the re .
num equipment provide equipment as specified hma pavernum hma compactor num vibratory drum compactornum sealer application systemnum forms num spreading and finishing machinenum num vibratornum grinding machine num straightedge num pavement sawnum hotair lance num hma plantnum hma trucks num concrete batching plantnum concrete trucks num for class v mix concrete in a concrete mobile mixer or transit mix truck .
use a gang drill capable of maintaining vertical and horizontal alignment and drilling the group of holes in num seconds or less .
num construction num full depth repair using concrete a .
preparation .
sawcut full depth at the limits of the repair .
remove existing concrete or composite pavement using the lift out method .
do not use inplace breaking to remove concrete .
ensure that spalling of the remaining concrete does not occur during the lifting .
reuse removed pavement as specified in num.a .
the contractor may sawcut the slab and drill the lift out holes up to num days before the concrete removal .
only remove concrete that can be replaced during the workday .
repair any damage to remaining pavements .
after the existing concrete has been removed the re will examine underlying material to determine its condition .
if water or excess moisture exists in the area remove the underlying material to the depth specified by the re .
place and compact coarse aggregate using the directed method as specified in num.c .
grade the underlying surface so that the thickness of the repair matches the existing slab thickness .
b .
placing limitations .
comply with the concrete placing limitations specified in num.c .
for class v concrete do not place concrete if the ambient temperature or the surface temperature of the underlying layer falls below num f. ensure that the temperature of the class v concrete is at least num f at the time of placement .
c. setting forms joint ties and dowels .
for the sides of repair areas that are not in contact with sound concrete set forms for the entire area of the repair before placing concrete .
set forms at grade in full contact with the underlying surface .
ensure that concrete does not seep beneath the form .
stake forms into place with at least num pins for each numfoot section .
lock form sections together to prevent movement in any direction .
place numinch preformed joint filler along curb and around structures and other objects protruding into the slab .
for repairs that are num feet or shorter do not install longitudinal joints ties .
coat the edge of existing slabs with cutback asphalt mcnum before placing concrete .
for repairs that are longer than num feet install longitudinal joint ties in the abutting concrete face .
drill holes into the face of the existing concrete pavement not more than num inch in diameter greater than the maximum measured dimension of the joint tie .
for transverse joints abutting concrete pavement to remain drill holes into the face of the existing concrete pavement not more than num inch in diameter greater than the dowels .
use a gang drill to install the dowels in the face of the slab .
maintain vertical and horizontal alignment during drilling and do not damage existing concrete surrounding the hole .
before installing dowels and joint ties clean the holes of cement dust standing water and materials that interfere with proper bonding of the epoxy grout .
mix the epoxy grout according to the manufacturers recommendations .
introduce the epoxy grout by lowpressure injection through a polyethylene tube reaching to the end of the hole .
slowly withdrawn the tube as the hole is filled .
fill the holes to approximately num percent of their depth .
install plastic groutretention disks to prevent the escape of grout .
insert the dowel or joint tie into the hole slowly and twist num full revolution to evenly distribute the num grout ensuring that no bubbles are introduced within the grout .
ensure that there is sufficient epoxy grout so that it rises to the surface and overflows from the sides of the disk upon introduction of the dowel or joint tie .
spread overflow epoxy grout on the concrete face .
provide temporary support for dowels and joint ties after insertion to prevent movement and damage to the bond .
ensure that the dowels and joint ties are not disturbed before the final cure of the grout is achieved .
lightly coat the exposed end of the dowel bars with form oil or light grease .
do not coat joint ties .
when replacing portions of slabs greater than num feet in length install joint assemblies and secure in place with anchor stakes .
ensure that devices for contraction joint assemblies are capable of holding dowels firmly in place during the entire construction operation .
place dowels across joint assemblies parallel to and level with the surface course .
set joint assemblies in line with existing adjacent joints and perpendicular to the existing longitudinal joint .
space additional joint assemblies equidistantly between transverse joints between num and num feet apart and perpendicular to the existing longitudinal joint .
check the alignment and grade elevations of the forms and joint assemblies and make corrections before placing the concrete .
ensure that the forms do not deviate from the required alignment by more than num inch .
reset or remove and replace forms that settle or deflect under the spreading and finishing equipment .
clean the top and face of forms and oil the face before placing concrete .
d. placing consolidating and finishing concrete .
place concrete as specified in num.d.num.b .
consolidate strikeoff and finish concrete as specified in num.d.num.c except for the following num .
the department will only require mechanical finishing equipment for repairs longer than num feet num .
place concrete in num layers with the first layer placed to such a depth that the surface of the layer is at the proper elevation to receive the reinforcement steel .
place the reinforcement steel followed by the next layer of concrete .
remove and replace the lower layer concrete if it has developed initial set or has been in place more than num minutes before being covered with the next layer .
num .
texture the surface using a stiff broom .
e. curing .
ensure that the concrete is not exposed for more than num minutes after finishing .
the re will direct a suspension as specified in num of concrete operations if the curing procedure is delayed or is not followed .
except for class v apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num or wet burlap and white polyethylene sheeting as specified in num.f.num .
maintain the curing material for num days .
for class v cure the concrete using wet burlap as specified in num.f.num and cover with an insulation blanket to retain the heat from hydration .
ensure that insulation blankets are secured to prevent lifting .
when the concrete surface temperature exceeds num f remove the insulating blanket .
f. sawcutting and sealing joints .
sawcutting relief joints may begin as soon as hardened concrete can support operations without spalling and must be completed within num hours of placing concrete and before opening to traffic .
sawcut transverse relief joints above joint assemblies .
sawcut numinchwide relief joints to a depth of num of the thickness of the concrete repair .
sawcut num inch wide transverse and longitudinal joints to a depth of num inch at relief joints and butt joints .
after sawcutting immediately remove all sawing slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface .
clean sawcuts with a minimum of numpoundspersquareinch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
seal sawcuts immediately after blowing .
seal joints with joint sealer when the ambient temperature is between num and num f. pour joint sealer in the sawcuts ensuring that joint sealer is not spilled on the surface of the concrete .
if spillage occurs immediately remove spilled joint sealer from the surface of the concrete .
fill joints so that the joint sealer is num to num inch below the adjacent surface .
do not allow traffic over the sealed joints until the joint sealer has hardened to resist pickup .
g. opening to traffic .
for class v concrete do not open repair to traffic until flexural strength as measured by flexural beams is more than num pounds per square inch .
for class a and e concrete do not open repair to traffic until compressive strength as measured by the average of num cylinders is more than num pounds per square inch .
if the required strength is not met by the time the roadway must be opened to traffic open to traffic .
remove and replace the repair during the next available roadway closure .
num num full depth repair using hma a .
preparation .
prepare concrete as specified in num.a .
b .
weather limitations .
comply with weather limitations as specified in num.b .
c. hma placement .
dump spread and screed the hma in lifts no thicker than num times the nominal maximum size of the aggregate .
in small areas spread rake and lute hma with hand tools .
compact using vibratory drum compactors or hma compactors for a minimum of num passes .
d. opening to traffic .
remove all loose material from the repair before opening to traffic .
open repairs to traffic when the surface temperatures is below num f. num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit full depth concrete pavement repair concrete class ___ square yard full depth concrete pavement repair hma square yard section num retrofit dowel bars num description this section describes the requirements for installing retrofit dowel bars in existing concrete pavement .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified quick setting patch type num numa or numbnum dowel barsnum use aggregate with maximum size no greater than num inch in the quick setting patch .
for caulk use a silicon sealer manufactured to adhere to concrete .
use foam core insert of rigid styrofoam material or closed cell foam faced with poster board or plastic material .
num equipment provide equipment as specified pavement sawnum num construction num retrofit dowel bars demonstrate the method of sawcutting slots and placing the dowels or tie bars for the res approval .
sawcut slots in the pavement to a depth that allows placing the center of the dowel at middepth in the concrete slab .
perform multiple cuts parallel to the longitudinal joint to remove material from the slot .
use small demolition hammers with a weight less than num pounds to break loose the concrete .
sand blast and then clean exposed surfaces in the slot to provide an acceptable bonding surface .
immediately before placing the dowel bar caulk the existing transverse joint or crack at the bottom and the sides of the slot .
place the caulking to provide a smooth level surface and tight fit for the foam core insert and to prevent any of the quick setting patch from entering the joint or crack .
num place dowel bar end caps on each end of the dowel to provide a num inch long void for expansion .
lightly coat the dowel bar with form oil or light grease and place the foam core insert around the middle of the dowel .
place the dowel bar at the middepth of the slab parallel to the longitudinal joint and parallel to the pavement surface .
for cracks that are skewed more than num degrees place the dowel bar perpendicular to the crack .
ensure that the foam core insert fits tightly around the dowel and to the bottom and edges of the slot .
install the filler material so that it remains in a vertical position and tight to all the edges during placement of the quick setting patch .
place quick setting patch to the bottom of the dowel bar .
handtamp the quick setting patch in place .
check the position of the dowel bar to ensure that it is parallel to the pavement surface and the longitudinal joint .
place and handtamp quick setting patch to fill the slot .
finish the surface flush with the pavement surface .
if the foam core insert shifts during placement of the quick setting patch remove and replace the dowel bar .
ensure that the foam core insert is cut flush to the surface .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit retrofit dowel bar unit section num diamond grinding existing concrete pavement num description this section describes the requirements for diamond grinding of existing concrete pavements .
num materials num materials intentionally blank num equipment provide equipment as specified grinding machine num mechanical sweeper num num construction num diamond grinding existing concrete pavement ensure that concrete pavement repairs are performed before diamond grinding .
perform joint sealing after diamond grinding .
perform grinding operations in a longitudinal direction that is parallel to the longitudinal joint .
do not overlap longitudinal passes more than num inches .
continuously remove grinding slurry from the pavement surface .
ensure that the surface of the ground pavement has a corduroy texture consisting of grooves between num and num of an inch in width .
ensure that the peaks of the ridges are between num and num of an inch in width and are approximately num of an inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves .
do not grind to eliminate minor depressions if it lowers the overall profile of the pavement .
ensure that in any num num foot test area at least num percent of the surface is ground and textured .
test transverse joints and cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
regrind misaligned joints and cracks in excess of num inch until the surfaces are flush .
num ensure that the surface after grinding meets ride quality requirements .
the department will evaluate the ride quality acceptance as specified in num.j using the equations for other roadways .
regrind deficient areas in the pavement surface .
when regrinding to correct deficiencies is required regrind the entire width of the lane in the area to be corrected .
using a mechanical sweeper clean the area before opening to traffic and before subsequent construction or resurfacing .
remove and dispose of slurry and sweepings as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit diamond grinding existing concrete pavement square yard section num sealing existing joints in concrete pavement num description this section describes the requirements for cleaning and sealing transverse and longitudinal joints in existing concrete pavement .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified joint sealernum backer rodnum num equipment provide equipment as specified sealer application system num hotair lance num num construction num sealing existing joints in concrete pavement clean joints to be sealed to a depth of at least num inches by use of a rectangular plow a diamond blade saw or other suitable equipment .
remove joint material incompressibles rubble and other extraneous materials present in the joint or adhering to the face of the adjacent concrete slabs .
clean both faces of the joint by sandblasting to the depth of the proposed sealer leaving the faces clean and free of existing joint sealer and other contaminants .
blow the joint with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
insert the backer rod only in transverse expansion joints at a depth equal to the joint width plus num inch for the recess .
install the backer rod with a doublewheeled steel roller without stretching or puncturing the backer rod .
ensure that the backer rod is firmly seated to support the joint sealer in the joint .
melt the joint sealer according to the manufactures recommendations .
ensure that the application temperature of the joint sealer is approximately num f except do not exceed the manufacturers safe heating temperature .
seal joints when the ambient temperature is above num f. discard the first gallon of material to flow from the applicator wand .
pour joint sealer in the joints ensuring that joint sealer is not spilled on the surface of the concrete .
if spillage occurs immediately remove spilled joint sealer from the surface of the concrete .
fill joints so that the joint sealer is num to num inch below the adjacent surface .
num remove the joint sealer for the full slab width and full seal depth from joints that are filled to within num inch of the elevation of the adjacent concrete .
completely clean and reseal the joints the same day as the joint overfilling occurred .
do not allow traffic over the poured joints until the joint sealer has hardened to resist pickup .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit sealing existing joints in concrete pavement linear foot num division num bridges and structures section num sheeting and cofferdams num description this section describes the requirements for constructing and removing cofferdams and sheeting .
num materials provide materials as specified concrete num structural steelnum steel sheet pilesnum bolts num num construction num temporary sheeting a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning work submit working drawings for approval .
include the following num .
size crosssection section modulus and physical properties of the sheeting that will provide the maximum longitudinal bending moment for proper functioning .
num .
bracing design to protect workers adjoining properties and the public .
num .
the combined stress calculations to determine the maximum effect of the principal stresses on the sheeting .
include a check for the principal stresses against the appropriate material yield point .
num .
the effects of bending stresses in the longitudinal direction and the transverse direction .
num .
the maximum forces that the sheeting is subjected to during construction operations .
num .
the contractor may use the henckyvon mises yield distortion energy criterion to combine stresses and relate the principal stresses to a failure criterion material yield point .
num .
method for removing obstructions .
num .
method for addressing underground facilities and utilities that coincide with sheeting .
num .
if required dewatering plan including method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas .
do not use earthen berms as a method of dewatering .
b .
construction .
excavate and remove materials that obstruct the installation as specified in num .
do not install within num feet of concrete that is being placed or has been placed within the previous num hours unless approved by the re .
ensure that the sheeting has no gaps and is continuous for its entire length .
c. dewatering .
if required dewater as specified in the approved dewatering plan .
continue dewatering operations until the temporary sheeting is removed or as directed by the re .
d. removal .
remove temporary sheeting when it is no longer required .
backfill voids left from temporary sheeting to provide uniform finish grades .
except for timber the re may approve leaving the temporary sheeting in place .
when temporary sheeting is left in place remove the upper portion to at least num feet below finish ground .
num permanent sheeting construct permanent sheeting as shown on the plans .
ensure that the sheeting has no gaps and is continuous for its entire length .
at least num days before constructing sheeting submit to the re for approval a dewatering plan including method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and num environmentally sensitive areas .
dewater according to the approved dewatering plan .
continue dewatering operations until no longer required .
num temporary cofferdams a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning work submit working drawings for approval .
include the following num .
size crosssection section modulus and physical properties of the cofferdam that will provide the maximum longitudinal bending moment for proper functioning .
num .
bracing design to protect workers adjoining properties and the public .
num .
the combined stress calculations to determine the maximum effect of the principal stresses on the cofferdam .
include a check for the principal stresses against the appropriate material yield point .
num .
the effects of bending stresses in the longitudinal direction and the transverse direction .
num .
the maximum forces that the cofferdam is subjected to during construction operations .
num .
the contractor may use the henckyvon mises yield distortion energy criterion to combine stresses and relate the principal stresses to a failure criterion material yield point .
num .
a complete description of the proposed cofferdam including brochures or other literature that indicates a proven performance history of the proposed system .
num .
dewatering plan including method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas .
do not use earthen berms as a method of dewatering .
b .
construction .
construct cofferdams to ensure the stability of the excavation and to keep the excavation free of water .
construct the cofferdam with interior dimensions that allow clearance for the construction and inspection of forms and for the handling and pumping of water outside of the footing area .
extend the cofferdam below the bottom of the footings and brace cofferdams in all directions and ensure that they are maintained free of water until the subsequent work has been completed .
the contractor may only extend timber or bracing of a cofferdam into or through the proposed substructure with re approval .
ensure that vertical structural members supported on rock are toedin to ensure stability .
c. dewatering .
continue dewatering operations until the temporary cofferdam is removed or as directed by the re .
d. removal .
remove temporary cofferdams when no longer required .
restore disturbed areas including watercourse beds to original conditions .
the contractor may request that the temporary cofferdam be left in place .
if approved the re will designate the limits of the cofferdam to be left in place .
num permanent cofferdams a .
construction .
construct cofferdams to protect the foundation and the construction against damage and water .
ensure that vertical structural members supported on rock are toedin sufficiently to provide stability against movement .
b .
placing concrete seal .
when concrete seals are shown submit a plan of operation to the re for approval at least num days before placing concrete .
include the following in the plan num .
method of placing concrete .
num .
methods of controlling water and sediment intrusion .
num .
equipment models and quantity .
include backup equipment within the project limits at all times .
num .
size and description of crew .
num .
corrective action plan for equipment breakdown or cofferdam failure .
maintain still water at the point of deposit .
do not place concrete in running water .
ensure that plastic concrete does not come in contact with water outside of the confines of the cofferdam .
place concrete in num continuous operation .
to prevent segregation place the concrete in a compact mass in its final position .
do not disturb the concrete after placement .
place concrete under water using num of the following methods num .
tremie method .
when using a tremie ensure that the tube is at least num inches in diameter and constructed in sections having flanged couplings fitted with gaskets .
support the tremie to allow free movement of the num discharge end over the entire placement area and to allow its being lowered rapidly to choke off or retard the flow .
ensure that the discharge end is completely submerged in concrete at all times and the tremie tube contains sufficient concrete to prevent water entry .
num .
bottomdump bucket method .
when using a bottomdump bucket to place concrete ensure that the bucket has a capacity of at least num cubic yard and loose fitting top covers .
gradually lower the bucket until it rests upon the prepared foundation or upon concrete already placed .
then gradually raise the bucket while discharging the concrete to maintain as near still water as possible at the point at discharge .
ensure that depressions in the top of the seal are less than num inches below the specified elevation and peaks are less than num inches above the specified elevation .
the re will take soundings during placement of the final lift of each seal before initial set .
cut areas exceeding the numinch tolerance to within the permissible height above the theoretical top of the seal .
c. dewatering .
if required submit a dewatering plan to the re for approval .
include the method of dewatering and controlling sediment and contaminants from entering adjacent waterbodies wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas .
do not use earthen berms as a method of dewatering .
before placing the tremie seal clear the bottom of excavation of objectionable material .
do not dewater while placing concrete and for at least num hours after completion of the tremie seal .
do not begin dewatering a sealed cofferdam until the seal has cured to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
dewater the cofferdam and clean the seal of laitance .
d. removal .
remove the cofferdam to the limits shown on the plans after completion of the substructure .
restore disturbed areas including watercourse beds to original conditions .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit temporary sheeting square foot permanent sheeting square foot temporary cofferdam lump sum permanent cofferdam lump sum the department will measure the square footage of temporary sheeting and permanent sheeting by multiplying the average height and length of sheeting that is driven .
the department will determine the average height by extending a line from the bottom of the excavation to a vertical plane of the top of sheeting .
section num load bearing piles num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and installing concrete steel and timber piles .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concrete num structural precast concretenum prestressed concrete num reinforcement steelnum steel castings for hpile tips medium strength num steel pilesnum coal tar epoxy paintnum num round timber pilingnum timber treatment num num equipment provide equipment as specified impact hammersnum vibratory hammersnum leads and followers num num construction num furnishing pile driving equipment perform a wave equation analysis program weap for each pile type and hammer combination .
ensure that the number of required hammer blows at the ultimate pile resistance indicated by the weap analysis is between num and num blows per inch .
also ensure that the compressive and tensile pile stresses are within the allowable limits .
submit num copies of the weap analysis signed and sealed by a professional engineer and num copies of the njdot pile and driving equipment data form to the department for approval num days before delivery of the equipment to the project limits .
submit a separate weap analysis and njdot pile and driving equipment data form for each pile type and hammer combination .
num preboring holes when preboring holes for round piles use an auger with a diameter that is between num inches smaller than the average nominal diameter of piles .
when preboring holes for steel hpiles use an auger with a diameter that is num to num inches less than the nominal diagonal dimension of the piles .
backfill the void between the piles and the prebored holes with granular material .
num driving piles a .
wave equation analysis program weap .
when dynamic pile load tests will not be performed the re will determine the ultimate bearing capacity of the pile the anticipated number of hammer blows per inch and the anticipated compressive and tensile pile stresses at the required ultimate pile capacity using the wave equation analysis .
b .
methods of driving .
do not drive piles in embankments until the embankment work including placement compaction and removal of surcharge has been completed .
do not drive piles within num feet of concrete that is being placed or has been placed within the previous num hours unless approved by the re .
when driving piles in groups start from the center of the group and proceed outward in both directions or start from the end of the group and proceed to the opposite end of the group .
when using followers in driving drive num long pile in each group of num without a follower as a test pile to determine the average bearing capacity of the group .
do not install precast and prestressed concrete piles for at least num days after fabrication .
if at any point precast and prestressed concrete piles are cured at num f or below the re may require additional curing time before the installation of the piles .
additionally do not install precast and prestressed concrete piles in seawater brackish water or sulfate soils for at least num days after fabrication .
the contractor may use vibratory pile drivers with the approval of the re to advance steel bearing piles .
obtain re approval before jetting piles .
the re will require use of an impact pile driver for at least the final num feet of penetration .
drive piles as follows num .
accuracy of driving .
ensure that piles are driven within num inch per foot from the vertical or batter .
ensure that the driven piles are within num inches of the specified position .
ensure that piles for trestle bents are driven num within num inch per foot from the vertical or batter .
ensure that the driven trestle bent piles are within num inches of the specified position .
the re will prohibit excessive manipulation of the piles to force them into proper position .
num .
penetration .
at least num days before beginning the work submit a plan to the re for approval for the types of piles including those whose tip elevation is noted for jetting blasting or the use of spuds and other work necessary to obtain the penetration required .
num .
rock bearing piles .
drive steel hpiles or other steel piles that are intended to bear on rock to the refusal necessary to penetrate the rock sufficiently to provide uniform and adequate bearing .
the pile is considered as reaching refusal when a penetration of not less than num blows per num inch has been achieved .
c. test piles .
the re will determine the length of the test pile .
excavate the ground at each footing location to the elevation of the bottom of the footing before the pile is driven .
drive the test piles with the same type of equipment that will be used for driving production piles .
drive the test piles at the designated locations to the specified bearing capacity or hammer blow count and tip elevation .
perform the following tests when shown on the plans num .
static pile load test .
obtain the services of a professional testing laboratory or professional engineer with satisfactory pile load test experience to conduct the load test to record data and to provide reports of the test results to the re .
determine the top elevation of the test piles immediately after driving and again just before static load testing to check for heave .
redrive or jack piles that heave more than num inch relative to the original elevation prior to testing .
allow at least num days to pass between the driving of any anchor piles or the load test pile and the commencement of the load test .
if pipe walls are not of adequate strength to sustain the static test loading when empty place the required reinforcement and concrete before loading .
do not apply loads for static load tests for castinplace concrete piles until the concrete in the test pile has set at least num days .
refer to the special provisions to determine the total static test load to be applied to piles .
perform static load tests according to astm d num using the quick load test method for individual piles except perform the test to plunging failure or the capacity of the loading system .
provide testing equipment and measuring systems according to astm d num except ensure that the loading system is capable of applying num percent of the ultimate pile capacity or num tons whichever is less .
at least num days before beginning the work submit detailed plans of the proposed loading apparatus prepared by a professional engineer to the re for approval .
construct the apparatus to allow the various increments of the load to be placed gradually without causing vibration to the test pile .
when the approved method requires the use of anchor piles that will be used as production piles drive anchor piles of the same type and diameter as the production piles in the location of the production piles when feasible .
remove the loads after the completion of the tests .
the re may allow the test piles to become part of the structure if approved .
if any pile is found unsatisfactory for use in the structure the re will direct removal of the pile or cutoff of the pile below the ground line or footing .
upon completion of each test submit to the re for approval num copies of the static load test recordsreports signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
num .
dynamic pile load tests .
at least num days before beginning the work submit verification to the re that the components of the apparatus for obtaining dynamic measurements and the apparatus for recording reducing and displaying data have been calibrated by the equipment manufacturer within the past num months .
submit the name qualifications and previous experience of the person performing the dynamic pile load tests to the re for approval .
perform dynamic testing according to astm d num .
take dynamic measurements while driving the piles specified as dynamic load test piles .
using pile analyzer instruments determine the ultimate capacity of the pile .
monitor the stresses in the pile during driving operations to ensure that the pile is not damaged by excessive compressive or tensile stresses .
monitor the driving of test piles during the full length of driving and during restriking .
drive piles to the depth at which the dynamic equipment indicates that the required ultimate bearing capacity has been achieved and to the required tip elevation .
if needed to maintain num acceptable stresses in the piles modify the driving method .
if the dynamic test equipment measurements indicate nonaxial driving immediately realign the driving system .
if restrike is specified in the special provisions or directed by the re wait a minimum of num hours and then reattach the instruments before restriking the dynamic load test pile .
warm up the hammer by applying at least num blows to another pile before restriking .
terminate the restrike when the ultimate capacity of the pile is reached when the amount of penetration reaches num inches or when the total number of hammer blows reaches num whichever occurs first .
if the established hammer blow count is not attained on restrike the re may direct the contractor to drive a portion of or all of the remaining test pile length and repeat the restrike procedure .
after restrike the re will determine whether additional pile penetration and testing is required .
the re may require splicing of a test pile driven to plan grade that does not meet the required hammer blow count .
drive the spliced pile until the required bearing is obtained .
within num hours of the completion of each test submit num copies of the pile dynamic monitoring report to the re .
include the pile dynamic analyzer pda test results the case pile wave analysis program capwap results and an interpretation of the data that is signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
d. production pile lengths .
when test piles or load tests are specified the re will use the data obtained in conjunction with other available geotechnical information to determine the lengths of production piles to be furnished .
the re will not prepare the order list for any portion of the foundation until the required test data has been completed .
the contractor may increase the length of the production piles to be furnished to provide fresh heading or to suit the contractors method .
complete test piles before driving any production piles unless approved by the re .
e. cutoffs and cappings .
ensure that the tops of foundation piles are embedded in the concrete footing at least num foot .
at locations where tremie concrete is used ensure the piles project at least num inches above the top of the tremie concrete .
ensure that the length of pile cutoff is sufficient to allow the removal of all injured material .
ensure that the distance between the edge of a pile to the nearest edge of the footing is at least num inches .
when the cutoff elevation for a precast concrete pile is below the elevation of the bottom of the cap build up the pile from the butt of the pile to the elevation of the bottom of the cap with a reinforced concrete extension .
cutoff piles at right angles to the axis of the pile at the designated elevation .
make the cuts in clean straight lines .
f. painting steel piles and pipe shells .
when steel piles or pipe shells in the completed structure extend above the original ground line or finished ground surface protect the piles or pipe with coal tar epoxy paint as specified in num.c .
ensure the coating extends from an elevation num feet below the bed of waterbody or finished ground surface to the top of the exposed steel .
g. defective piles .
ensure that the pile driving procedure does not subject the piles to excessive and undue abuse producing crushing and spalling of the concrete injurious splitting splintering and brooming of the wood or deformation of the steel .
correct damaged or defective piles using num of the following methods num .
withdraw the pile and replace it with a new and if necessary longer pile .
num .
drive a second pile adjacent to the defective pile .
remove the defective pile to at least num inches below cutoff elevation and fill the hole with sand if it is a castinplace pile .
num .
splice build up the pile or extend a sufficient portion of the footing to properly embed the pile .
redrive piles that heave by more than num inch as a result of the driving of adjacent piles or any other cause .
if a pile can not be driven as specified due to an obstruction the re will determine when adequate penetration has been achieved .
num splicing piles use full length steel piles pipes shells precast concrete piles and prestressed concrete piles .
do not splice partial pile lengths to achieve the production pile length unless directed .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the method of splicing splice location for each pile and name of certified welder to the re for approval .
do not splice timber piles .
num pile shoes attach pile shoes as shown on the plans .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit furnishing equipment for driving piles lump sum prebored hole linear foot test pile furnished linear foot test pile driven linear foot static pile load test unit dynamic pile load test unit castinplace concrete pile furnished ___ diameter linear foot castinplace concrete pile driven ___ diameter linear foot precast concrete pile furnished ___ x ___ linear foot precast concrete pile driven ___ x ___ linear foot prestressed concrete pile furnished ___ x ___ linear foot prestressed concrete pile driven ___ x ___ linear foot prestressed concrete pile furnished ___ diameter linear foot prestressed concrete pile driven ___ diameter linear foot steel hpile furnished hp ___ x ___ linear foot steel hpile driven hp ___ x ___ linear foot timber pile furnished ___ diameter linear foot timber pile driven ___ diameter linear foot splice ___ unit pile shoe unit the department will pay num percent of the lump sum price bid for furnishing equipment for driving piles when the equipment necessary for driving piles is furnished and driving of test piles has started on an individual structure basis .
the department will pay the remaining num percent when the work of driving piles is completed on an individual structure basis .
the department will measure prebored holes that are specified or directed by the re by the linear foot from the bottom of the foundation excavation elevation to the bottom of the hole elevation .
the department will make payment for the length of pile furnished based on the res order list .
the department will not make payment for the additional length of furnished pile to provide fresh heading to drive through water or to meet the contractors driving method .
if the required penetration for any pile is greater than the length in the order list the department will include for measurement in furnished piles the additional length directed by the re .
the department will measure the length of piles driven by total length of linear foot installed and accepted from the tip to the cut off elevation .
the department will not include static pile load tests under driving piles .
the department will make payment for static pile load tests under static pile load test .
the department will not include dynamic pile load tests under driving piles .
the department will make payment for dynamic pile load tests under dynamic pile load test .
the department will not make separate payment for dynamic pile load tests and capwap analysis performed on piles that require restriking .
the department will include restriking and a capwap analysis of a dynamic pile load test in the dynamic pile load test .
when dynamic pile load tests dynamic or pda monitoring are used the department will not make payment for installation of test piles until recorded data is submitted to the re .
the department will make payment for splices within the pile order length if the order length is greater than num feet under splice ___ .
the department will not make payment for splices in piles that are less than num feet unless directed by the re .
num section num drilled shaft foundations num description this section describes the requirements for installing and testing drilled shafts .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concretenum self consolidating concrete num groutnum reinforcement steelnum drilled shaft casingnum structural steel paint organic zincnum waternum provide claymineral based slurry processed attapulgite or bentonite for mineral slurry .
ensure that the mineral slurry has a mineral grain size that will remain in suspension and has sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable screening system .
ensure that the percentage and specific gravity of the material used to make the mineral suspension is sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to allow proper concrete placement .
provide polymer slurry as recommended by the manufacturer .
num equipment provide equipment as specified concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum ensure that equipment does not introduce uncontrolled exhaust fumes into the surrounding areas or other occupied areas adjacent to the work site .
crane and drilling engine exhaust fumes will require their own separate exhaust systems adequately vented to the atmosphere away from any confined work sites .
ensure that equipment used for final bottom cleaning does not have a centralizing guide at the tip .
use excavation and drilling equipment having adequate capacity including power torque and down thrust to excavate a hole of both the maximum specified diameter and to a depth of num percent beyond the depths shown on the plans when operated at rated capacity .
provide crosshole sonic logging csl test equipment that includes the following components num .
a microprocessorbased csl system for display of individual csl records analogdigital conversion and recording of csl data analysis of receiver responses and printing of csl logs .
num .
ultrasonic source and receiver probes for numor numinch inner diameter pipe as appropriate .
num .
an ultrasonic voltage pulser to excite the source with a synchronized triggering system to start the recording system .
num .
a depth measurement device to determine and record depths .
num .
appropriate filteramplification and cable systems for csl testing .
num num construction num installation plan no later than num days after the date of the notice to proceed submit to the re for approval an installation plan that includes the following num .
names and descriptions of the last num drilled shaft construction projects completed including the names and telephone numbers of owners representatives .
num .
type size and number of equipment to be used .
num .
details of the overall construction operation sequence and the proposed sequence of shaft construction .
num .
details of planned shaft excavation methods .
num .
details of the methods to ensure shaft stability during excavation and concrete placement .
include a review of method suitability to the anticipated work site and subsurface conditions .
if casings are proposed or required provide casing dimensions detailed procedures for permanent casing installation and procedures for temporary casing installation and removal .
num .
when slurry is specified or proposed provide details of the methods for mixing placing circulating and desanding the slurry .
also include the method of monitoring and continuously maintaining the slurry level .
provide the method of disposal .
num .
details of methods to clean and maintain the shaft excavation including removal of loose rock and sediment from the shaft bottom .
num .
details of steel reinforcement lifting splicing if necessary in a hanging position insertion and securing including support and centralization methods .
num .
mix design of the concrete and documentation showing that the mix design meets the approved mix and strength requirements .
num .
the method used to fill or eliminate voids between the plan shaft diameter and excavated shaft diameter or between the shaft casing and surrounding soil if permanent casing is specified .
num .
methods to determine drilled shaft dimensions and the deviation from vertical for the entire depth of the drilled shaft .
num .
details of proposed methods to check shaft bottom cleanliness .
num .
procedures for control and removal of spoils on land over water or both .
num .
details of concrete batching andor delivery to the work site and concrete placement including proposed operational procedures for concrete pump or tremie .
discuss the initial placement raising tremie pipes during placement overfilling of the shaft concrete the proposed method to accurately monitor the volume of concrete being placed at all times during the pour and provisions to prepare the completed shaft top at its final shaft top elevation .
num .
the qualification records of the testing organization to perform the ocell load test and the csl .
num .
details of procedures materials and equipment for performing the ocell load test and the csl .
provide a certificate of calibration for the load cell from an approved testing laboratory .
ensure that the calibration was performed for all ranges of proposed loading within the num months preceding the load tests .
ensure that the certified accuracy of the load cell is within num percent of the true load .
num .
concrete core drilling equipment and procedures to retrieve the core specimens that may be required to determine the integrity of concrete placed in the drilled shaft .
the re will schedule a review meeting between the contractor designer and the department after reviewing the installation plan and at least num days before the start of work .
within num days after receipt of the plan the re will notify the contractor of any additional information required and changes that may be necessary .
if the re rejects the plan or a part of the plan submit revisions to the re for reevaluation .
the re will notify the contractor within num days after receipt of proposed changes of their acceptance or rejection .
num demonstration drilled shaft installation the department will require a demonstration drilled shaft to verify the contractors methods .
locate the demonstration shaft as shown on the plans or as directed by the re .
excavate the demonstration shaft to the depth of the deepest num production shaft shown on the plans .
construct the demonstration shaft as specified in num .
include csl as specified in num .
cutoff the concreted demonstration shafts num feet below finished grade or num feet below the mudline if in water .
restore disturbed areas at demonstration shaft holes to their original condition .
once approval has been given to construct production shafts do not change the personnel methods or equipment that were used to construct the approved demonstration shaft without written approval of the re .
num load tests a. ocell installation .
ensure that the installation and execution of the ocell load tests are supervised by a professional engineer .
ensure that the ocell vibrating wire strain gauges hydraulic supply and other attachments are assembled according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide a reinforcement steel cage as specified in num.k to attach the ocell .
excavate using the approved method at the location shown on the plans .
after excavating a test drilled shaft and obtaining approval from the re place a seating layer of concrete in the base of the drilled shaft .
while the seating concrete is still plastic install the reinforcement steel cage with the ocell in the test shaft so that the ocell rests firmly in the concrete .
after seating the ocell assembly place concrete in the drilled shaft as specified in num.m .
the me will take at least num concrete compression test cylinders from the concrete used in the test shaft .
at least num day before the load test the me will test at least num of the cylinders .
the me will test at least num cylinders on the day of the load test .
do not perform the ocell test until num days after placing the concrete and the concrete achieves the specified compressive strength .
b .
load testing and reporting .
perform load tests according to astm d num .
if the test apparatus shows signs of negative effects due to the construction activities immediately cease testing and do not resume until the conditions are favorable for testing .
apply loads in increments equaling num percent of the maximum test load for the drilled shaft .
take direct movement indicator measurements of the following num .
downward drilled shaft endbearing movement num indicator required .
num .
upward topofdrilled shaft movement minimum of num indicators required .
num .
vibrating wire strain gauges minimum of num per test required .
apply loads at the specified intervals until the maximum test load shown on the plans is reached in either end bearing or side shear or until the maximum capacity or maximum stroke of the ocell is reached .
in addition to the requirements of astm d num at each load increment or decrement take readings of the movement indicators at num num and num minute intervals while holding the load constant .
ensure that strain gauge readings are concurrent with shaft movement readings .
the re may direct additional cycles of loading and unloading using similar procedures following the completion of the test cycle .
ensure that dial gauges or linear variable displacement transducers lvdts used to measure end bearing side shear movement and shaft compression have a minimum travel of num inches and are capable of being read to the nearest num inch division .
the contractor may alternately monitor end bearing movement using lvdts capable of measuring the expansion of the ocell num inches .
ensure that the reference beam has a minimum length equal to num times the drilled shaft diameter .
monitor the reference beam for movement during load testing using a surveyors level .
provide the performance results of each load test to the re the day after performing the load tests .
provide a report of the load test results to the re within num days of completing the test .
ensure that the report includes data readings and plots of the readings the details of the load test and setup and a determination of the end bearing and frictionadhesion of the rock and soil .
within num days the department will notify the contractor if revisions to the foundation lengths and installation procedures will be made based on the results of the load tests .
do not begin construction of production drilled shafts without the departments approval .
c. posttest grouting procedures .
grout the interior of the ocell and annular space around the outside of the o cell according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor does not have to grout test shafts that will not be used as production shafts .
num num crosshole sonic logging csl a. csl tube installation .
begin crosshole sonic logging csl on all production and demonstration drilled shafts num hours after placing concrete in the shaft .
ensure that the testing is completed within num days after placing concrete .
ensure that the csl tubes are watertight and have a round regular internal diameter free of defects or obstructions including any at tube joints to allow the free unobstructed passage of numinch diameter source and receiver probes .
ensure that each pipe is fitted with a watertight shoe on the bottom and a removable cap on the top .
attach the pipes securely to the interior of the reinforcement cage with a minimum cover of num inches .
the re may allow the contractor to install tubes on the outside of the cage if adequate cover and clearance are available .
install the tubes as near to parallel as possible .
ensure that the tubes extend from num inches above the shaft bottoms to at least num feet above the shaft tops .
if the shaft top is subsurface extend the tubes at least num feet above the ground surface .
ensure that joints required to achieve fulllength tubes are watertight .
ensure that the tubes are not damaged during reinforcement steel cage installation .
as the cage is being lowered into the shaft monitor the tubes to ensure that they are vertical and parallel and that connections are watertight .
after installing the reinforcement cage immediately fill the tubes with clean water .
after the tubes are filled with water cap or seal the tube tops .
before placing concrete plumb at least num tube per shaft and record the tube length .
note the stickup of the tubes above the shaft tops .
do not remove the seals or caps until the concrete in the shaft has set .
remove the caps or plugs after installation and ensure not to apply excess torque hammering or other stresses that could break the bond between the tubes and the concrete .
b. csl testing and reporting .
perform csl tests between pairs of tubes .
perform the csl tests with the source and receiver probes in the same horizontal plane unless the tests indicate potential defects .
take csl measurements at depth intervals of num inches or less from the bottom of the tubes to the top of each shaft .
pull the probes simultaneously starting from the bottoms of the tubes over a depth measuring device .
remove slack from the cables before pulling to provide for accurate depth measurements of the csl records .
test num principle diagonals through the center and between each tube pair around the perimeter of tested shafts .
if the tests indicate potential defects the re may direct the contractor to evaluate questionable zone using tomography source and receiver vertically offset in the tubes .
report defects indicated by longer pulse arrival times and significantly lower amplitudeenergy signals to the re and conduct additional tests as required to evaluate the extent of such defects .
the re will reject a shaft based on conclusive evidence that a defect exists in the shaft that will result in inadequate or unsafe performance under service loads .
if the csl records are complex or inconclusive the re may require additional testing to confirm the location of the defect .
the re may require coring to verify shaft conditions .
submit to the re a report signed and sealed by a professional engineer that includes recommendations as to the acceptability unacceptability and soundness of the drilled shaft .
include in the report a csl log for each tube pair tested with analyses of num .
initial pulse arrival time versus depth .
num .
pulse energyamplitude versus depth .
num .
defect zones .
the department will evaluate the csl test results and determine whether or not the drilled shaft construction is acceptable .
if the department determines that the drilled shaft is acceptable dewater the csl tubes and grout .
num core drilling of drilled shaft concrete the contractor may core drill drilled shafts that are determined to be unacceptable based on the csl tests .
the re will determine the number and depth of cores required .
drill cores at a minimum diameter of num inches .
num keep an accurate coring log properly mark cores with the depth at each interval of core recovery and place the cores in a crate .
deliver the cores and num copies of the coring log to the department laboratory .
if the re determines that the drilled shaft is acceptable dewater and grout the core holes and the csl tubes .
if the department determines that the drilled shaft is unacceptable submit working drawings for approval proposing corrective measures .
do not begin corrective measures until the department approves the working drawings .
do not proceed with construction above a drilled shaft until the quality of the shaft as represented by the core samples is determined to be acceptable and the re provides notification to continue construction .
num constructing drilled shafts a .
installation plan .
submit the installation plan as specified in num .
do not begin constructing drilled shafts until the re approves the plan .
b .
location and alignment .
construct drilled shafts within num inches of plan position in the horizontal plane at the elevation of the top of the shaft .
ensure that the vertical alignment of a shaft excavation does not vary from the plan alignment by more than num inch per foot of depth .
ensure that the alignment of a battered shaft excavation does not vary from the plan alignment by more than num inch per foot of depth .
c. construction sequence limitations .
excavate to the bottom of the footing elevation before beginning shaft construction .
when constructing drilled shafts and placing embankment construct drilled shafts after the placement of embankment .
repair disturbances caused by shaft installation to a subsequent drilled shaft area before beginning shaft construction .
do not excavate a shaft if an adjacent shaft in the same substructure unit is open unless the res written approval is obtained .
do not perform blasting or vibrate to place casings until the concrete in adjacent shafts has reached num percent of the required numday compressive strength .
once the excavation of a shaft has begun do not stop the excavation until the excavation is completed .
if the excavation is stopped for more than num hours maintain shaft stability as detailed in the installation plan .
d. excavation log .
maintain an excavation log during shaft excavation that includes the following num .
description and approximate top and bottom elevation of each soil or rock material encountered during shaft excavation .
num .
elevations at which seepage or groundwater flow are encountered and remarks .
num .
the type of tools used for the excavation .
num .
changes in the type of tools used for excavation .
ensure that discrepancies noted on the log by the re are resolved by the end of each day .
provide num copies of the final log to the re within num hours after a shaft excavation is completed and approved .
reuse excavated material as specified in num.a .
e. excavating .
use the appropriate method for constructing drilled shafts as follows num .
dry method .
only use the dry method where the groundwater level and soil conditions allow construction of the drilled shaft in a relatively dry excavation and where the sides and bottom of the shaft may be visually inspected by the re before placement of reinforcement and concrete .
the dry method will consist of drilling the shaft excavation removing any accumulated water and loose material from the excavation placing the reinforcement cage and concreting the shaft in less than num inches of water .
num .
wet method .
construct drilled shafts using the wet method where dry excavation can not be maintained .
the wet method will consist of using water or slurry as specified in num.g to maintain stability of the drilled shaft perimeter while excavating to finished depth placing the reinforcement cage and concreting the shaft .
the contractor may use the static or circulation process of the wet method .
when the material encountered can not be drilled using conventional earth drilling tools and equipment provide rock drilling equipment including air tools approved blasting materials and other equipment as necessary to construct the shaft excavation to the size and depth required .
obtain the res approval before switching from earth to rock drilling tools and equipment .
obtain the res approval before blasting .
num the contractor may overream with a grooving tool overreaming bucket or other re approved equipment .
the re will direct the thickness and extent of sidewall overreaming .
the department will require sidewall overreaming between num and num inches when the sidewall of the hole has either softened due to excavation methods swollen due to delays in concreting or degraded because of slurry cake buildup .
immediately remove drilling tools that are lost in the excavation .
f. constructing using casings .
construct drilled shafts using casings where shown on the plans or where the dry or wet construction methods are inadequate to prevent caving or excessive deformation of the hole .
the contractor may either place casings in a predrilled hole or advance casings through the ground by twisting driving or vibrating .
when installing casings that are left in rock for the purpose of shielding voids ensure that the predrilled hole is not more than num inches bigger than the casing diameter .
when downsizing of permanent casing is required do not overlap more than num feet of casing .
when constructing drilled shafts in open water extend the exterior casings from above the water elevation into the ground to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of the concrete .
install the casing to ensure a positive seal at the bottom of the casing so that no seepage of water or other materials occurs into or from the shaft excavation .
when casings are not shown on the plans but the contractor believes that casings are necessary the contractor shall submit in the installation plan details of the proposed casing method including casing lengths and diameters and the proposed procedures of casing installation to the re for review .
if the contractor does not determine the need for casings until after work on the shafts has begun the contractor shall submit to the re for review a revised installation plan proposing the casing installation method for review .
ensure that casings are clean round straight and free of weld breaks and holes that would allow passage of water or plastic concrete .
with re approval the contractor may provide casings larger in diameter than shown on the plans .
num .
temporary casings .
casings are temporary unless shown as permanent casings on the plans .
telescoping predrilling with slurry and overreaming to beyond the outside diameter of the casing may be required to install casing .
remove temporary casing before completing concrete placement in the drilled shaft .
before withdrawing the casing ensure that the level of plastic concrete in the casing is at least num feet above either the hydrostatic water level in the formation or the level of drilling fluid in the annular space behind the casing whichever is higher .
as the casing is withdrawn maintain an adequate level of concrete within the casing so that fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward and discharged at the ground surface without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
if the contractor removes a specified diameter or length of casing and substitutes a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils the contractor shall stabilize the excavation using a slurry or backfill before the new casing is installed .
if temporary casings become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed the department will designate the drilled shaft defective .
submit working drawings for approval proposing corrective measures .
do not begin corrective measures until the department approves the working drawings .
num .
removable casing .
when the shaft extends above ground or through a body of water the contractor may use suitable removable casing for the portion exposed above ground or through a body of water except when permanent casing is specified .
strip removable casing from the shaft and ensure that the concrete is not damaged .
the contractor may remove casings when the concrete has attained a strength of at least num pounds per square inch as determined from num concrete cylinders field cured according to aashto t num provided that curing of the concrete is maintained as specified in num.f .
do no expose the shaft concrete to salt water or moving water for num days .
num num .
permanent casings .
when not shown on the plans the contractor may use permanent casing if approved by the re .
ensure casings are continuous between the top and bottom elevations shown on the plans .
after installation is complete cut off the permanent casing at the specified elevation .
after installing the casings repair damage to coated surfaces of the casings exposed to the air by applying an organic zinc prime coat from the same manufacturer as the shopapplied inorganic zinc prime coat .
g. constructing using slurries .
when using slurry to construct drilled shafts the contractor may use mineral or polymer slurries .
during construction maintain the level of the slurry at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the shaft excavation .
use a temporary surface casing in the upper soils .
maintain the slurry level inside the shaft above the groundwater level during installation and cleaning out .
in the event of a sudden significant loss of slurry to the hole cease the construction until either a method to stop slurry loss or an alternate construction procedure has been approved by the re .
pump slurry into holding tanks to ensure that no slurry spills or contaminates the site .
provide physical or chemical treatment of the slurry according to the manufacturers recommendations .
during construction maintain the level of mineral slurry in the shaft at least num feet above the highest expected piezometric pressure head that is along the depth of the shaft .
maintain the level of polymer slurry at least num feet above the highest expected piezometric pressure head that is along the shaft .
if the selected slurry construction method fails in the opinion of the re to produce the desired final results cease this method and propose an alternate method to the re for approval .
ensure that a heavily contaminated slurry suspension which could impair the free flow of concrete has not accumulated in the bottom of the shaft .
before placing concrete for shaft excavation take slurry samples using a sampling tool approved by the re .
take slurry samples from the bottom of the shaft and at intervals not exceeding num feet up the slurry column in the shaft until num consecutive samples produce acceptable values for density viscosity sand content and ph at each sampling depth .
when slurry samples are unacceptable take corrective actions .
do not place concrete until the slurry is resampled and test results are approved .
if the slurry remains in the shaft for more than num hours or if caking develops roughen or reream the shaft with appropriate new bottom cleaning and slurry testing before concreting .
place concrete on the same day as the completion of the excavation of the drilled shaft to the bottom elevation .
num .
mineral slurry .
premix mineral slurry with water and allow time for hydration according to the manufacturers recommendations before using during shaft excavation .
provide slurry tanks of adequate capacity for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
do not substitute excavated slurry pits with slurry tanks without obtaining approval from the re .
do not mix the slurry in the shaft .
monitor the properties of the premixed slurry as it is introduced into the borehole and periodically thereafter including a final check of a bottom sample before placing concrete to verify that the density and sand content are within the limits for the proper slurry displacement during concreting .
use desanding equipment to control slurry sand content to less than num percent by volume at any point in the borehole at the time the slurry is introduced .
perform control tests on the mineral slurry in the presence of the re to determine density viscosity and ph .
adjust the slurry to meet the requirements shown in table num num table num mineral slurrynum property range test density at time of slurry introduction num num lbsftnum api numb bentonite slurry section mud balance astm d num density in hole at time of concreting num num lbsftnum api numb bentonite slurry section mud balance astm d num viscosity at time of slurry introduction num num secquart api numb section num marsh funnel and cup viscosity in hole at time of concreting num num secquart api numb section num marsh funnel and cup sand content by volume num max api numb section num sand screen set astm d num ph at time of slurry introduction num num api numb section num paper test strips or glasselectrode ph meter ph in hole at time of concreting num num api numb section num paper test strips or glasselectrode ph meter num .
increase by num lbsftnum in salt water .
num .
standard measurements are in seconds per quart .
one secquart num secliter .
a .
perform tests when the slurry temperature is above num f. b .
ensure that the sand content does not exceed num percent by volume at any point in the borehole as determined by the api sand content test when the slurry is introduced .
num .
perform tests to determine density viscosity and ph value during the shaft excavation to establish a consistent working pattern .
perform a minimum of num sets of tests during the first num hours of slurry use .
when the results show consistent behavior the contractor may decrease the testing frequency to num set per every num hours of slurry use .
num .
polymer slurry .
provide a slurry management plan to the re that includes a set of the slurry manufacturers written recommendations and results of the following tests as a minimum num .
density test api numbnum section num .
num .
viscosity test marsh funnel and cup api numbnum section num or approved viscometer .
num. ph test ph meter ph paper .
num .
sand content test api sand content kit api numbnum section num .
also include the tests to be performed the frequency of those tests the test methods and the maximum and minimum property requirements that must be met to ensure that the slurry meets its intended functions .
ensure that all test reports are signed and provide them to the re on completion of each drilled shaft .
h. removing obstructions .
the re will determine if an object is considered an obstruction .
remove surface and subsurface obstructions at drilled shaft locations .
the contractor may need to use special procedures and tools when the drilled shaft excavation can not be advanced using conventional augers fitted with soil or rock teeth drilling buckets or underreaming tools .
special procedures and tools may include chisels boulder breakers core barrels air tools hand excavation temporary casing and increasing the hole diameter .
do not blast without obtaining written approval from the re .
i .
rock socketing .
the re will determine the top of rock sound enough for the contractor to begin the socket based on the existing borings and observations during shaft drilling .
the re will not consider weathered or highly fractured rock as the top of rock socket .
prepare rock socket for concrete placement by roughening with drilling tools or by overreaming as directed by the re .
rotate roughening tools against the rock socket area to remove accumulated slurry cake to scale off loose rock fragments and to roughen the finished rock socket surface .
j. excavation cleaning and verification .
unless otherwise approved by the re ensure that at least num percent of the base of each shaft has less than num inch of sediment at the time of concrete placement .
ensure that the maximum depth of sediment or debris at any place on the base of the shaft does not exceed num inches .
in the presence of the re determine the cleanliness of the bottom of the shaft by the use of sounding probe data video camera tape with weight or other methods approved by the re .
after final cleaning determine the dimensions depth and alignment as directed by the re .
k. constructing reinforcement steel cages .
immediately after the shaft excavation has been inspected and approved assemble and place the reinforcement steel cage consisting of longitudinal and transverse bars ties cage num stiffeners spacers centralizers and other necessary appurtenances before placing concrete .
remove internal stiffeners as the cage is placed in the drilled shaft hole before placing concrete .
use concrete spacers or other approved noncorrosive spacing devices at sufficient intervals near the bottom and at intervals not exceeding num feet up the shaft to ensure concentric spacing for the entire cage length .
if the size of the spacers is not shown on the plans provide spacers that will create a minimum numinch annular space .
provide cylindrical concrete supports to ensure that the bottom of the cage is maintained at the specified distance above the base .
l. concrete placement time limitations .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
continuously place concrete from the bottom to the top elevation of the shaft .
ensure that the concrete placement is completed within num hours .
the re may allow the concrete placement time to exceed num hours if the contractor demonstrates that the slump of the concrete will not be less than num inches during the entire time of concrete placement .
m. concrete placement methods .
the contractor may request num additional set of cylinders to be taken for determining strength for early form removal as specified in num.g .
if additional cylinders are requested notify the re at least num hours before placing .
when using scc to construct drilled shafts only place scc using the tremie method .
when using a concrete pump to place concrete for the drilled shaft provide a standby pump that is immediately available if there is a pump failure .
check the elevation of the top of the steel cage before during and after concrete placement .
if the final upward displacement of the rebar cage exceeds num inches or if the downward displacement exceeds num inches per num feet of shaft length the re will reject the drilled shaft .
correct the shaft to the satisfaction of the re .
do not construct additional shafts until the rebar cage support system is corrected .
num .
tremie method .
ensure that tremie tubes are of sufficient length weight and diameter to discharge concrete at the shaft base elevation .
ensure that the inside and outside surfaces of the tremie are clean and smooth to allow the flow of concrete during concrete placement and an unimpeded withdrawal of the tremie tube after concrete placement .
ensure that the tremie tubes inside diameter is at least num times the maximum size of aggregate used in the concrete mix .
do not use tremie tubes less than num inches in diameter .
ensure that the tremie tube thickness is adequate to prevent crimping or sharp bends .
do not use tremie tubes that have aluminum parts that will come in contact with concrete .
ensure that the tremie tube is watertight .
do not begin placing concrete underwater until the tremie is placed to the shaft base elevation .
the contractor may use valves bottom plates or plugs to ensure concrete discharge begins within one tremie diameter of the base .
remove plugs from the excavation or construct them using a material that will not cause a defect in the shaft if not removed .
construct the discharge end of the tremie to allow the free radial flow of concrete during placement operations .
ensure that the tremie tube discharge end is immersed at least num feet in concrete at all times after starting the flow of concrete .
maintain a continuous flow of the concrete at a positive pressure differential to prevent water or slurry intrusion into the shaft concrete .
if the tremie tube discharge end is removed from the plastic concrete and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level the re will consider the drilled shaft defective .
to correct this defect the contractor may remove the reinforcement cage and concrete complete necessary sidewall removal directed by the re and replace the shaft or the contractor may replug the tremie tube recharge with concrete and insert a minimum of num feet below the existing top level of concrete before continuing placing concrete .
num .
pumped method .
ensure that pump lines have a minimum diameter of num inches and are constructed with watertight joints .
ensure that the discharge end remains at least num feet below the surface of the plastic concrete .
when lifting the pump line during concreting temporarily reduce the line pressure until the discharge end has been repositioned at a higher level in the excavation .
num if at any time during the concrete pour the pump line discharge end is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level consider the shaft defective .
in such case remove the reinforcement cage and concrete complete any necessary sidewall removal directed by the re and replace the shaft .
ensure that waste concrete overflows the full top circumference of the casing evenly .
waste concrete is the top num inches of the initial concrete placed plus the height of additional volume of waste concrete deposited in the shaft where concrete placement was halted and restarted plus any additional amount necessary to produce full strength nonsegregated concrete at the plan shaft top level .
continue placing concrete until the waste concrete is pushed upward and ejected completely out of the top of the casing and wasted or place an additional num inches of concrete above the planned shaft top level and allow to cure in place for removal later .
remove waste concrete at the top of the shaft to maintain a uniform appearance and to meet the specified dimensions of the shaft .
do not channel or bleed off waste concrete using notches holes or cuts in the casing top .
the contractor may remove or pump out plastic concrete in the casing that is above the top elevation of the drilled shaft after ejecting waste concrete to the top elevation .
n. approval .
compare the computed theoretical volume of the excavation with the actual volume of concrete placed and create a plot of depth versus volume .
provide results to the re .
after placing the concrete ensure that the top of the reinforcement steel cage is within num inches and num inches of the plan elevation .
ensure that the top elevation of the completed drilled shaft is within num inches and num inch of the plan elevation .
the re may reject drilled shafts because of damage failure to advance through mislocation misalignment or failure to install the drilled shaft to the proper bearing stratum or results of csl testing indicating defects .
for each rejected drilled shaft submit to the re for approval a plan showing how to correct the problem and prevent its reoccurrence .
repair augment or replace the drilled shaft .
if the re rejects a drilled shaft the contractor shall cease the construction of all other drilled shafts until the contractor demonstrates the ability to construct an approved drilled shaft .
within num days after completing the installation of all drilled shafts and before removing the drilled shaft installation equipment from the project limits provide the re with a plan certified by a land surveyor registered in the state of new jersey showing the asinstalled location of drilled shafts .
the re will analyze the total loads on individual drilled shafts based on the survey data .
if the load on any drilled shaft exceeds num percent of the specified load capacity correct the drilled shaft as directed by the re .
the corrections may include installation of additional drilled shafts .
do not place substructure concrete on a drilled shaft until the concrete in the shaft reaches a minimum of num percent of the required numday compressive strength and until all csl test results are approved and the csl tubes have been dewatered and grouted .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit furnishing drilled shaft equipment lump sum demonstration drilled shaft linear foot load test unit crosshole sonic logging unit shaft coring linear foot drilled shaft in soil ___ diameter linear foot drilled shaft in rock ___ diameter linear foot obstruction linear foot tomography unit the department will make payment for each load test completed and accepted .
num the department will not include payment for tomography under crosshole sonic logging .
if the re directs tomography the department will make payment for the number of numd evaluations performed and accepted under tomography .
the department will make payment under shaft coring if the drilled core confirms that the shaft is acceptable .
the department will not make payment for shaft coring if the core confirms that there is a defect .
the department will make payment for num percent of the lump sum price bid for furnishing drilled shaft equipment when the equipment necessary for drilling shafts is furnished and drilling of shafts has began .
the department will make payment for the remaining num percent when all shafts have been drilled and all shaft concrete has been placed to the top of the shafts .
the department will not include payment for removal of obstructions under drilled shaft in soil .
if an obstruction is encountered the department will make payment for removal of the obstruction under obstruction .
the department will make payment for sampling and analysis for regulated waste including solids from dewatered slurry under soil sampling and analyses regulated as specified in num .
the department will make payment for offsite transport and disposal and recycling of regulated waste or hazardous waste including solids from dewatered slurry under disposal of regulated material or disposal of regulated material hazardous as specified in num .
section num structural concrete num description this section describes the requirements for constructing castinplace concrete .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified gritnum concretenum high performance concretenum mortar num curing materials num reinforcement steelnum welded wire reinforcementnum epoxy waterproofingnum preformed joint filler num joint sealer hotpourednum waterstopsnum num equipment provide equipment as specified sealer application systemnum spreading and finishing machinenum vibratornum straightedge num pavement sawnum hotair lancenum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num num construction num reinforcement steel a .
handling .
store reinforcement steel above ground level .
when unloading coated reinforcement steel minimize scraping of the bundles bartobar abrasion and sags in the bundles .
for coated reinforcement steel do not skid the bundles from the truck bed to the ground .
ensure that equipment used for handling the bars is equipped with nylon slings .
do not use wire rope slings or chains .
lift bundles of bars to ensure that sagging does not occur .
ensure that coated bars or bundles of coated bars are not dropped or dragged during handling .
b. storing .
coordinate deliveries of coated reinforcement bars to the work site with the placing of the bars in the structure .
store reinforcement steel as close as possible to the area where it will be placed to minimize handling .
store the bars above the ground on timbers or other suitable protective cribbing and space the dunnage to prevent sags in the bundles .
when storing a large quantity of bars in a small area stack bundles of straight bars with adequate blocking placed between the layers of bundles to provide stability and prevent sagging .
do not store reinforcement bars at the work site for more than num days unless approved by the re .
if long term storage is approved protect nonmetallic tags on the bundles or attach additional galvanized metal tags on all bundles of bars to maintain identification .
if long term storage is approved cover the bars with white polyethylene sheeting or other suitable protective material .
for stacked bundles drape the white polyethylene sheeting over the sides of the bundles around the perimeter of the stack .
secure the covering and provide air circulation around the bars to prevent condensation under the polyethylene sheeting .
c. field cutting .
obtain re approval before field cutting reinforcement steel .
do not flame cut epoxycoated reinforcement steel .
if coated reinforcement bars are cut in the field coat the cut ends and repair damage to the coating as specified in num.g .
d. field bending .
obtain re approval before field bending reinforcement steel .
use the cold method to make minor adjustments to reinforcement steel bars in the field .
do not bend galvanized reinforcement steel more than num degrees .
with the approval of the re the contractor may use the heat method to perform minor adjustments to uncoated bars .
preheat the bar to between num and num f and then gently bend in a gradual arc .
for bars partially embedded in concrete ensure that the concrete is not damaged by heating the bars .
e. placing and fastening .
when placing ensure that reinforcement steel is free of dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substances .
tie bars at all intersections except where spacing is less than num inches in each direction in which case tie alternate intersections .
use stays blocks ties hangers or chairs to maintain the specified concrete cover .
if using blocks ensure that the blocks are precast concrete .
ensure that blocks are not used where they are exposed in a finished surface .
when using galvanized reinforcement steel ensure that all miscellaneous hardware that comes in contact with or is used to support position or fasten the reinforcement steel are also galvanized according to aashto m num .
when using epoxycoated reinforcement steel use only plasticcoated or epoxycoated tie wires and ensure that all miscellaneous hardware used to support position or fasten the reinforcement are dielectric plasticcoated or epoxycoated .
if using welded wire reinforcement overlap sheets at least num grid in width .
fasten overlaps securely at the ends and edges .
repair damage to epoxycoating or galvanized coating as specified in num.g .
do not place concrete before inspection and approval of the reinforcement steel .
f. splices .
when splicing is not specified submit a plan for splicing to the re for approval .
include size location and splicing method .
the contractor may use mechanical coupling devices listed on the qpl .
when using galvanized reinforcement steel ensure that mechanical coupling devices are galvanized according to aashto m num .
when using epoxy coated reinforcement steel ensure that mechanical coupling devices are epoxy coated according to aashto m num .
when using mechanical connections remove the coating from the ends of the reinforcement steel over the length of the sleeve and at least num inches from the ends of the sleeves or more if recommended by the supplier .
num repair damage to epoxycoating or galvanized coating as specified in num.g .
g. field repairing of coatings .
the re will allow field repair when there are less than num damaged areas in any num foot length of bar .
the re will reject material with more than num damaged areas within a numfeet span and any material with a damaged area more than num square inches in size .
repairable damage is any bare or loose spots or breaks in the coating that affect an area smaller than num square inches .
ensure that grease dirt mortar concrete mill scale injurious rust or any other foreign substance is removed before repairing .
num .
epoxycoating .
repair damage to epoxycoating according to aashto m num .
num .
galvanizedcoating .
repair damage to the galvanized coating according to astm a num .
h. protecting exposed reinforcement steel .
when noncoated embedded reinforcement steel is partially exposed at construction joints for more than num days protect the exposed portion of the bar with a coat of neat cement mixed with water within num days of the initial concrete placement .
remove loose coating by lightly tapping within num days of the subsequent concrete placement .
num constructing concrete a. falsework .
when forms and concrete require support construct falsework on sills resting on foundations capable of carrying the loads without settlement .
if falsework can not be founded on solid footings support with falsework piling .
construct the falsework to support the forms and the structure so that there is no deflection .
provide camber in the falsework and forms to allow the joints to tighten in the forms and supporting falsework .
when constructing centering for arches correct any deflection due to placing the concrete by jacking as the concrete is being placed .
b .
forms .
construct forms that are true to line and grade that are mortar tight and that provide a smooth even concrete surface .
ensure that forms are rigid to prevent distortion .
prevent the opening of the joints or movement in any direction .
ensure that all bolts are countersunk on the face forming the concrete surface .
ensure that forms are free from rust grease and other foreign matter .
clean the top and face of forms and oil the face before erecting .
ensure that the form oil does not discolor the concrete .
provide a system to monitor settlement or movement in the falsework and forms .
check the alignment and elevation of the forms and make corrections before placing the concrete .
reset or remove and replace forms that deviate from the specified line and grade .
provide a chamfer to form edges as shown .
ensure that all chamfer strips are straight of uniform width and dressed .
construct forms so that they can be removed without damaging the waterstops .
splice weld or solder metallic waterstops as necessary to form continuous watertight joints .
install nonmetallic waterstops in continuous strips without splices .
the re will allow splices at changes in direction when necessary .
splice nonmetallic waterstops according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when splicing pvc waterstops ensure that the heat used is sufficient to melt but not char the plastic .
secure waterstops to prevent movement during concrete placement .
when epoxycoated reinforcement steel is used use epoxycoated or galvanized metal ties .
when metal ties and anchorages remain in the forms remove to a depth of at least num inch from the face without damaging the concrete .
provide cones if using wire ties .
the contractor may use manufactured fiber tubes as column forms for round columns of concrete .
ensure that fiber tubes are rigid and circular in section .
store fiber tubes above ground on supports in a dry area .
ensure that fiber tubes are not exposed to moisture before use .
when erecting column forms hold forms in a vertical position to prevent distortion during concrete placement .
c. limitations of placing .
at least num days before placing concrete submit to the re for approval a plan for hot and cold weather concreting .
include the method that will be used to ensure that the temperature of the concrete is between num and num f during mixing and placing .
num do not place concrete when precipitation is imminent as determined by the re .
if it begins precipitating during concrete placement the re may direct the contractor to suspend placement operations and protect the plastic concrete as specified in num.i .
if placement can not be resumed within num minutes the re may direct the construction of a construction joint .
if during the concrete placement or within the num hours preceding the scheduled concrete placement the national weather service httpwww.nws.noaa.gov locally forecasts the ambient temperature to be below num f or above num f during the scheduled concrete placement or curing period follow the appropriate temperature condition procedure .
do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is below num f or above num f. num .
cold weather concreting .
the re will prohibit the placement of concrete when the ambient temperature is below num f unless all surfaces in contact with the concrete placement are preheated to between num and num f and access is provided for measuring the temperature of the inplace concrete .
for access establish a num inch diameter hole that is num inches deep at a num degree angle by placing a greased bolt through the forms prior to concrete placement .
use num or more of the following protective measures to maintain the concrete temperature a .
insulated forms .
before placing concrete construct insulated forms to protect concrete .
ensure that the forms are free of ice snow and frost at time of placing concrete .
b .
insulated blankets .
use insulated blankets to protect concrete .
place the blankets on top of polyethylene sheeting within num minutes of placing concrete .
c. heating and housing .
before placing concrete in the forms provide housing for the section of concrete to be placed so that the temperatures specified can be maintained within the enclosure .
construct the enclosures to allow removal of forms and finishing of concrete surfaces without interruption of the heating .
maintain the heating system to provide uniform heating within the enclosure .
ensure that the heating system has been operating so that the temperature of form surfaces reinforcement steel and abutting construction to be in contact with the concrete is between num and num f before placing the concrete .
provide a sufficient number of backup heaters at the project limits to maintain the temperature of the housing in the event of a breakdown of the primary heating system .
in the event of a breakdown operate the backup heaters until the primary heating system is repaired .
maintain the protective measures for arches culverts deck slabs and approaches for at least num days .
for other concrete placements maintain for at least num days .
ensure that the temperature of the concrete is maintained between num and num f for num days after placement .
the re will check the temperature of the concrete in the established hole .
if the temperature of the concrete falls below num f within num days after placing maintain the protective measures in place for an additional num days .
if the temperature of the concrete rises above num f the re may direct the forms to be loosened or protective measures to be removed .
if the temperature of the concrete falls below num f or rises above num f within num days of placement the re will direct that the concrete be removed and replaced .
after the concrete temperature has been maintained for num days at a minimum of num f ensure that the temperature of the concrete does not fall more than num f in num hours .
num .
hot weather concreting .
when the ambient temperature reaches num f use the following procedures before and during concreting operations .
num .
schedule work so that concrete can be placed continuously .
if necessary start concrete placement at night or early morning .
num .
use a waterreducing admixture or a waterreducing and retarding admixture as specified in num and according to the manufacturers recommendation .
num .
prevent absorption by sprinkling the underlying material and the wood forms just before concrete placement so that they do not absorb water from the mix .
num .
begin curing within num minutes after finishing .
if the temperature of the plastic concrete reaches num f take immediate steps to cool either the mixing water or the aggregates or both according to the plan of action .
do not place concrete when its temperature in the plastic state exceeds num f at the time of placement .
num d. placing and consolidating concrete .
the contractor may request num additional set of cylinders to be taken for determining strength for early form removal as specified in num.g .
if additional cylinders are requested notify the re at least num hours before placing .
appoint sufficient number of personnel who are certified by the njaci as concrete construction technologists or by aci as concrete transportation construction inspectors to monitor daily operations for concrete placement .
the certified personnel are responsible for ensuring proper dimensions of forms position of reinforcement steel proper handling placement consolidation and finishing of concrete and proper curing of the concrete .
ensure that all forms joints and reinforcement steel have been placed inspected and approved before placing concrete .
ensure that utilities pipe conduit ducts and any other items to be encased in concrete are in place and secure before placing concrete .
secure or provide rigid bracing for items to be encased in concrete during concrete placement to prevent their displacement .
ensure that forms for weep holes through concrete are pvc or unreinforced concrete drain pipe .
do not place concrete until all laitance and loose deleterious material on reinforcement bars and previously placed concrete has been removed .
clean forms of all debris immediately before placing concrete .
wet the surfaces not treated with oil paraffin or epoxy bonding compound .
do not place concrete that is below num f or above num f. begin placing concrete at the lowest elevation and proceed upgrade .
place the concrete so that segregation does not occur and there is no displacement or movement of reinforcement and forms using num of the following methods num .
chutes and troughs and other conveyances .
do not dump or drop concrete from a distance greater than num feet unless using closed chutes or pipes to confine concrete .
ensure that buggies chutes troughs and pipes used for placing concrete are kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete .
num .
pumped concrete .
at least num days before beginning operations submit a plan to the re according to aci numr .
include the method and procedures along with a list of adequate descriptions of equipment and manpower proposed for use including contingency equipment and manpower .
the re will prohibit the use of aluminum alloy pipe as a conveyance for the concrete or for any pieces of equipment in contact with the concrete .
for flatwork concrete ensure that the pipeline is horizontal for at least num feet at the discharge end .
if the concrete remaining in the pipeline is to be used discharge the concrete in such a manner that there is no contamination or segregation .
take samples of the plastic concrete according to aashto t num from the discharge end of the pipeline .
immediately deliver the samples to the me for testing .
if the re determines that this is not feasible the me will sample the concrete before and after pumping and will develop adjustment factors for slump and air content .
the me will use the adjustment factors to determine the acceptability of slump and air content .
when using spreaders to separate forms remove spreaders while placing the concrete .
if the reinforcement steel or forms settle or move cease placing concrete and immediately notify the re .
place concrete uniformly to avoid rehandling .
after initial placement of the concrete do not jar forms or place strain on the ends of projecting reinforcement .
consolidate the concrete using internal mechanical vibrators .
when required supplement vibrating by hand spading to ensure proper and adequate consolidation .
provide at least num additional standby vibrating unit for individual concrete placements in excess of num cubic yards .
use vibrators to work the concrete around the reinforcement steel and embedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms .
ensure proper vibration of the concrete to avoid honeycombing and voids .
do not use vibrators to move or spread concrete into position .
do not over vibrate concrete .
float the external surface of concrete during placing to force coarse aggregate from the surface and to bring mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish substantially free from water and air pockets or honeycombs .
for sidewalks driveways and islands apply surface texture using a broom before applying curing materials .
after placing concrete for elevated structures check and if necessary adjust forms and falsework to the specified position before the concrete has taken its initial set .
num when placing concrete for bearing areas finish concrete to the specified elevation .
if the elevation of the finished surface is higher than specified bushhammer to the specified elevation .
if the elevation of the finished surface is lower than specified submit a plan to the re for approval detailing the method to correct the deficiency .
monitor the internal temperature of the concrete num inches below the surface .
if the temperature of the concrete exceeds num f the re may direct the forms to be loosened or opened .
e. placing mass concrete .
when mass concrete is shown on the plans submit a thermal curing plan to the re at least num days before placing concrete .
at a minimum include the following requirements in the plan num .
concrete mix design including pozzolanic materials to control concrete temperature .
num .
adjustments to form removal and loading times for slower strength gains for high pozzolan mixes .
num .
an analysis of the anticipated thermal developments within placements using proposed materials and casting methods .
num .
a plan outlining specific measures to be taken to control the temperature differential within the limits .
num .
the proposed monitoring system .
num .
outline of corrective actions to control the temperature differential and maximum internal temperature .
num .
proposed methods of repairs or corrective actions if the mass concrete member is not accepted .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
when curing concrete ensure that the temperature differential of the mass concrete does not exceed num f between the internal and external temperature of concrete .
measure the internal temperature as close as possible to the center of the member but not less than num inches from the surface .
measure the external temperature of the concrete at an exposed surface .
monitor the temperature differential and the maximum internal temperature with monitoring devices that continuously record temperature for num days .
provide the re with a copy of each set of readings .
provide temperaturemonitoring devices to record temperature between the interior and exterior of the member at points approved by the re and monitor the mass placement to measure temperature differentials .
monitor the temperature until the interior temperature is within num f of the lowest ambient temperature or a maximum of num days .
provide the re with a copy of each set of readings as they are taken and a temperature chart for each mass placement member showing temperature readings versus time .
if monitoring indicates that the proposed measures are not controlling the concrete temperature differential to within num f and the maximum internal temperature of num f implement corrective actions according to the thermal curing plan to maintain the temperature differential .
f. applying curing materials .
after float finishing and when marring of the concrete will not occur apply curing materials within num minutes after finishing .
the re will suspend concrete operations if the curing procedure is delayed or is not followed .
cure the concrete using the following materials num .
curing compound .
apply num coats of curing compound as provided by the manufacturer each at a rate of num gallon per num square feet of surface in a continuous uniform film with pressure spraying equipment .
do not apply curing compound to exposed construction joint areas .
apply the second coat between num and num minutes of applying the first coat .
if the method of applying the curing compound produces a nonuniform film discontinue application and correct the procedure .
if the procedure can not produce the required results use another curing option .
protect the treated surface as specified in num.i from damage for at least num hours .
if precipitation falls on the newly coated concrete before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if the film is damaged in any other way apply an additional coat of curing compound at the original specified rate .
do not apply curing compound to concrete surfaces that will receive a subsequent concrete placement .
remove curing compound from concrete surfaces that will receive a subsequent concrete placement .
num .
wet burlap and white polyethylene sheeting .
presoak burlap strips for at least num hours before placing .
cover the concrete with strips of wet burlap at least num feet longer than the width of the slab to cover the sides .
lay the strips across the slab and overlap at least num the width of the strip to provide a double thickness of burlap .
ensure that the burlap remains wet throughout the specified curing period .
ensure that the wet burlap does not add excess water to the concrete surface .
num cover the wet burlap with white polyethylene sheeting .
overlap sections of polyethylene sheeting at least num inches .
place the white polyethylene sheeting and weigh down to ensure that it remains in contact with the surface .
where reinforcement steel protrudes ensure that the white polyethylene sheeting is draped and overlapped over the structure to protect any exposed areas .
extend white polyethylene sheeting num feet beyond the edges of the concrete .
replace or restore polyethylene sheeting that is damaged or disturbed .
num .
white polyethylene sheeting .
overlap sections of polyethylene sheeting at least num inches .
place the polyethylene sheeting and weigh down to ensure that it remains in contact with the surface .
where reinforcement steel protrudes ensure that the polyethylene sheeting is draped and overlapped over the structure to protect any exposed areas .
extend the polyethylene sheeting num feet beyond the edges of the concrete .
replace or restore polyethylene sheeting that is damaged or disturbed .
maintain curing materials for arches and culverts for at least num days for other concrete placements maintain for at least num days .
when using protective measures for cold weather concreting as specified in num.c.num maintain the curing materials until the protective measures are removed .
g. removal of forms and falsework .
the department may require concrete strength tests as specified in the special provisions for removal of forms and falsework .
remove forms without damaging the surface .
the contractor may remove forms num hours after placing concrete except for the following num .
remove barrier curb and parapet forms as soon as the concrete holds its shape to facilitate finishing .
num .
when using concrete that contains more than num percent fly ash by weight of total cementitious material maintain the forms for at least num days .
num .
the contractor may remove forms for wing walls after num days if the concrete has attained a strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from num concrete cylinders field cured according to aashto t num .
if concrete cylinders for wing walls are not tested or do not meet a strength num pounds per square inch when tested before num days the contractor may not remove forms until num days after the concrete has been placed .
num .
the contractor may remove forms for battered columns or pier caps after num days if the concrete has attained a strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from num concrete cylinders field cured according to aashto t num .
if concrete cylinders for battered columns or pier caps are not tested or do not meet a strength num pounds per square inch when tested before num days the contractor may not remove forms until num days after the concrete has been placed .
num .
the contractor may remove forms for arches or culverts after num days if the concrete has attained a strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from num concrete cylinders field cured according to aashto t num .
if concrete cylinders for arches or culverts are not tested or do not meet a strength of num pounds per square inch when tested before num days the contractor may not remove forms until num days after the concrete has been placed .
do not remove falsework and centering for spandrelfilled arches before the abutments have been placed up to the spring line .
num .
do not remove falsework supporting the deck of rigid frame structures until the embankment has been placed behind the vertical legs .
num .
when using protective measures for cold weather concreting as specified in num.c.num do not remove the forms until the protective measures are removed regardless of concrete cylinder strength .
num .
do not remove the forms for decks for num days .
for elevated formwork lower centering gradually to prevent damage to the structure .
remove falsework from continuous or cantilevered structures to ensure that the structure is gradually subjected to its working stress .
h. finishing concrete surface .
finish the surface of the concrete immediately after removing the forms .
apply a class num finish to surfaces not exposed to view .
apply a class num finish to all surfaces exposed to view .
do not begin finishing a surface until the entire face of the structure is completed to ensure a uniform texture and color .
for barrier curb and parapet apply a class num finish within num hours of placing concrete .
the classes of concrete finish are as follows num .
class num surface finish .
remove projecting wire or metal devices that have been used for holding the forms in place .
if the wire or metal device can not be removed cut the wire or metal device at least num inch below the surface of the concrete .
remove lips of mortar and irregularities caused by form joints .
ensure that all construction and expansion joints are tooled and free of mortar and concrete .
num patch holes depressions voids and honeycombs by chipping away coarse or broken material until a dense uniform surface of concrete exposing solid coarse aggregate is obtained .
cut away feathered edges to form faces perpendicular to the surface .
saturate the surfaces of the deficient area with water then fill the deficient area with stiff mortar .
finish the surface of the mortar with a wooden float before initial set takes place .
when patching large or deep areas as determined by the re patch the area using the same mix design concrete as the surrounding concrete .
chip away coarse or broken material until a dense uniform surface of concrete exposing solid coarse aggregate is obtained .
cut away feathered edges to form faces perpendicular to the surface .
saturate the surface of the area with water then apply a layer of bonding compound to the area .
fill the area with the concrete .
finish the surface of the concrete with a wooden float before initial set takes place .
the department may reject a structure for having areas of excessive honeycombs as directed by the re .
num .
class num rubbed finish .
after performing a class num finish rub surfaces with a wetted wooden block or a medium coarse carborundum stone using a small amount of mortar on its face .
do not use the carborundum stone until the concrete has hardened to the state where the sand grinds rather than ravels or rolls .
continue rubbing until form marks projections and irregularities have been removed voids are filled and a uniform surface has been obtained .
leave the paste produced by this rubbing in place .
after the entire surface of the structure has been rubbed and the paste has dried obtain the final finish by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform color .
i .
protecting concrete structures .
post warning tape around flatwork such as bridge decks pavement sidewalks driveways and islands during the curing period .
provide wet burlap or polyethylene sheeting to protect the edges and surface of the plastic concrete from precipitation .
do not drive piles within num feet of concrete that is being placed or has been placed within the previous num hours unless approved by the re .
ensure that salt or brackish water does not come in contact with the concrete for a period of num days after being placed .
j. loading concrete structures .
do not allow anything other than the curing materials on concrete surfaces for num hours after placing the concrete .
the contractor may begin constructing forms for subsequent concrete placements after the forms from the underlying concrete can be removed as specified in num.g .
after the forms have been constructed and at least num days after the underlying concrete has been placed the contractor may perform subsequent concrete placements .
the contractor may begin storing materials backfilling or other loading on the concrete surface num days after the concrete has been placed if the forms can be removed as specified in num.g .
num epoxy waterproofing provide a copy of the manufacturers recommendations to the re at least num days before applying epoxy waterproofing .
apply epoxy waterproofing to abutment and pier seats after applying the finish and at least num days after stripping the forms and to the tops of slabs of culverts having less than num feet of fill and an hma overlay directly over that slab .
do not apply epoxy waterproofing to riding surfaces .
immediately before application clean the surfaces of dirt grease form oil or other foreign material that may have accumulated .
do not apply epoxy waterproofing unless the ambient temperature is between num and num f at the time of application .
mix and apply the epoxy waterproofing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
if necessary bushhammer bearing surfaces to their proper elevations before applying the epoxy waterproofing .
apply num coats of epoxy waterproofing using a brush or roller .
allow the first coat to dry before applying the second coat .
ensure that the total thickness of the coatings is num mils .
while the second coat is still tacky broadcast grit at uniform rate of num pounds per square yard over the top surfaces by hand except on masonry plate bearing areas .
after the epoxy waterproofing has set brush off excess grit and dispose of as specified in num .
allow the epoxy waterproofing to completely dry before placing any material against the concrete member .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit reinforcement steel pound reinforcement steel epoxycoated pound reinforcement steel galvanized pound concrete culvert cubic yard concrete footing cubic yard concrete wing wall cubic yard concrete pier column protection hpc cubic yard concrete abutment wall cubic yard concrete pier column and cap cubic yard concrete pier shaft cubic yard concrete pedestrian bridge cubic yard epoxy waterproofing square yard section num precast and prestressed structural concrete num description this section describes the requirements for manufacturing furnishing and erecting prestressed members precast reinforced concrete culverts and precast concrete arch structures .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num concretenum nonshrink grout num.a structural precast concretenum prestressed concrete num reinforcement steelnum dowels num posttensioning reinforcementnum bearing pads num anchor boltsnum epoxy waterproofingnum preformed joint filler num subsurface drainage geotextilenum waternum provide posttensioning grout that complies with the requirements for class b or c grout according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num equipment provide grouting equipment according to the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
for each tensioning jack provide the re with jack calibrations charts certified by a testing laboratory approved by the department to show the relationship between the dial gauge and the force delivered .
ensure that jacks and the gauges are calibrated as a unit and are recalibrated every num months .
num num construction num prestressed concrete structures a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings for certification that include the class of concrete the pattern and schedule for releasing strands before detensioning detensioning concrete strength and tensioning and detensioning patterns .
if the design requires posttensioning include end blocks in the design .
in the case of multiple span structures if the design of beams of any num span requires end blocks include end blocks for all spans of the fascia beams .
b .
shipping and storing .
notify the re at least num days before shipping .
transport and store precast girders and slabs in an upright position and ensure that the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the member are approximately the same during transportation and storage as when the member is in its final position .
obtain re approval to transport or store precast units in a position other than upright .
when shipping members that are pretensioned ensure that no creep occurs .
c. erection plan .
submit a plan of operations to the re for approval at least num days before the preerection meeting .
include at a minimum the following in the plan num .
number and type of manpower and equipment .
num .
shipping procedures .
num .
lifting procedures .
num .
erecting sequence .
num .
temporary bracing .
num .
manufacturers recommendations .
num .
procedures for employee safety .
num .
traffic control and protection .
num .
method of posttensioning and determining friction loss .
num .
anchorage details and design calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
d. erecting .
notify the re to schedule a preerection meeting at least num days before the start of erection .
before erecting prestressed concrete beams follow the loading requirements for substructure members as specified in num.j .
place the embankment backfill behind the abutment walls to at least num percent of their height before erection unless otherwise approved .
set bearing pads according to the manufacturers recommendation .
set structural bearing assemblies or reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies as specified in num.c .
anchor prestressed concrete voided slabs and box beams to abutments and piers using dowels as anchors .
e. posttensioning of prestressed slabs and box beams .
do not splice strands unless approved by the re .
install posttensioning reinforcement through preformed ducts before grouting the longitudinal keyways .
tension the rods and strands to the value shown on the plans .
continuously monitor the tension being applied during the tensioning process .
after tensioning the posttensioning reinforcement remove the exposed ends at the fascia members so that no part of the posttensioning reinforcement or end fittings extend beyond a point num inch inside the exterior face of the prestressed concrete member .
do not flamecut the posttensioning reinforcement .
permanently protect exposed strand or rod ends at end fittings from corrosion using a method approved by the re .
fill the recessed pockets at the fascia with mortar matching the concrete surface .
f. grouting .
num .
concrete beams .
grout according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num .
concrete box beams and concrete slab beams .
sandblast the keyway surface clean to ensure bonding before erection .
the contractor may sandblast at the fabrication plant if shown on the certified working drawings .
the contractor may substitute waterblasting for sandblasting .
immediately before grouting clean the keyway by waterblasting .
ensure that the water does not puddle .
after cleaning seal the keyway with closed cell foam backer rod at least num inch below the keyway bottom .
num seal the ends of the keyway to prevent grout loss .
do not grout the keyway before the res inspection and approval .
mix and place nonshrink grout according to the manufacturers recommendations .
begin the grouting operation at num end of the keyway and proceed continuously to the opposite end without interruption .
fill only num keyway with grout at a time .
consolidate the grout as it is placed in the keyway and finish the grout flush with the top of the keyway .
ensure that the ambient temperature is between num and num f when placing grout .
when the ambient temperature is expected to fall below num f provide measures to maintain the concrete surface temperature between num and num f. provide curing blankets and place over the grout no later than num hour after the grout placement .
keep the curing blankets on the grouted keyways for at least num hours .
allow the grout in the keyways to cure at least num hours before allowing traffic or equipment on the bridge .
num precast concrete culverts a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings for approval that show plan elevation and sections as well as details for all appurtenances such as headwalls cutoff walls wingwalls and aprons .
in addition include details of the neoprene gasket between the precast concrete culvert units as well as all threaded inserts bar extensions waterproofing and end anchorage details for the posttensioning reinforcement .
provide erection details including handling points neoprene gasket details the method for pulling the culvert boxes together section lengths and the method of installing the units .
b .
shipping and storing .
notify the re at least num days before shipping .
ship and store precast units according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c. erection plan .
submit a plan of operations as specified in num.c .
d. erecting .
notify the re to schedule a preerection meeting at least num days before the start of erection .
construct a minimum numfoot thick coarse aggregate layer that extends num inches past each side of the precast culvert .
compact the coarse aggregate layer using the directed method as specified in num.c .
tie the precast units together with a minimum of num longitudinal rods or strands to ensure an adequate seal and to provide continuity and concrete shear transfer between the precast units .
provide a flexible watertight neoprene gasket according to astm d num at the joint between the precast units .
ensure that the gasket is continuous around the circumference of the joint and has only num splice .
before backfilling place a numfoot wide strip of subsurface drainage geotextile over the top and side transverse joints .
if precast concrete culvert units are used in parallel for multicell installations fill the space between the units with nonshrink grout or class a concrete .
e. posttensioning .
place a longitudinal rod or strand through a preformed hole located in each corner of the units and stressed to a tension of num pounds each .
after tensioning cut the exposed end of the posttensioning reinforcement to num inch below the surface of the anchorage pocket .
do not flame cut the posttensioning reinforcement .
galvanize all hardware associated with the end anchorage system .
apply num coats of bituminous paint to the exposed parts of the end fittings .
f. grouting .
fill hand hole pockets posttensioning reinforcement sleeves and lifting lugs with nonshrink grout after the joints are sealed and the posttensioning reinforcement are tensioned .
apply num coat of an epoxy waterproofing to all top slab hand hole pockets or lifting holes that are grouted in the field after the grout has properly cured .
g. backfilling .
backfill and compact around the culvert as specified in num .
num precast concrete arch structures a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings for approval that include the following num .
concrete compressive strength value .
num .
when the earth cover over the precast concrete arch unit is less than num inches provide corrosion protected reinforcement in the outside mat of reinforcement .
num num .
plan elevation and sections as well as details for all appurtenances such as headwalls cutoff walls wingwalls and aprons .
num .
details of the neoprene gasket between the precast concrete arch units as well as all threaded inserts bar extensions waterproofing backfilling and loading requirements and end anchorage details for the post tensioning reinforcement .
num .
profiles and dimensions of all precast concrete arch structures lifting loads of all components and reinforcement steel layout .
num .
erection details of the joint seal between the precast concrete arch structures joint seal details section lengths and the method of installing the units .
b .
shipping and storing .
notify the re at least num days before shipping the precast concrete arch units .
ship precast units according to the manufacturers recommendations .
store the precast concrete arch units according to the manufacturers requirements .
to prevent cracking of the structures support the precast concrete arch units with timber members .
c. erection plan .
submit a plan of operations as specified in num.c .
d. erecting .
notify the re to schedule a preerection meeting at least num days before the start of erection .
construct footings using class b concrete .
ensure that the surface of the footing does not vary more than num inch in num feet .
provide a float finish to the footing .
ensure that the concrete reaches a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from test cylinders cast during placing of the concrete before installing the precast concrete arch structure .
install precast concrete arch units on footings according to the manufacturers erection instructions .
connect the foundations for the precast concrete arch units and other appurtenances with reinforcement or suitable mechanical connections to form one monolithic body .
fill the footing keyway and lifting points with nonshrink grout .
e. joints .
seal and cover the butt joint made by num adjoining precast concrete arch units the joint between the end unit and the headwall and the joint between the end unit and wingwall according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the joint surface is clean before the sealing operations .
cover the joint continuously from the bottom of a precast concrete arch unit section leg across the top of the arch and to the opposite arch unit section leg .
ensure that all laps that result in the joint wrap are a minimum of num inches long with the overlap running downhill .
f. backfilling .
after the re has approved the precast arch structure place inum soil aggregate in numinch lifts or less .
when placing backfill ensure that the difference between the heights of the backfill on the opposite sides of the arch structure does not exceed num inches .
use mechanical tampers to compact the backfill adjacent to each side of the arch units and over the top of the arch units until they are covered to a minimum depth of num inches .
do not operate heavy equipment weighing in excess of num tons over the structure until a depth of backfill has been placed that will support the equipment .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit pretensioned prestressed concrete beam ___ linear foot prestressed concrete box beam type ___ ___ by ___ linear foot prestressed concrete slab beam type ___ ___ by ___ linear foot precast concrete culvert linear foot precast concrete arch structure linear foot the department will make payment for structural bearing assemblies as structural bearing assembly as specified in num .
the department will make payment for reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies as reinforced elastomeric bearing assembly as specified in num .
num section num structural steel num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and erecting bridges structures structural bearings and reinforced elastomeric bearings and associated elements that include use of structural steel and miscellaneous metals .
num materials provide materials as specified groutnum structural steelnum structural steel fabricationnum structural bearing assembliesnum reinforced elastomeric bearing assembliesnum bearing pads num bolts and bolting materials num anchor boltsnum direct tension indicators dtinum organic zinc coating systemnum epoxy mastic coating systemnum num construction num structural steel a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings for approval .
b. erection plan .
at least num days before the preerection meeting submit a plan of operations to the re for approval .
include at a minimum the following in the plan num .
number and type of manpower and equipment .
num .
shipping procedures .
num .
lifting procedures .
num .
beam erecting sequence including method of setting bearings and diaphragms .
num .
manufacturers recommendations .
num .
procedures for employee safety .
num .
traffic control and protection .
c. shipping and handling .
at least num days before shipping the steel submit to the re for approval all shipping and storage details .
ensure that structural steel is handled and shipped as specified in num .
ensure that the steel is protected from the binding chains during shipping using softeners approved by the me .
use padded hooks and slings to hoist steel .
space diaphragms and similar pieces to ensure that the coatings are not damaged by rubbing during shipment .
do not store steel on the ground .
ensure that members do not fall or rest on each other .
d. erecting .
ensure that stringers and builtup girders involving field splices are completely preassembled in the shop with account taken to their relative position in the finished structure as to grade camber and curvature .
the contractor may erect the builtup stringer or girder as a unit as allowed by traffic conditions .
obtain department approval before welding to members or parts of members subject to tension or reversal of stress .
if necessary to weld in these areas ensure that the actual stress range at the point of attachment does not exceed the value for category f according to the aashto lrfd bridge design specification .
if field welded splices are made inspect splices using nondestructive tests at the site of erection .
unless otherwise approved construct embankments in back of the abutment walls to at least num percent of their height before placing structural steel .
erect structural steel according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
ensure that temporary attachments or supports for scaffolding or forms do not damage the coating system of the steel .
use sufficient support pads for fascia bracing .
num provide lateral support when hoisting members into position so as to prevent lateral buckling or other damage .
ensure that bolt heads of highstrength bolts are on the outside of fascia stringers .
e. installing highstrength steel bolts .
check galvanized bolts and nuts to verify that a visible lubricant is on the threads .
check black bolts and nuts to verify that they are oily to the touch .
provide a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent tension measuring device on the project during erection .
verify each lot of dtis using the skidmorewilhelm calibrator as specified in njdot snum .
before beginning bolt installation perform the rotationalcapacity test as specified in num.c on num assemblies from each rotationalcapacity lot .
if assemblies do not meet the rotational capacity requirements when tested at the work site the contractor may clean and relubricate the bolt assemblies in the rotationalcapacity lot .
after cleaning and relubricating retest the assemblies for compliance to the rotational capacity requirements .
ensure that the bolt nut and washer are from the same rotationalcapacity lot .
if the dti is used under the nut place an additional washer between the nut and the protrusions on the dti .
if recommended by the bolt manufacturer the contractor may use wax lubricant beeswax or a water wax emulsion to aid in installation .
hold the bolt head stationary while tightening the nut .
install bolts in all of the holes of the connection and tighten to a snugtight condition to compact the joint .
ensure that the number of spaces in the dti in which a numinch feeler gauge is refused after snugging does not exceed the maximum snugtight refusals as specified in table num .
if the number of refusals exceeds the maximum remove the assembly insert a new dti and resnug .
tighten the assemblies successively from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges by turning the nuts while holding the bolts stationary .
tension the assemblies until the number of spaces in which the numinch thickness gauge is refused meets or exceeds the minimum final tension refusals specified in table num .
table num criteria for dti spaces for a num bolts bolt diameter inches num num num num num num num number of spaces on dtis num num num num num num num maximum snug tight refusalsnum num num num num num num num minimum final tension refusalsnum num num num num num num num num .
if the dti is coated and under the nut the maximum snug tight refusals is the number of spaces on the dti minus one .
num .
if the dti is coated and under the nut the minimum final tension refusals is the number of spaces on the dti .
if an assembly is tightened so that there are no visible gaps remaining in any of the spaces on the dti the assembly has been overtightened .
remove and replace overtightened assemblies .
for painted steel apply num coats of an organic paint system supplied by the same manufacturer as the originally applied inorganic zinc system to the field bolted connections .
f. repairing damaged coating .
repair damaged coatings as directed by the re .
use an organic zinc coating system for the paint repair supplied by the same manufacturer as the originally applied inorganic zinc system .
if the originally applied coating system is not available the me will designate an alternate system .
num bearings a .
working drawings .
submit for approval working drawings that include the following num .
the total quantity of each kind of bearing required fixed guidedexpansion or nonguided expansion grouped first according to type load range and then by actual design capacity .
num .
plan view and section elevation including all relative dimensions .
num .
details of components and sections showing all materials incorporated into the bearing .
num .
all astm aashto and other material designations .
num .
any required revisions or additions to concrete members reinforcement steel or other facilities .
num .
details of the connections of the isolator load plates to the mounting plates .
num .
vertical horizontal rotation movement and load capacity .
num .
a schedule of all bearing offsets .
num .
alignment plans .
num num .
paint or coating requirements .
num .
installation scheme .
num .
anchorage details .
num .
bearing preset details .
b .
shipping and storing .
ensure that bearings are handled and shipped as specified in num .
store bearing devices and components in an area at the work site that provides protection from environmental and physical damage .
inspect bearings within num week after the bearings arrive on the project .
following the inspection rewrap the bearings and keep the bearings clean until installation .
do not dismantle bearings at the work site unless necessary for inspection or installation .
if it is necessary to open or dismantle bearings at the work site obtain re approval and do so under the direct supervision of the manufacturer .
when installing ensure that the bearings are clean and free of all foreign substances .
c. installing bearings .
install bearings as follows num .
anchor bolts .
provide anchor bolts in abutments and piers for bearings that are either castinplace cast in num inch diameter corrugated sleeves or cast in holes drilled after the concrete has set however the re will prohibit drilling in rigid frame and ttype piers .
if using anchor bolt sleeves ensure that the anchor bolts are circumferentially corrugated and are galvanized steel or plastic .
ensure that the wall thickness of the sleeves is sufficient to withstand the construction loads applied to them .
if drilling holes to cast bolts in core drill the holes at least num inch larger in diameter than the diameter of the bolts .
ensure that the reinforcement steel is not damaged during core drilling .
prevent the collection and freezing of water in holes during the time between when the anchor bolts are set and when the bearings are placed .
fill holes with an environmentally safe antifreeze seal the top with a watertight cap and coat with a rubberasphalt joint sealer .
before setting the bearing remove the environmentally safe antifreeze and other foreign material from the holes .
set the bolts by filling the holes with nonshrink grout .
num .
bridge seat bearing areas .
do not place bearing plates on bridge seat bearing areas that are irregular or improperly finished or deformed .
ensure that the epoxy waterproofing has been applied and is cured before placing bearings .
immediately before placing the bedding material and installing bearings or masonry plates clean the contact surfaces of the concrete and steel .
ensure that all bearing plates are set level in position and have full contact .
when setting bearing plates on masonry pad the plates using an elastomeric bearing pad .
num .
setting bearings .
allow for the effect of stress deformation and temperature changes when setting bearings .
use swedged or threaded anchor bolts to ensure a secure grip upon the material used to embed them in the holes .
when using seismic isolation bearings install the isolators level and perpendicular to the gravity load .
accommodate superstructure gradients with beveled sole plates .
ensure that there are no obstructions including bolt extensions that prevent the isolators from deforming horizontally in any direction .
clean the area around each isolator of all debris and construction materials at the completion of the contract .
connect the isolators to the superstructure and substructures by bolting .
do not weld steel in contact with an isolator .
num shear connectors ensure that shear connectors conform to section num of the ansiaws dnum bridge welding code .
when galvanized reinforcement steel bars are used use galvanized shear connectors .
install using automatically timed stud welding equipment shear connectors in the field only after the structural steel is erected after the deck forms are installed and before the reinforcement steel is placed .
num num steel pedestrian bridges submit an erection plan as specified in num.b at least num days before erecting the steel pedestrian bridge .
apply intermediate and finish coats of paint to the units either in the shop or on the work site before erection .
repair painted areas that are damaged during transportation or erection as specified in num.f .
num steel grid flooring at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for approval .
construct steel grid flooring according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
place concrete for filled type grid flooring as specified in num.d .
num repair galvanizing where limited areas of galvanized surfaces are damaged during shipping or erection repair the areas using any of the num methods in astm a num .
ensure that the repair achieves the minimum coating thickness specified for the item .
paint galvanized surfaces only when directed by the re .
if painting is directed treat the galvanized surface according to the manufacturers recommendations the apply the epoxy intermediate and urethane finish coats only .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit structural steel lump sum reinforced elastomeric bearing assembly unit structural bearing assembly unit shear connector unit shear connector galvanized unit steel pedestrian bridge lump sum steel grid flooring square foot section num concrete bridge deck and approaches num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete bridge decks parapets deck joint systems and approaches .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concrete num hpcnum nonshrink groutnum.a epoxy grout num.b reinforcement steelnum numbar open steel parapetnum bearing pads num preformed joint filler num preformed elastomeric joint assembliesnum strip seal expansion joint assemblies num modular expansion joint assembliesnum num num equipment provide equipment as specified sealer application systemnum pavement formsnum spreading and finishing machine for concrete bridge decksnum vibratornum slipform extrusion machinenum straightedge num pavement sawnum hotair lancenum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num joint assemblies a .
working drawings .
submit working drawings for certification for strip seal expansion joint assemblies preformed elastomeric joint assemblies and modular expansion joint systems .
as a minimum indicate the following information on the working drawings num .
plan elevation and section of the joint system for all movement ratings and roadway width limitations as well as relative dimensions and tolerances .
num .
all astm aashto or other material designations .
num .
method of installation including sequence of installation relative temperature settings setting anchorage and installation at curb lines .
num .
corrosion protection system or material .
num .
details of temporary supports for shipping and handling .
include lifting mechanisms and locations .
num .
design calculations for all structural elements .
as warranted include fatigue design calculations and strength design calculations .
indicate locations of all welded splices .
num .
design the joint system as num continuous unit without field splices .
if due to shipping or construction requirements splices are necessary indicate that the locations of the splices are to be in areas outside the main traffic lanes .
provide field splicing procedures .
num .
ensure that the removal and reinstallation of the strip seal can be accomplished from above the joint without full closure of the roadway .
num .
ensure that the expansion joint assembly seals do not protrude above the top of the joint .
use preformed neoprene strip seals that are mechanically held in place .
in addition for modular expansion joint systems incorporate the following design criteria num .
design the expansion joint system to accommodate all expected longitudinal movements as well as vertical and horizontal rotations .
incorporate strip seal glands with a maximum movement range of num inches per seal .
support each separation beam with an independent support bar that is welded to the separation beam .
suspend the support bars over the joint opening by sliding elastomeric bearings .
incorporate an equidistant control system that develops its maximum compressive force when the joint is at its maximum opening .
do not use bolted connections between the separator beams and support bars .
num .
design the splices to consist of a bolted separator beam splice .
num .
design and fatigue test the transverse separation beams support bars and other structural elements according to nchrp report num fatigue design of modular bridge expansion joints and chapter num of the aashto lrfd bridge design specification .
num .
design the elastomeric springs and bearings to be removable and replaceable .
b .
installation .
ensure that expansion joint systems are selfsupported and continuous across the full width of the deck and continue into traffic barriers and curbing .
provide to the re a copy of the manufacturers recommendations for the joint systems installation .
provide a joint installation temperature chart on the working drawings ranging from num to num f. install one of the following joint systems according to the manufacturers recommendations num num .
strip seal expansion joint assemblies .
strip seal expansion joint assemblies include molded neoprene rubber gland parallel steel rail sections and all hardware necessary to form a mechanical connection between the metal components and the bridge deck .
for strip seal expansion joint assemblies place closedcell foam backer rod in the seal cavity of the steel retainer rails before placing the deck slab concrete .
ensure that the backer rod remains in place until the rubber gland seal is installed .
do not field splice molded neoprene rubber glands or preformed elastomeric compression seal .
repair galvanized coating that is damaged before or during installation .
num .
preformed elastomeric joint assemblies .
preformed elastomeric joint assemblies include preformed elastomeric compression seal parallel steel rail sections and all hardware necessary to form a mechanical connection between the metal components and the bridge deck .
num .
modular expansion joint assemblies .
modular expansion joint assemblies include preformed neoprene strip seals that are held in place by steel edge and separation beams a support bar to support the separation beam and sliding elastomeric bearings .
these assemblies contain no bolted connections .
take precautions to protect the joint system from damage after installation .
provide a bridge or a method to protect the joint system from construction vehicle damage to the satisfaction of the re .
when installing the joints ensure that they are in the correct position during the concrete placement .
ensure that the installed joint system matches the roadway profile and finished grades .
adjust the opening at expansion joints to correspond with the installation temperature chart .
num constructing bridge decks a .
forms .
construct forms as follows num .
stayinplace sip forms .
submit working drawings for certification that include the following num .
deck reinforcement location .
num .
grade of steel .
num .
galvanizing specification .
num .
physical and section properties for all permanent steel bridge deck form sheets .
num .
locations where the forms are supported by steel flanges subject to tensile stresses .
provide form cut and fill grade sheets .
weld form supports to the flange of stringer or floor beam except in the areas where flanges are subjected to tensile stress .
ensure that sip forms do not rest directly on the top of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
fasten sip forms to form supports and ensure that a minimum bearing length of num inch at each end is achieved .
do not flamecut sip forms .
cut vertical legs for form supports at or below the bottom of the deck slab to maintain the required concrete cover for reinforcement steel at all locations .
do not use sip forms where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers or outside of the fascia stringers .
weld sip forms according to ansiaws dnum bridge welding code pertaining to fillet welds .
the contractor may use a numinch fillet weld .
do not weld flanges in tension or structural steel bridge members fabricated from nonweldable grades of steel .
repair permanently exposed form metal whose galvanized coating has been damaged as specified in num.f .
num .
removable forms .
construct removable forms as specified in num.b .
do not use shoring to support stringers along the span length where the superstructure under live load and impact loads is designed for composite action .
b. deck placement plan .
at least num days before the start of placing bridge deck concrete submit to the re for approval a plan of operation that includes the following num .
sip form cut and fill grade sheets .
num .
a screed and rail erection plan .
num .
deck grades .
num num .
sequence and rate of placing concrete .
num .
number and type of personnel performing the work .
num .
number type and model of equipment to be used in handling placing and finishing the concrete including the weight of the finishing machine .
num .
request for a change in the number location or configuration of construction joints .
num .
method of maintaining the evaporation rate below num pounds per square foot per hour .
num .
type of fog misting equipment if used .
c. meeting .
within num days before the start of deck placement conduct a meeting with the re the me and the concrete supplier to discuss the plan of operation and to coordinate the deck placement .
d. installing joint assemblies .
ensure that joint assemblies are installed as specified in num.b .
e. installing reinforcement steel .
ensure that reinforcement steel is installed as specified in num .
f. limitations of placing concrete .
comply with the limitations of placing specified in num.c except do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is above num f. if within the num hours before the concrete placement the national weather service httpwww.nws.noaa.gov locally forecasts a num percent chance or greater of precipitation during the scheduled concrete placement postpone the placement of bridge decks and pavement .
do not place concrete when the atmospheric evaporation rate is greater than num pounds per square foot per hour .
the contractor may use fog misting wind shields or other methods approved by the re to keep the evaporation rate below num pounds per square foot per hour .
if using fog misting ensure that the fog misting equipment is capable of delivering num to num gallons of water per minute at num to num pounds per square inch using a numdegree to numdegree wideangle nozzle .
position the fog nozzle num feet above the concrete surface .
do not use fog misting to apply water for finishing purposes .
immediately cease fog misting if water accumulates on the surface .
the me will measure air temperature relative humidity and wind speed at the location of the deck placement .
the me will measure concrete temperatures from the sample used for slump and air content tests .
the me will perform measurements and calculations at least once every num hours beginning num hour before concrete placement .
g. performing the dry run .
perform a dry run with the finishing machine over the full length of the bridge segment .
ensure that the screed rail supports are spaced no more than num feet apart .
adjust the screed to its finishing position before performing the dry run .
during the dry run check the height and deflection of screed rails the cover for reinforcement steel and forms .
make necessary corrections before notifying the re for inspection .
if the supports for the rails are located in the deck concrete ensure that the supports can be removed without disturbing the concrete or partially removed so that no part remains less than num inches below the finished concrete surface .
the re will not inspect the dry run until it is evident that the placement and finishing operation can be completed within the scheduled time that any required weather protective materials are in place and that all necessary finishing tools and equipment are on hand at the work site .
the re will check to ensure that elevations are within num inch of the specified elevations .
the re will check elevations longitudinally every num feet and transversely at the edges of breaklines joint assemblies gutter grades and the center of each lane and shoulder .
the re may direct placement of additional grade stakes in areas with rapid changes in grade so that intermediate longitudinal checks can be made .
once the re has approved the dry run do not make adjustments to the operation without re approval .
h. placing deck concrete .
provide work bridges or other re approved means of access to the surface of the deck for the purpose of finishing straightedging making corrections and for other operations requiring access to the surface of the deck after the passing of the screed .
before placing deck concrete construct bulkheads in the shape of the required deck crosssection .
when multiple concrete placements are required within a deck structure follow the numbered sequence shown on the plans beginning with the lowest number .
the contractor may submit a written request to the re for approval to have this requirement waived if the succeeding sections can be completed within num hours after the start of the initial section placement .
the re will not allow these requirements to be waived for deck slabs on prestressed concrete beams that are continuous for live load .
do not place a deck section until the previously placed concrete within the unit has cured for num hours .
num coordinate concrete placement and initial strikeoff by a transverse finishing machine so that initial strikeoff is between num and num feet behind the concrete placement .
deliver place and consolidate the concrete as specified in num.d at a uniform rate in a continuous operation .
ensure that stoppages of concrete placement do not exceed num minutes .
if there is a stoppage of more than num minutes the re may direct the deck segment be removed and replaced .
when placing concrete maintain a minimum rate of num cubic yards per hour for deck slabs of num cubic yards or less .
maintain a minimum rate of num cubic yards per hour for deck slabs of more than num cubic yards of concrete .
make as few passes of the machine as are necessary to obtain a smooth dense surface of the required contour .
maintain a small uniform quantity of concrete ahead of the screed on each pass .
ensure that the quantity of concrete carried ahead of the screed is not great enough to cause slipping or lifting of the finishing machine on the rails at any time .
if improper adjustment or operation of the finishing machine results in unsatisfactory consolidation reinforcement cover or surface requirement immediately correct the unsatisfactory condition .
if the supports for the rails are located in the deck concrete remove them before initial set has taken .
fill the resulting holes with deck concrete .
if the concrete has hardened fill the holes with nonshrink grout .
ensure that all deck concrete is placed before placing sidewalks curb and parapet .
i. deck slab surface texture finish .
texture concrete bridge deck slabs using a broom or burlap drag immediately after final strikeoff .
when using burlap drag attach a single full width strip to the finishing machine .
texture the concrete deck slab in a transverse direction .
clean the broom or burlap as necessary to provide a uniform texture .
provide a smooth finish within num foot of curbs and drainage structures .
provide a final finish on sidewalks and top of curbs with a finebristle broom .
j. curing .
within num minutes of texturing apply wet burlap and white polyethylene sheeting as specified in num.f and maintain for at least num days .
ensure that the water used for curing does not leave the bridge deck .
do not allow anything on the deck during the numday curing period except for personnel necessary to maintain curing materials and protective measures .
post warning tape around flatwork during the curing period .
k. underdeck inspection .
if the re determines that underdeck inspection is warranted the re will direct the removal of at least num sip panel for each span at the location and time selected .
as soon as the form is removed the re will inspect the concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if the re finds irregularities that do not justify rejection of the work submit a plan to the re for approval to repair the irregularities .
give the concrete a class num finish as specified in num.h.num .
if the re determines that the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory remove additional forms for inspection .
remove or repair unsatisfactory concrete .
if the inspection shows excessive irregularities in the slab modify the placement plan before placing additional slabs .
repair the adjacent metal forms and supports to present a neat appearance and ensure they are securely fastened .
l. saw cut grooved surfacing .
saw cut the deck no earlier than num days after placing the concrete .
saw cut before opening to traffic .
provide num approved gauges to the re to verify groove depth before sawcutting .
include the manufacturers recommendations for use with the gauges .
cut grooves using multibladed sawcutting equipment fitted with diamondtipped circular saw blades .
the re will allow the use of single blade saw equipment where necessary to complete the work as required .
cut grooves perpendicular or radial to the centerline of the traveled way .
radially groove in partialwidth passes .
limit each pass to num lane width .
ensure that grooves are between num and num inches wide and num and num inches deep .
space the blades to achieve the distance specified in table num between the centerlines of each groove to form a random pattern .
table num groove spacing num num num num num num num perform consecutive passes within num inches of the previous pass .
do not cut grooves over an area that has been already grooved or introduce a cutting blade into a groove that has been already established .
num during grooving operations the re will randomly check the groove dimensions .
if the minimum groove depth has not been achieved stop grooving operations and make the necessary adjustments .
ensure that slurry or debris from the grooving operations does not accumulate in the grooves .
continuously collect slurry and dispose of as specified in num .
ensure that the slurry does not enter the structure or highway drainage system .
m. loading the deck .
before allowing anything on the deck ensure that the deck has cured for a minimum of num days .
the re may allow the contractor to place a finishing machine on the deck num hours after placing concrete for the previous segment .
after a minimum of num days the contractor may load a total of num pounds on the deck if the deck has attained a strength of at least num pounds per square inch as determined from num set of cylinders field cured according to aashto t num .
after a minimum of num days the contractor may load more than num pounds if the deck has attained the design strength and if approval has been obtained from the department .
to obtain approval submit stress analysis calculations for the load and the location of the load on the deck .
the department will not approve stresses that exceed the design allowable by more than num percent .
if placement of the load is allowed provide matting to protect the surface from damage .
n. concrete deck surface requirements num .
acceptance testing .
construct deck slabs so that less than num percent of the measured length of the lot exceeds a numinch tolerance in num feet .
the me will test the surface of concrete bridge deck slabs with a rolling straightedge that automatically marks the length of deck surface variations that exceed the tolerance of num inch in num feet .
the re will determine conformance to the surface tolerance for concrete deck slabs in lots each lot being equal to the number of cubic yards of deck concrete placed in the designated lanes of traffic from joint assembly to joint assembly .
the re will calculate such lot quantity using the specified nominal deck thickness excluding the quantity of concrete placed in haunches end dams and diaphragms .
the re will base acceptance on the percentage of the total length of the lot having surface variation exceeding num inch in num feet this percent noncompliance being defined as the lot percent defective length .
to compute the lot percent defective length add the lengths of individual surface defects exceeding the specified tolerance and divide this sum by the total length tested then multiply by num to convert to percent .
the re will test the full extent of the lot in the longitudinal direction .
the transverse location of the test generally is in the wheelpaths of vehicle travel which are defined as the num imaginary lines located approximately num feet on each side of the centerline of the lane and extending for the full length of the lane .
if the lot percent defective length equals or exceeds num on any machine finished deck irrespective of whether such machine finishing was required or optional or num on a manually struck and finished deck the re may order any or all of the concrete in the lot to be removed replaced and retested for acceptance .
if the re allows the concrete to remain in place apply a num percent reduction to the payment request for the lot .
table num reduction per lot of deck slab concrete due to nonconformance with surface requirements lot percent defective length reduction per lot percent num num none num num num num num num num .
surface remedial measures .
regardless of the overall surface conformity of a lot of bridge deck concrete if surface deviations have a detrimental effect on deck drainage or reinforcement steel cover the re may require appropriate remedial measures to restore any or all of the deck slab surface to the required grades and surface tolerance .
when such remedial procedures are ordered by the re submit a plan detailing the intended limits of the surface restoration and the methods equipment and materials proposed for use .
after completion of the surface restoration measures the me will retest the lot containing the affected area .
o .
opening to traffic .
do not allow vehicular traffic of any kind on the deck slab until the deck has been saw cut grooved finished as specified in num.l .
num num date panel submit a sample of the date panel showing the coloring and surface finish to the re for approval .
ensure that the date panel is cast true and straight in a single unit that includes anchors .
ensure that the material used to color the concrete is nonfading .
ensure that the arrises are clean and accurate .
install the date panel into the parapet using epoxy grout .
num concrete bridge sidewalk ensure that the concrete deck has cured for at least num days before beginning sidewalk construction .
construct forms as specified in num.b .
ensure that the reinforcement steel is placed as specified in num .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
floatfinish concrete before applying a surface texture with a broom .
apply curing materials as specified in num.f and maintain for num days .
post warning tape around the sidewalk during the curing period .
follow the loading restrictions as specified in num.j .
num concrete parapet and barrier curb ensure that the concrete deck has cured for at least num days before beginning parapet or barrier curb construction .
construct moldings panel work and bevel strips true to line and grade with neatly mitered joints .
ensure that corners in the finished work are true clean cut and free from cracks spalls or other defects .
construct barrier curb using the fixed form method .
construct parapet to support bridge lighting foundations using the fixedform method .
construct parapet not supporting bridge lighting foundations using num of the following methods num .
fixedform method .
construct forms as specified in num.b .
ensure that the reinforcement steel is placed as specified in num .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
remove the forms as soon as the concrete holds its shape and immediately apply the class num finish as specified in num.h.num .
ensure that the application of the class num finish is completed within num hours of placing concrete .
num .
slipform method .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the proposed equipment methods and processes for the construction of the slipformed concrete parapet to the re for approval .
provide to the re evidence of successful history and operation of the slipform machine or other equipment .
design and construct a support system to restrain the reinforcement cage during slipforming so that displacement will not occur .
locate the reinforcement steel so that after the joints are saw cut the reinforcement steel will have the minimum concrete clear cover as shown on the plans .
ensure that the slipforming machine consolidates the freshly placed concrete in num complete pass of the machine .
ensure that the forming portion of the slipform machine is readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine .
if information on the history is not available construct a test section at least num feet long at the project limits to verify that the proposed equipment material and methods are capable of producing the required concrete parapet .
attach a grade line gauge or pointer to the machine to ensure that a continual comparison can be made between the barrier being placed and the established grade line as indicated by the offset guide line .
when using the slipform method supply concrete to the slipform machine at a uniform rate to produce a completely shaped parapet .
ensure that the machine is operated to produce consolidated concrete free from surface pits larger that num inch in diameter and num inch in depth and that requires no additional handling .
if concrete placement is interrupted protect from drying by covering the placed concrete with several layers of wet burlap .
if the interruption exceeds num minutes install a construction dam or bulkhead .
if the interruption exceeds num minutes discontinue any further placement .
the contractor may resume concrete placement at the joint beyond the bulkhead after num hours measured from the start of delay has elapsed .
if the re determines that the length of placement between the bulkhead and the next joint can not be slipformed form the section by methods other than slipforming .
remove all loose and otherwise unsatisfactory materials from the surface of the cold joints .
obtain approval from the re before using tools for this purpose .
scrub the surface with a wire broom and keep wet until new concrete is placed .
immediately before placing concrete apply the epoxy bonding coat according to the manufacturers recommendations .
within num hours of slipforming saw cut contraction joints to a maximum depth of num inch past the troweled v notch groove to prevent shrinkage cracking .
num cure using curing compound as specified num.f .
if drilling is required for subsequent construction allow the concrete to cure for a minimum of num days before drilling .
num numbar open steel parapet ensure that the deck has cured for at least num days before placing concrete for numbar open steel parapet .
place concrete for numbar open steel parapet as specified in num.d .
do not drill for numbar open steel parapet installation until the concrete has cured for at least num days .
install as shown on the plans .
num bridge approach prepare the underlying surface as specified in num .
set forms as specified in num.b place reinforcement steel as specified in num and set joint ties for the entire area to be paved at least num day before placing concrete .
set forms at grade in full contact with the underlying surface .
install longitudinal joint ties through the forms and secure in place .
ensure that concrete does not seep around the bar .
if longitudinal joint ties can not be installed before placing concrete install as specified in num.c .
check the alignment and grade elevations of the forms and joint ties and make corrections before placing the concrete .
ensure that the forms do not deviate from the required alignment by more than num inch .
reset or remove and replace forms that settle or deflect under the spreading and finishing equipment .
clean the top and face of forms and oil the face before placing concrete .
comply with the limitations of placing specified in num.f .
place concrete as specified in num.h .
apply the surface texture as specified in num.i .
cure the concrete as specified in num.j .
saw cut the surface as specified in num.l .
follow the loading restrictions as specified in num.m .
do not allow vehicular traffic of any kind on the approach until the it has been saw cut grooved finished .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ by ___ preformed elastomeric joint assembly linear foot strip seal expansion joint assembly linear foot modular expansion joint assembly linear foot concrete bridge deck cubic yard concrete bridge deck hpc cubic yard date panel unit concrete bridge sidewalk cubic yard concrete bridge sidewalk hpc cubic yard concrete bridge parapet linear foot concrete bridge parapet hpc linear foot numbar open steel parapet linear foot ___ x___ concrete barrier curb bridge linear foot concrete bridge approach cubic yard the department will include payment for reinforcement steel under the various concrete items .
the department will make payment for reinforcement steel under reinforcement steel reinforcement steel epoxy coated and reinforcement steel galvanized as specified in num .
the department will measure ___ by ___ preformed elastomeric joint assembly strip seal expansion joint assembly and modular expansion joint assembly of the various sizes by the linear foot along the centerline including the vertical face of curbs and tops of sidewalks and brush curbs .
the department will make pay adjustments for surface requirements as specified in table num and will apply to the lot volume for concrete in deck slabs and approach .
num section num bridge drainage num description this section describes the requirements for constructing scuppers inlets and downspouts for surface drainage of bridge decks .
num materials provide materials as specified bolts and bolting materialnum steel alloy pipe num gray iron casting framenum ductile iron casting gratesnum if inlet frames grates and scuppers are fabricated from steel galvanize as specified in num .
num construction num inlet frames grates and scuppers ensure that the bearing surfaces of frames and grates are machined so that the grates have uniform bearing on the frames .
ensure that the bearing surfaces are match marked before being delivered .
ensure that the frames are set flush with the deck surface .
num steel alloy pipe repair areas where galvanizing has been damaged as specified in num .
obtain re approval of the type of threaded concrete inserts for support brackets and clamp .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit inlet frame and grate unit scupper unit ___ steel alloy pipe linear foot section num bridge railing and fence num description this section describes the requirements for constructing metal railing fence and guide rail on bridges .
num materials bearing pads num bolts and bolting materialnum anchor bolts num adhesive anchor bolts num chainlink fencenum bridge railingnum ensure that the railing is fabricated to allow for minor adjustments in both horizontal and vertical directions .
num num construction num bridge railing at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for certification .
indicate material specifications for adhesive anchors washers and nuts on the working drawings .
base the design embedment of the adhesive anchor bolts on a concrete compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
ensure that the embedment depth of the adhesive anchors shown on the working drawings is sufficient to obtain the required pullout strength as required for the proof load testing as specified in num .
ensure that the railing is fabricated to allow for minor adjustments in both horizontal and vertical directions .
install num or numrail aluminum railing on top of the concrete parapet as shown on the plans .
do not use expansion type anchor bolts .
num .
castinplace type .
set anchor bolts before placing concrete using a rigid template for each anchor assembly .
when placing concrete ensure that bolts do not move and spacing is maintained between the rigid templates .
ensure that the exposed threaded ends of the anchor bolts remain clean and protected from concrete .
clean the anchor bolts before installing the specified hardware .
num .
adhesive type .
do not drill for installation until the concrete has cured for at least num days .
install adhesive anchors according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when drilling ensure that spalling does not occur and existing utilities are not damaged .
do not use a rotary hammer to drill the holes .
repair damage to the existing concrete utilities and reinforcement steel as a result of drilling .
clean and dry drill holes before and during installation of the adhesive anchors .
repair damage to galvanized coating as specified in num .
num chainlink fence for bridge erect fence as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit bridge railing ___rail aluminum linear foot bridge railing ___rail steel linear foot chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel bridge ___ ___ high linear foot chainlink fence pvccoated steel bridge ___ ___ high linear foot chainlink fence galvanized steel bridge ___ ___ high linear foot chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel bridge ___ ___ high curved top linear foot chainlink fence pvccoated steel bridge ___ ___ high curved top linear foot chainlink fence galvanized steel bridge ___ ___ high curved top linear foot section num timber structures num description this section describes the requirements for constructing structures or parts of structures other than piles composed of treated or untreated timber or a combination of both on prepared foundations .
num materials provide materials as specified round timber pilingnum timber for sheet pilingnum timber for structuresnum num timber treatmentsnum timber connectors and hardware num num construction num timber structures construct timber structures according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications and according to the details provided in the contract documents .
do not use cant hooks peaveys pikes or hooks for handling of the timber members .
num sheeting and wales submit working drawings for approval of the design of ring or shear plate timber connectors .
ensure that connectors are made of corrosionresistant metal .
include the following num .
timber and steel material designations .
num .
hardware requirements such as nails bolts nuts washers drift bolts and dowels .
num .
timber dimensions .
num .
timber connector type its dimensions and installation method .
num .
hole dimensions .
num .
bracing requirements .
refer to the special provisions for corrosion requirements for metal components .
num method of measurement the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit timber structure lump sum timber sheeting cubic foot timber wale cubic foot section num bulkhead fender and dolphin systems num description this section describes the requirements for constructing bulkhead fender and dolphin systems using concrete steel timber or composite piles .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concrete num precast structural concretenum prestressed concrete num structural steelnum steel pilesnum bolts and bolting materialnum coal tar epoxy paintnum zinc coating on steelnum sawn timber postsnum timber bearing pilesnum num timber sheet piles num timber for structuresnum timber treatment num fiber reinforced plastic lumber frplnum fiberglass reinforced plastic piles frpp num fiberglassconcrete composite piles fccp num provide tie rods plate washers turnbuckles nuts bolts washers and all other hardware in bulkheads made of steel with a dual coating system consisting of zinc coating galvanizing and coal tar epoxy paint .
num equipment provide equipment as specified impact hammersnum vibratory hammersnum leads and followers num num construction num bulkhead fender and dolphin systems a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning work submit working drawings for approval for steel or concrete sheet piling composite piles and frpl .
num .
steel and concrete sheet piling .
include design calculations member size member location and penetration depth .
num .
composite piles .
when using composite piles the contractor may use fccp or frpp .
include the following for composite piles num .
calculations and certifications showing structural properties including ultimate and flexural strength .
num .
the location of any embedded or attached lifting devices and use of pickup or support points .
num .
the location of the roughened surface where skin friction is needed between the pile and the soil .
num .
the location of detailing of any splices shoes and top of pile connections required .
num .
catalog cuts manufacturers recommendations schedules diagrams performance charts physical appearance and other characteristics .
num .
pile driving recommendations including recommended driving energies .
num .
for fccp include the outside diameter and wall thickness of the composite reinforcement tube and the concrete placement method .
num .
for frpp provide certification and lab reports from an independent testing facility that frpp meets the plastic material properties and structural properties specified in num .
num .
frpl .
include the following for frpl num .
written certification from the frpl manufacturer as specified in num that their product satisfies the requirements of num .
num .
catalog cuts manufacturers recommendations schedules diagrams performance charts physical appearance and other characteristics of frpl .
num .
lab reports from an independent testing facility including calculations that confirm that the frpl meets the ultimate strength requirements specified in num .
b .
shipping storing and handling .
ship store and handle components including fiberglass tubes protective coatings and concrete to avoid damage .
when pile tips are required attach to the pile before shipping .
store piles on a minimum of numinch wide timber cribbing arranged to support and to maintain straightness within the specified tolerance .
store components so that they may be easily inspected .
when storing components protect from exposure to extreme heat or impact .
only use fabric slings to move composite timber and concrete materials .
c. coating steel .
apply coal tar epoxy paint immediately after the installation of all connections except for tie rods that do not have threaded ends .
paint unthreaded tie rods at least num hours before installation .
clean galvanized num surfaces receiving coal tar epoxy paint according to sspcsp num .
ensure that galvanizing is not damaged during the cleaning process .
blast clean surfaces of sheeting plates and wales according to sspcsp num .
coat the surfaces with coal tar epoxy paint as follows num .
immediately after blast cleaning apply num coats of coal tar epoxy paint at a maximum coverage rate of num square feet per gallon .
ensure that the total dry film thickness of the num coats is less than num mils at any point .
apply the coating by brush roller or spray .
the contractor may thin the first coat with a maximum of num percent of solvent according to the coating manufacturer however the contractor may not thin the second coat .
allow the first coat to thoroughly dry before applying the second coat .
allow the second coat to dry and harden before handling the steel .
num .
clean damaged or rejected areas of coating of foreign or loose material and promptly recoat the area .
remove the loose or damaged coating in the surrounding area and brush the adjacent surface of the remaining sound film with methyl isobutyl ketone to provide a good bonding surface for the new coats .
num .
allow the top coat to cure for at least num hours before driving .
d. constructing bulkhead fender and dolphin systems .
when constructing with timber drive nails flush with the surface of the wood .
ensure that driving does not cause hammer marks in wood surfaces .
drift sharpen the lower ends of timber sheet piling to wedge against the adjacent timbers .
if the tops are battered in driving leave slightly high and then cut off at the required elevation .
after cutting coat the ends of sheeting members and wales with num applications of coal tar epoxy paint .
drive piles as specified in num.b .
the contractor may use lighter driving equipment or vibratory pile drivers .
ensure that the completed piling is vertical in line driven to the prescribed depth cut off to a straight line at the shown elevation and watertight at the joints .
ensure frpl is cut beveled drilled countersunk and otherwise fabricated according to manufacturers recommendations .
set material accurately to the required levels and lines with members plumb and true and accurately cut and fitted .
securely attach frpl to substrate by anchoring and fastening as shown on plans .
e. extensions and splices .
splice piles as specified in num .
f. cutoffs and cappings .
cut off and cap piles as specified in num.e .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit concrete sheet piling square foot steel sheet piling square foot timber sheet piling square foot composite pile linear foot fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber cubic foot the department will measure fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber frpl in cubic feet computed on the basis of volume of the shortest commercially available length that is placed .
the department will measure the square footage of concrete sheet piling steel sheet piling and timber sheet piling by multiplying the average height and length of sheeting that is driven .
the department will determine the average height by extending a line from the bottom of the excavation to a vertical plane of the top of sheeting .
num section num sign support structures num description this section describes the requirements for constructing sign support structures .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concretenum reinforcement steelnum sign structuresnum anchor boltsnum electrical conduit and fittingsnum num equipment provide equipment as specified vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num sign structures a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning work submit working drawings for certification .
b .
storage and handling .
load transport unload and erect structural materials so that the metal is kept clean and free from injury in handling .
store structural materials above the ground on platforms skids or other supports .
keep the structural materials free from accumulation of dirt oil acids or other foreign matter .
c. erection plan .
at least num days before erecting posts tower shafts and trusses submit a plan to the re showing the proposed equipment to be used .
include calculations and lift points to maintain the truss assembly in plumb position during placement detailed erection instructions and drawings of all structures and the proposed scheme for traffic control during the erection of the towers and trusses .
ensure that the plan includes the method to install walkways luminaires signs and miscellaneous attachments within the same numhour period that the trusses are erected unless otherwise approved by the re .
d. excavating .
excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
e. placing concrete for pedestals .
set anchor bolts into a template to maintain alignment and elevation .
secure in position to prevent displacement while placing concrete .
before placing the concrete place reinforcement steel as specified in num and conduit .
ensure that concrete placement complies with the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
cure concrete as specified in num.f .
f. installing electrical material .
provide and install galvanized steel conduit ells in pedestals .
where this conduit is not to be extended to a junction box terminate the lower end of each ell num feet from the face of the pedestal and num inches below grade and cap with a standard galvanized steel pipe cap .
the upper end of each ell shall project above the pedestal for a sufficient distance to terminate at the level of the bottom of the handhole in the sign support post or tower shaft or at a maximum of num inches below such level .
terminate the ell by ground bonding bushing with closure disk in conduit not to be extended .
num where a cable passes through a hole or runs along a surface at any point on the complete assembly ensure holes and surfaces are deburred and free of sharp edges or protuberances that may damage the cable .
g. erecting posts trusses and tower structures .
straighten any deformed structural material before being laid out punched drilled or otherwise worked on in the shop .
the re will reject structural material with sharp kinks or bends .
verify bolt alignment before erecting towers .
do not erect posts and tower shafts on the completed pedestals until approved by the re .
backfill footings before erection .
num .
trusses .
connect the truss abutting chord splices according to subsection num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
provide num working platforms that allow the bolt assembly tightening from opposite sides of the structure .
provide num impact wrenches .
sequentially tighten by initiating and progressing the tightening of the bolts in a pattern whereby a numdegree opposite side repetition is maintained .
sequentially tighten each bolt and nut to the same calibrated increment .
install highstrength steel bolts as specified in num.e .
num .
posts and tower shafts .
clean and lubricate threads of anchor bolts and nuts before installing post or tower shaft .
ensure that the top of the concrete pedestals or caissons is free of dirt or other foreign materials .
install the top and bottom bolt assemblies as shown on the plans and set level and as specified in num.e .
after erecting the posts or tower shafts and tightening all nuts as outlined above add a second nut to each anchor bolt and adjust snug tight .
the contractor may use self locking nuts to maintain the connection .
after installing the second nut or selflocking nut adjust the leveling nuts to a snug tight condition .
snug tight is defined as the tightness that exists when all surfaces on the joint are in firm contact with one another .
leave the space between the top of the pedestal and the bottom of the post open .
at least num days before erecting vms structures provide num stainless steel mounting ubolts per lot to the njdot bureau of materials .
verify the location of an electrical power source in the field before foundation construction and before fabrication of the structure .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit cantilever sign support structure no.___ unit bridge mounted sign support structure no .
___ unit butterfly sign support structure no .
___ unit overhead sign support structure no .
___ unit the department will make payment for excavation as specified in num .
the department will make payment for concrete and reinforcement steel as specified in num .
the department will make payment for load bearing piles as specified in num .
section num retaining walls num description this section describes the requirements for constructing castinplace retaining walls prefabricated modular wall systems mechanically stabilized earth mse wall systems and other alternate retaining wall systems .
num num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num soil aggregate inum num soil aggregate inum num concretenum mortar num curing materials num precast concrete unitsnum reinforcement steelnum welded wire reinforcementnum structural steel plates and bars num highstrength steel bolts num coal tar epoxy paintnum preformed joint filler num joint sealer hotpourednum subsurface drainage geotextilenum hdpe geomembranenum waterstopsnum provide soil reinforcement strips according to astm a num grade num .
provide tie strips according to astm a num grade num .
num equipment provide equipment as specified vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num proprietary retaining walls a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for approval that include at a minimum the following num .
design calculations giving complete information as to the proposed method of fabrication and erection of precast units and related components .
num .
general notes design parameters soil characteristics and factors of safety .
num .
an elevation view of the wall showing elevations at the top of the wall the beginning and at the end .
num .
plan view of the wall showing the offset from the construction baseline to face of wall units at all changes in horizontal alignment .
num .
distance from front of wall to the extreme limit of module .
num typical sections of the wall indicating how internal drainage and surface drainage behind the wall is handled .
typical crosssections of cut and fill sections .
limits and extent of select granular backfill material placed above original ground .
location of proposed ground line .
num .
panel or unit length and size and designations .
num .
a numbered panel layout for fabrication and erection purposes .
num .
typical panels as well as special panels such as at bends dimensions necessary to construct the member the location of reinforcement steel in the member and the location of reinforcement attachment devices that are embedded in the panels .
num .
designation of breaks in vertical alignments and elevations at whole stations and at numfoot increments and treatment .
num num .
all details for footings and leveling pads including step details locations and elevations and actual maximum bearing pressure .
num .
architectural details such as special facing finish texture and color .
num .
the location of the proposed final ground line .
num .
row limits and their relationship to the wall with offsets and stations to corners .
num .
location of any noise walls or sign structures near the wall by station and offsets .
num .
centerline of any drainage structures or utilities behind and passing through or under walls .
num .
location of all piles on any adjoining structures foundation plans with details to avoid any conflict .
num .
connections to barriers copings signs lights railing fences noise barriers or any other element .
num .
details for the construction of walls and soil reinforcement around obstructions including bridge supports drainage facilities sign footings or any other element .
num .
details for required electrical systems including highway lighting bases junction boxes and conduit .
num .
limits and extent of common structure volume such as excavation volume of concrete reinforcement steel and backfill .
num .
numbers and types of precast unitspanels .
num .
manufacturers recommendations including suggested sequence of construction .
b .
shipping handling and storing .
ensure that the precast units have cured for at least num hours and have attained the minimum numday compressive strength before shipping .
provide galvanized handling devices according to astm a num .
store transport hoist and handle units to prevent cracking or damage .
after galvanizing coat attachment surfaces not to be embedded in concrete with coal tar epoxy paint .
replace or repair units damaged by improper storing transporting or handling .
c. wall foundation .
excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
grade the foundation for the structure level for a width that exceeds the length of the soil reinforcement by at least num feet .
place concrete as specified in num.d for an unreinforced concrete leveling footing or provide a precast concrete leveling pad according to the manufacturers recommendations .
before placing wall units install underdrains and drainage pipes .
d. installing .
provide num copies of the manufacturers recommendations to the re .
if a section of wall is to be castin place construct the section as specified num.d .
obtain re approval of the foundation for the structure before beginning erection .
install the units according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for erection handle units with lifting devices set into the upper edge of the panels .
place units in a horizontal course .
do not place the subsequent course until the previous course is backfilled within num inches of the top of the course .
provide external bracing for the initial course .
while erecting each course examine line and grade and correct deviations to prevent cumulative inaccuracies in alignment .
vertical tolerance and horizontal alignment tolerance shall not exceed num inch when measured along a straightedge .
install joint filler and rubber pads according to the manufacturers recommendations .
close joints at corners or angle points .
ensure that all wall units above the first course interlock with the lower courses .
vertical joint openings on the walls front face shall not exceed num inch .
the front face vertical joints shall have numinch wide strips of subsurface drainage geotextile behind each joint starting num feet below grade .
e. back of wall drainage .
place a stone pocket subsurface drainage geotextile and an numinch corrugated steel underdrain pipe as shown on the plans .
when constructing weep holes place ports or vents for equalizing hydrostatic pressure below low water .
use num inch pvc or unreinforced concrete drain pipe as forms for weep holes through concrete .
f. backfilling .
for mse walls place reinforcement perpendicular to the face of the wall unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed .
before placing soil reinforcement compact the backfill material as specified in num.g .
for modular bin walls fill wall units num feet or less in height in num lift and then thoroughly compact with a vibratory tamping device .
fill wall units more than num feet in height in num approximately equal lifts and thoroughly compact after each layer is placed .
num backfill after erecting each course of wall units .
verify that the reinforcements and wall units are not damaged disturbed or misaligned while backfilling .
correct misalignment and remove and replace damaged units of the wall units before placing the next course .
backfill using num of the following materials num .
soil aggregate inum or soil aggregate inum and coarse aggregate no .
num .
for mse walls use inum soil aggregate .
the contractor may use inum soil aggregate or no .
num coarse aggregate in place of inum soil aggregate for modular walls .
do not exceed num inches loose measurement for the maximum lift thickness of the backfill .
decrease this lift thickness to obtain the specified density .
the me will determine the optimum moisture content as specified in aashto t num method c. ensure that the moisture content of the backfill is uniform throughout each layer and has a placement moisture content that is less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
remove and rework backfill that has a placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content until the moisture content is uniformly acceptable throughout the entire layer .
ensure that backfill placed within num foot of a drainage structure or utility does not have any particle greater than num inches in maximum dimension .
num .
coarse aggregate .
do not exceed num inch lift thickness of coarse aggregate .
place subsurface drainage geotextile at the interface of the coarse aggregate and regular roadway materials and embankments .
at each reinforcement strip level level and compact the coarse aggregate before placing the reinforcement .
g. compacting .
compact backfill material without damaging disturbing or misaligning the wall units before placing the next block level .
roughly level each course of backfill to an elevation approximately num inches above the level of the next course of units .
compact in a direction parallel to the wall .
for mse walls do not use sheepsfoot or gridtype rollers for compacting backfill within the limits of the soil reinforcement .
compact for the specified material as follows num .
soil aggregate inum or soil aggregate inum .
with the exception of the numfoot zone directly behind the units compact inum soil aggregate or inum soil aggregate with large smooth drum vibratory rollers using the density control method as specified in num.d .
within num feet of the wall use small single or double drum hand operated walkbehind vibratory rollers or walkbehind vibrating plate compactors .
make at least num passes .
num .
coarse aggregate .
to provide the proper density of the broken stone compact by making at least num passes with a vibratory roller that has a total operating weight of num to num tons .
set the roller in the vibratory mode between num and num mph .
within num feet of the wall use small single or double drum hand operated walkbehind vibratory rollers or walkbehind vibrating plate compactors .
make at least num passes .
when there is evidence of wall displacement or disturbance compact with a smooth drum static roller .
at the end of each days operation slope the last placed layer of backfill away from the wall units to direct runoff of rainwater away from the wall face .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the work site .
ensure that the overall vertical tolerance of wall does not exceed num inch per num feet of wall height .
h. hdpe geomembrane liner for mse walls .
deliver hdpe geomembrane liner systems and store to prevent damage to the material before installation .
before placing hdpe liner ensure that the area to be lined is smooth and free of sharp objects or debris .
do not use equipment or tools that may damage the hdpe liner while handling moving or installing .
place the hdpe liner below the pavement and just above the first row of reinforcements .
slope the hdpe liner to drain away from the wall units .
align seams parallel to the line of maximum slope .
overlap seams at least num feet and seam according to the manufacturers recommendations .
conduct field testing of seams according to the manufacturers specifications to verify satisfactory seaming conditions .
num when backfilling prevent damage to the hdpe liner system .
do not allow equipment or traffic within num feet of the hdpe liner .
slope the last placed level of backfill away from the wall units to direct runoff of rainwater away from the wall face .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the work site .
num castinplace retaining walls place reinforcement steel as specified in num .
construct concrete as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit retaining wall location no .
___ square foot retaining wall castinplace location no .
___ square foot the department will measure retaining walls by the square foot .
the area measured is the product of the average height determined by extending the final ground lines at the top and bottom of the wall to a vertical plane of the front face of wall and the total length of wall shown .
section num temporary structures num description this section describes the requirements for constructing and removing temporary structures .
num materials the contractor may use any material or combination of materials that are approved with the working drawings .
num construction num temporary structures a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for approval .
b. erection plan .
at least num days before beginning work submit to the re a plan that includes the proposed equipment detailed erection instructions and drawings of all structures and the proposed scheme for traffic control during the erection and use .
c. structures .
for overpass and waterbody structures construct to provide horizontal and vertical clearance that is at least equal to the clearances provided by the existing structure .
if there is no existing structure construct the temporary structure to provide horizontal and vertical clearance that is at least equal to the clearances provided by the new structure .
remove temporary structures after the new work is open to traffic .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit temporary structure oneway lump sum temporary structure twoway lump sum temporary structure pedestrian bridge lump sum the department will pay num percent of the lump sum price bid when the temporary structure is opened to traffic .
the department will pay the remaining num percent when the temporary structure has been removed .
num division num structure rehabilitation section num bridge deck rehabilitation num description this section describes the requirements for repairing or scarifying existing concrete bridge decks .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregatenum fine aggregatenum concretenum quicksetting patch materials num curing materials num reinforcement steelnum rebar coupling devices num num equipment provide equipment as specified spreading and finishing machine for concrete bridge decksnum vibratornum scarification equipmentnum straightedge num mechanical sweeper num pavement sawnum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum mobile mixer num smallbatch mixernum submit technical data sheets for the proposed pneumatic hammers to the re for approval .
num construction num repair of concrete deck a deck condition survey .
the re will perform the deck condition survey before scarification if scheduled and after the removal of any existing hma overlay and waterproofing membrane .
submit written notice to the re at least num days before the work site is available for a deck condition survey .
the department will schedule surveys during daylight hours unless the working time is restricted in the contract .
the re will perform surveys only if the ambient temperature has been above num f for at least num hours before the beginning of the survey and only if the deck is dry .
the re will use the data obtained to determine the repair limits .
b. sawcut and removal .
when type c repair is specified or full depth repair is required provide temporary shielding as specified in num to prevent debris from falling below the deck .
saw cut repair areas to a num inch depth .
remove loose and disintegrated concrete from the areas to be repaired to a sound concrete surface .
ensure that the remaining concrete is not damaged during concrete removal .
ensure that the reinforcement steel is not damaged or debonded during concrete removal .
the contractor may remove concrete or prepare and shape repair areas with num power chipping or hand tools .
do not use pneumatic hammers heavier than num pounds .
the contractor may start such tools in the vertical position but must immediately tilt to a numdegree operational angle .
do not operate pneumatic hammers and chipping tools at an angle exceeding num degrees relative to the surface of the deck slab .
do not use pneumatic hammers heavier than num pounds for chipping areas directly below the top longitudinal reinforcement steel or within num inches of the primary girder reinforcement steel such as stirrups in prestressed concrete girder configurations .
remove concrete to the depth specified for the following type of repair .
num .
type b repair .
for type b repair remove delaminated deteriorated and designated deck concrete to a minimum depth of num inch below the bottom of the top layer of existing reinforcement steel to a maximum depth of num percent of the thickness of the existing concrete deck .
the re may require the contractor to remove sound concrete to achieve the limits of the designated repairs .
num .
type c repair .
for type c repair remove delaminated deteriorated and designated deck concrete for the full depth of the existing deck .
the re may require the contractor to remove sound concrete to achieve the limits of the designated repairs .
collect the concrete and reuse as specified in num.a .
c. cleaning and splicing reinforcement steel .
clean corroded uncoated reinforcement steel by sandblasting waterblasting or wire brushing .
for coated steel clean areas where the coating is damaged by wire brushing and repair the coating according to aashto m num .
for reinforcement steel that has lost num percent or more of its original crosssectional area splice in or couple new epoxycoated reinforcement steel of the same size .
lap the reinforcement steel at least num bar diameters from each end of the damaged area and wire tie together .
if necessary perform additional chipping of adjacent concrete to provide for this lap .
where reinforcement steel is broken or missing lap new bars at least num bar diameters from each end of the break .
d. patching .
the contractor may use class a concrete or type ia or ib quicksetting patch material whichever is specified .
for type c repair provide forms for placing the patch material .
num .
class a concrete .
perform patching within the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete as specified in num.d.num.b consolidate and strikeoff as specified in num.d.num.c and texture with a broom .
cure the repair areas as specified in num.f .
do not place traffic equipment or other loading on the patch material until the concrete has cured num hours and has attained a minimum strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from num test cylinders cast during placement and field cured .
num .
quick setting patch .
for type ia or ib quicksetting patch material place according to the manufacturers recommendations .
wet cure the patched area using wet burlap as specified in num.f.num immediately after placing and finishing .
keep the patched area covered for num hours .
do not open repair to traffic until compressive strength as measured by the average of num test cylinders is more than num pounds per square inch .
if the required compressive strength is not met by the time the roadway must be opened to traffic open to traffic .
remove and replace the repair during the next available roadway closure .
num scarification before beginning concrete removal perform a field survey for each stage of construction to establish existing grades and cross slopes and determine finished grades and cross slopes .
take elevations longitudinally every num feet and transversely at the gutterlines breaklines and the center of each lane and shoulder .
the re may direct additional elevation checks in areas with rapid changes in grade so that intermediate longitudinal checks can be made .
submit the field survey to the re num days before scarifying .
scarify the surface and ensure that the existing transverse and longitudinal joints are not damaged .
remove concrete and other materials that result from scarifying by hand mechanical sweeper or vacuum and reuse as specified in num.a .
do not use water or air to remove the scarified material .
if the re designates additional areas of deteriorated concrete for repair after scarification repair the areas as specified in num .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit repair of concrete deck type ___ square foot scarification square yard at bridge deck repair areas outlined as either type b or type c repair on the plans or at locations designated the department will make final payment for each outlined area for only one of the num repair types as determined by the final depth as measured in the field and as specified in the construction details regardless of original designation or preparatory work for another repair type .
section num pressure injection sealing num description this section describes the requirements for repairing cracks in concrete using pressure injection sealing .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified epoxy injection material num use an epoxy crack sealant recommended by the epoxy injection material manufacturer .
num equipment provide equipment as specified epoxy resin injection equipment num submit technical data sheets for the proposed core stopper drill or an equivalent drill to the re for approval .
num construction num pressure injection sealing a .
crack repair survey .
the re will examine the structure to verify the repair limits shown on the plans .
at least num days before the start of crack repair notify the re in writing and make the work site available for this examination .
the re may increase or decrease the limits of repair based on the examination .
the re will schedule surveys during daylight hours unless the working time is restricted in the contract .
b .
preparing for repair .
remove deteriorated damaged and loose concrete from the crack area .
drill port holes at numfoot intervals along the crack .
perform additional surface preparation requirements according to the epoxy manufacturers recommendations .
c. sealing surface cracks .
seal the surface of the crack with an epoxy crack sealant .
ensure that this sealer does not obstruct the port holes for the pressure injected epoxy resin and is capable of containing the injected epoxy resin .
ensure that the sealant is hard before injecting the epoxy resin adhesive .
d. injecting epoxy resin adhesive .
mix and apply the epoxy resin adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations and the following .
begin by injecting the lowest entry port and continue until the epoxy adhesive has reached the next port hole in the crack .
stop injection and immediately seal the port hole before moving the injection to the next port hole .
continue the operation by injecting the epoxy resin adhesive into the next port hole in the crack .
continue the operation until the crack is filled .
num e. finishing the surface .
when the crack has been filled and the epoxy resin adhesive has cured grind smooth the surface of the crack repair area to match the surrounding concrete .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit pressure injection concrete cracks linear foot section num pneumatically applied mortar num description this section describes the requirements for removing and restoring deteriorated concrete with pneumatically applied mortar .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified fine aggregatenum cement num curing materialsnum reinforcement steelnum waternum num equipment submit technical data sheets for the proposed pneumatic hammers to the re for approval .
num construction num pneumatically applied mortar a .
limits of repair .
the re will examine the structure to verify the repair limits shown on the plans .
submit written notice to the re at least num days before the work site is available for examination .
the re may increase or decrease the limits of repair based on the examination .
the re will schedule surveys during daylight hours unless the working time is restricted in the contract .
b .
preparing and cleaning .
remove deteriorated concrete to a sound surface and at least num inch beyond the first mat of reinforcement steel .
do not use pneumatic hammers heavier than nominal numpound class num pounds maximum to remove the concrete .
for abutment pier seat or column repairs do not extend removal under the bearing seats without approval of the re .
clean and replace reinforcement steel as specified in num.c .
chip concrete encasement cavities so their sides are perpendicular to the exposed surface for at least num inch in depth .
remove loose particles from the areas receiving mortar by flushing or scouring with compressed air jets c. test panels .
construct test panels using the equipment materials and mix proportions proposed for each type of repair on the project .
construct test panels that are at least num num num inches for each mix for each type of repair and for each shooting position to be encountered on the job including the overhead position .
construct test panels to the same thickness as the repair but not less than num inches thick .
apply the mortar for the test panels against similar support conditions to simulate actual field conditions for concrete repairs .
the me will mark the test panels at the time of application .
field cure panels in the same manner as the work for num days .
deliver the test panels to the me after the field cure is complete .
num the me will take num cores from each test panel .
if the average compressive strength at num days is less than num pounds per square inch the test panel fails .
modify the mix proportions or the shooting procedure and construct a new test panel for approval of the repair .
d. applying mortar .
protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon underneath or adjacent to the structure and all portions of the structure against damage or disfigurement by spatters and splashes .
if re determines that the contractors method is deficient cease applying mortar and submit working drawings for approval detailing a new method .
apply mortar according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that successive layers fully bond to the previous layer during application .
blend the edges of the repair area to meet the existing surface .
immediately remove mortar dropped or splattered on adjacent surfaces the superstructure and the substructure .
e. curing .
after applying the final layer of mortar apply num coats of curing compound each at a rate of num gallon per num square feet of surface in a continuous uniform film with poweroperated pressure spraying equipment .
apply the second coat between num and num minutes of applying the first coat .
if the method of applying the curing compound produces a nonuniform film discontinue application and correct procedure .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit pneumatically applied mortar square feet section num painting existing bridges num description this section describes the requirements for cleaning and painting structural steel and metal surfaces on existing bridges using an epoxy mastic coating system or an organic zinc coating system .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified structural steel paintnum use an organic zinc paint system or epoxy mastic paint system as shown on the plans .
use a reclaimable abrasive blast cleaning medium capable of providing the specified anchor profile .
if the re determines that work site conditions prohibit the use of a reclaimable abrasive medium the contractor may use low dusting silicafree abrasives .
ensure that the ph level of the abrasive is between num and num .
at least num days before blast cleaning submit samples of the proposed abrasive to the re for approval .
num equipment ensure that equipment that uses compressed air has oil traps and moisture separators installed in the air supply lines .
change the traps and separators on a regular basis according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that compressed air complies with the requirements of the blotter test according to astm d num .
only use approved rubber rollers on scaffold fastenings or other protective devices that will not mar the coated surface .
num num construction num pollution control system at least num days before removing paint submit a pollution control system to the re for approval .
keep a copy of the approved plan on project limits .
submit updates to the plan to the re for approval as necessary to reflect new information new practices or procedures changing site environmental conditions or other situations that may affect site workers .
do not change or deviate from the approved pollution control system without the approval of the re .
the pollution control system applies to all personnel entering the project limits .
ensure that the pollution control system and any other equipment does not encroach upon the bridge clearances over traveled roads or navigable water unless approved by the re .
if any part of the pollution control system fails to function at the required level of efficiency during operations immediately suspend the operations .
do not resume work until modifications to correct the cause of the failure have been made and approved by the re .
if the failure is due to adverse weather conditions such as high winds immediately suspend the operations until the weather conditions become favorable .
include the containment plan the waste disposal plan the lead health and safety plan and the equipment storage plan in the pollution control system .
ensure that the certified industrial hygienist cih certifies monthly in writing to the re that the contractor is in compliance with the pollution control system .
num .
containment plan .
describe in detail the method of providing erecting maintaining and removing enclosures as required to contain and collect waste resulting from the removal of coatings in the preparation of steel surfaces for painting .
ensure that the containment system is at minimum a levelnum containment system according to sspc guide numi con .
ensure that visible emissions meet or exceed section num level num emissions .
containment may consist of local systems such as small enclosures where power tools are used or certain enclosed vacuum blasting techniques where suction captures the abrasive and paint residue directly from the surface removes paint and fine particles and returns the abrasive to the blast nozzle .
submit working drawings for approval that include at a minimum the following num .
specific design of the containment plans to be employed .
num .
types of materials used .
num .
method for reclaiming the blasting medium .
num .
design of hangers .
num .
assembly and disassembly procedures .
num .
an analysis of maximum loading and deflection signed and sealed by a professional engineer that will be added to the existing structure by the proposed system when put into use .
ensure that the proposed system does not induce a load on the superstructure or substructure that creates an adverse overstress condition or otherwise induces an undesirable effect on the structure and affected members .
num .
type of solidrigid floor specify maximum load .
detail how the floor will be constructed dimensions and how funnels may be used .
when using the ground as solidrigid flooring describe how it will be secured and incorporated into the containment enclosure .
when using a floating or suspended platform include details about its construction .
describe how waste is to be offloaded from the platform how the platform is to be tied off and how storage drums are to be handled if they are to be loaded onto the platform .
num .
type of dust proof and wind resistant enclosures designed to contain as well as facilitate the collection of waste resulting from the surface preparation .
num .
type of connection to structure .
do not weld obtain re approval before bolting .
num .
type of lighting inside the containment structure during blasting and inspection .
num .
type of dust collection equipment .
design air flow inside the containment structure to meet applicable osha standards .
describe how the dust collector will be incorporated in the containment enclosure and how makeup air will be provided .
num .
type of vacuum truck or equivalent method to capture contain collect store and dispose of all rust and paint particles dust and all other contaminated material generated by the work either in the vicinity of or within the containment system .
num .
the runoff route from existing deck drains through the enclosure .
num include an emergency management plan outlining specific procedures to be followed in the event that the primary containment system fails to contain the materials and results in pollution of the environment .
provide details of equipment materials and methods that will effectively contain material that escapes during a failure of the primary system .
provide the necessary components of the emergency management plan at the project limits at all times when the work is in progress .
also include an outline of people to be notified in the event of a failure resulting in pollution of the environment according to the rules and regulations of the applicable agencies .
num .
waste disposal plan .
describe in detail the means of handling storing transporting and disposing of the waste generated by the removal of the existing paint systems .
include the following num .
description and quantity of storage containers sized for the job that conform to num cfr num and num .
ensure that each storage container has a protective liner and removable lid .
num .
the proposed method to contain the stored material and all necessary permits or licenses required .
num .
the location and design of temporary storage and loading facilities .
num .
commitment letters from properly licensed and insured waste transporters the name and epa identification number of the transporter name address and telephone number of responsible contact for the transporter list of all types and sizes of transportation vehicles and equipment to be used transportation methods and procedures for transporting waste materials necessary permit authorizations and previous experience in performing the type of work .
num .
the transportationstoragedisposal tsd facility including a commitment letter from the tsd facility indicating that it has the capacity to accept the estimated volume of waste material and stating that it will be open for business during the contract duration to accept the estimated volume of waste materials specified herein .
also submit at least num alternative tsd facilities in the event the approved facility ceases to accept waste materials generated under the contract .
num .
lead health and safety plan lhasp .
employ a cih to develop the lhasp .
include in the plan the means to implement and maintain the protocols necessary for protecting personnel from hazards associated with the project operations and activities .
establish and describe how policies programs and procedures that are necessary to comply with all federal state and local laws rules and regulations will be maintained .
do not modify or change this plan without approval of the cih and the re .
at a minimum include the following elements a .
introduction .
include scope structure locations names addresses and telephone numbers for the contractors project manager field superintendent cih occupation physician health and safety officer hso and available emergency assistance organization and responsibilities and an approval sheet with the signatures of the project manager field superintendent and qualified person .
b .
physician requirements .
qualification and responsibilities of the physician certified in occupational medicine by the american board of preventive medicine that will provide the medical surveillance removal and protection program .
c. hso requirements .
qualifications of hso including laboratory experience studying field conditions formal experience necessary to perform technical monitoring consulting testing and inspecting and the authority to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate the hazards .
d. exposure monitoring procedures .
ensure that no employee is exposed to lead at concentrations greater than num micrograms per cubic meter of air averaged over an numhour period .
include the method of compliance for determining if any employee is or will be potentially exposed to airborne concentrations of lead at or above the action level .
the contractor may use the task trigger method outlined in num cfr numdnum until the actual exposure assessment is documented .
e. protective equipment .
provide the following num .
type and number of respiratory protection according to num cfr num f. num .
type and number of protective work clothing and equipment according to num cfr num g numa num and num num f. facilities .
provide the following num .
hygiene facilities and practices including changing and showering facilities .
num .
eating facilities for employees exposed above the permissible exposure level without regard to respirators including method to ensure that employees do not eat or drink in contaminated areas according to num cfr num i num num and num .
num .
method to keep all work sites clean and free of lead to the extent that the work process allows according to num cfr num h num and num .
only use a vacuum with a h.e.p.a .
filter or wet cleaning methods when removing lead dust .
g. medical surveillance program .
include removal and protection procedures according to num cfr num j .
include at a minimum the following num .
method of providing a preemployment physical exam for all employees that consist of a medical questionnaire that ascertains previous medical history related to lead exposure and symptomatology of lead exposure or exposure to any other toxins blood lead and zinc protophrphyrin zpp counts together with hemoglobin and hematocrit blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine physicians approval for employee to wear negative pressure respirators and a thorough handson physical exam that includes special attention to systems affected by lead such as renal hematological neurological gastrointestinal cardiovascular and reproductive .
num .
method of conducting monthly blood lead sampling and zpp counts and evaluating and posting the levels monthly at the project limits for the duration of the leadexposed portion of any project .
num .
method of removing workers whose blood lead levels exceed num micrograms per num grams of whole blood from further airborne lead exposure in excess of num micrograms per cubic meter of air averaged over an numhour period based upon biological monitoring or a physicians determination .
num .
method for retraining employees and upgrading respiratory protection for employees whose blood lead levels exceed num micrograms per num grams of whole blood at any time during their employment .
num .
method of conducting post employment or yearly physical exams whichever comes first for employees who had blood lead levels in excess of num micrograms per num grams of whole blood at any time during their employment .
this examination shall include as a minimum blood lead and zpp counts and a thorough handson physical .
num .
ensure that any physician who provides these physical exams and tests has been made aware of the employees job duties any airborne lead levels the inherent lead exposure and if applicable all previous medical history and blood levels generated by other physicians .
num .
name and address of new jersey clinical laboratory approved by osha that has demonstrated proficiency in blood lead analyses to conduct blood monitoring .
num .
method of providing copies of individual blood lead levels and zpp levels and explaining results to the employee within num days of receiving the results .
h. information distribution .
provide the following num .
employee information and training procedures that inform employees of the hazards of lead and train in the precautions to take when working with lead .
num .
system of posting warning sign where exposure is above the permissible exposure limit .
use illuminated clean and visible signs according to num cfr num and num .
num .
record keeping including method to maintain and provide employee access to exposure records and their individual medical records .
i .
protection procedures .
procedures to protect personnel and the general public in case of emergencies including potential emergency situations such as but not limited to overt personnel exposure personnel injury fire or explosion and environmental incident .
j .
chain of command .
include the chain of command and responsibilities for emergency situations including a contingency plan for largescale emergencies such as site evacuation or other situations requiring significant outside emergency services and interactions .
num k. decontamination procedures .
provide a detailed decontamination method .
num .
equipment storage plan .
describe in detail the locations of nonworking hour storage of equipment to be utilized the type and number of additional and special traffic control devices needed to safely maintain the storage area and any permits and local permissions if required .
ensure that the plan is site specific for each stage of operation and provide an escort vehicle to assist slowmoving equipment entering or exiting the work zone .
num cleaning and painting a .
protection of environment structure person and property .
protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon underneath or adjacent to the bridge and all portions of the bridge superstructure and substructure against damage or disfigurement by spatters splashes and smirches of paint or paint materials .
provide canopies and drop cloths for such protection .
do not use drilling holes field welding or bolted connections to secure the containment system to the bridge structure .
the contractor is hereby advised that the existing paint systems on the bridges may include red lead or basic lead silica chromate paint or both red lead and basic silica chromate paint as components .
for contracts that involve lead paint abatement ensure that the personnel that perform the lead paint abatement are trained and certified in the applicable workers programs that concern health and safety compliance and that concern environmental regulations regarding lead abatement .
the department of health and senior services shall train personnel .
the department of community affairs division of codes and standards shall certify personnel .
ensure that only trained and certified personnel perform lead abatement activities .
only use lead abatement practices as described in the industrial lead paint removal handbook .
the department of labor will monitor contracts for compliance with the training and certification requirements .
b .
cleaning .
remove signs mounted on the fascia beams of the structures before cleaning .
mount vertical under clearance signs on the fascia beam or containment system until the cleaning is finished .
ensure that the containment enclosure extends from the bottom of the deck down to ground level or to a solid work platform .
frame and fasten materials for the enclosure to prevent billowing or opening from the weather .
when using tarpaulins ensure that all edges and seams have a flap that clamps over the connecting edges for the entire enclosure .
fasten these flaps along the tarpaulin edges to prevent dust from escaping .
do not begin cleaning or blasting until the pollution control system and all required permits for the handling storage and transportation of waste have been approved and the re approves the containment enclosure .
when organic zinc coating is specified only blastclean structural steel members .
when spot blast cleaning is specified before the cleaning operations remove accumulated dirt and dust and complete a thorough examination and survey of the existing surfaces to identify areas of paint failure and corrosion that will require blast cleaning outside the limits designated .
clean existing structural steel that has been previously painted and surfaces of other metal .
protect all components and materials that are not scheduled for blast cleaning during those operations .
num .
hand or power tool cleaning .
before hand or power tool cleaning remove all visible oil grease and salts by solvent cleaning as specified in sspcsp num .
roughen all existing paint left on the surface after hand or power tool cleaning before applying paint .
ensure that existing surfaces to be prepared by hand or power tool cleaning or a combination of both complies with the requirements of sspcsp num and sspcsp num respectively .
num .
blast cleaning .
before blast cleaning scrape the tops of bottom flanges to remove accumulated dust dirt and debris .
remove all visible oil grease and salts by solvent cleaning according to sspcsp num .
prepare existing surfaces by nearwhite blast cleaning according to sspcsp num .
ensure that the blast cleaning produces the required anchor profile of num to num mils in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges .
verify the profile depth by the testex replica tape .
do not blast clean a surface area of steel greater than the surface area of steel that can be prime coated within num hours .
num remove all fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges that are present on any steel member or that appear during the blasting operations by grinding .
reblast the ground area and ensure that the reblasted area meets the required anchor profile .
contain capture and collect blasting residues spent blasting medium rust particles paint particles and dust associated with the work .
collect blast medium and paint residue from steel surfaces with a commercial grade vacuum cleaner equipped with a brushtype cleaning tool or by double blowing with clean air .
if the double blowing method is used vacuum the top surfaces of all structural steel after the double blowing operations are completed .
keep the steel clean until the prime coat is applied .
protect freshly coated surfaces from subsequent blast cleaning operations .
thoroughly wire brush blast damaged primed surfaces .
if visible rust occurs reblast to the required condition .
vacuum and reprime the wire brushed or blast cleaned surfaces .
during blast cleaning if the containment enclosure is allowing waste to escape stop work until the enclosure is repaired .
clean up any waste released from the enclosure immediately .
if the wind velocity is high enough to cause the containment enclosure to billow cease blast cleaning and lower the enclosure after cleaning up all the waste .
c. waste disposal .
provide install and maintain any temporary loading and storage facilities onsite as required until completion of material handling activities .
the re will review the storage containers and storage location .
locate storage containers so as not to prevent a traffic or safety hazard .
locate storage containers in areas that are properly drained and where runoff water will not pond around or near the containers .
close storage containers and cover with tarpaulins at all times except during placement sampling and disposal of the waste .
after removing and collecting the waste from surface preparation work the re will designate the rust paint particles and dust associated with the work as hazardous waste with the corresponding usepa hazardous waste code dnum .
place expendable material and decontamination liquids generated from construction activities within the containment area including respirator cartridges protective clothing boots and gloves in watertight containers .
separately store all personnel protection equipment decontamination liquids that become contaminated due to contact with hazardous waste or materials containing hazardous substances and other expendable wastes and dispose in containers identified in the waste disposal plan .
ensure that these containers do not have indentations or shipping damage that would allow leakage of the contained material .
store waste in the onsite loading facility and storage area until transportation vehicles arrive for offsite disposal .
dispose of all hazardous waste within num days or before substantial completion whichever comes first .
continuously monitor the quantity of the waste captured contained collected stored and disposed of .
document the handling sampling manifesting transporting and disposal of hazardous waste .
maintain a complete and accurate record located with the project limits of all blasting medium purchased delivered and used during the execution of the work .
to allow for verification inspections submit to the re on a weekly basis both the record of the blasting medium delivered and used and the waste handling sampling manifesting transporting and disposal documentation .
move the contained waste materials to the storage area or dispose of at regular intervals once each working day minimum during the work according to the waste disposal plan field conditions and the direction of the re .
remove errant waste from the bridge deck structural steel piers abutments and other areas at least once a day or more frequently if required or directed .
clean any spillage of waste that may occur during disposal operations including during the loading transport and unloading of materials according to njdep regulations n.j.s.a .
num et seq .
only use the transporters identified in the waste disposal plan .
do not substitute or use additional transporters without approval from the re .
do not combine contaminated material from other projects with material from this project .
obtain and submit a copy of the test results of the waste from the tsd facility to the re .
comply with the manifesting requirements specified in num .
num ensure that the waste transporters vehicles and operating practices prevent spillage or leakage of hazardous or contaminated material while transporting to the final disposal site .
d. conditions for painting .
provide a suitable facility for the storage of paint that will comply with the latest osha regulations .
store and protect paint and thinners from the weather in enclosed structures at num to num f. equip the enclosure with a recording thermometer .
comply with the conditions for painting according to sspcpa num .
do not apply epoxy coating or organic zinc coating when the temperature is below num f or when the relative humidity is above num percent .
do not apply the urethane coating when the temperature is below num f or when the relative humidity is above num percent .
do not apply any coatings when the wind velocity exceeds num miles per hour when the air is misty or when in the opinion of the re conditions are unsatisfactory for the work .
also do not paint on damp or frosted surfaces or when the metal is hot enough to cause the paint to blister produce a porous paint film or cause the vehicle binder to separate from the pigment .
do not paint when the steel surface temperature is lower than num f above the dew point .
the re will determine the dew point using a psychrometer and appropriate tables .
the contractor may presume the dew point requirement to be satisfied if a thin clearly defined film of water applied to the cleaned vertical surface with a damp cloth evaporates within num minutes as determined by the re .
do not apply coatings when the temperature of the air paint or metal or the relative humidity is expected to be outside of specified limits before the paint is fully cured .
e. paint application .
num .
mixing paint .
mix coatings according to sspcpa num and the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
thinning paint .
if it is necessary to thin the coating for proper application thin the paint according to the manufacturers recommendations .
in cool weather the contractor may warm the paint to reduce the viscosity .
the contractor may heat the paint by placing the paint containers in water or on steam radiators .
num .
preparing the surface .
when surfaces requiring repainting are in contact with concrete use a non aluminum epoxy mastic primer approved by the departments bureau of materials .
when full depth deck repair or replacement is specified apply a prime coat to the top surfaces of top flanges of existing steel girders excluding the shear connectors .
do not paint aluminum alloy metal work copper sip forms for concrete decks and bridge deck grid flooring .
remove zinc salts oil dust dirt and other contaminants before applying each coat of paint and any repair coats in the field .
clean the primed surfaces with a high pressure water washing num pounds per square inch minimum .
when applying paint to a galvanized surface use epoxy intermediate and urethane finish coats only .
when using the epoxy mastic coating system apply the full coating system .
num .
applying paint .
apply paint only on clean dry surfaces according to sspcpa num .
apply paint using brushes rollers spray equipment or any combination of equipment that will attain satisfactory results and the film thickness specified .
apply paint uniformly and smoothly so that every part of the surface will be covered with the minimum specified thickness .
on surfaces that are inaccessible for painting by regular means apply paint by sheepskin daubers or spray or by other means if necessary to ensure coverage of the proper thickness of paint .
whenever painting operations are interrupted expel the remaining paint in the fluid hose from the hose .
thoroughly clean spray equipment at the end of each workday with an approved solvent .
properly dispose of the left over solvent and paint waste material .
if the paint coating is too thin or if areas of the surface are not completely coated repaint these areas of the work .
where excessive coating thickness produces surface defects such as mudcracking remove coating back to soundly bonded coating and recoat the area to the required thickness .
in areas of deficient primer thickness recoat according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num num .
coating thickness .
the re will use a magnetic dry film thickness gauge to determine the dry film thickness for each coat .
calibrate the gauge and use according to sspcpa num .
use a tooke film thickness gauge according to astm d num to verify the coating thickness when requested by the re .
if the tooke gauge shows that the prime coat is less than the specified minimum thickness the re will reject the entire coating system .
a. epoxy mastic coating system .
apply at least num coat of each of the following in the field spot prime over blast cleaned or exposed surfaces prime and finish coats .
place a full prime coat over the entire surface including areas that have been spot primed .
ensure that the dry film thickness of the paint is at least num mils for the spot prime coat at least num mils for the prime coat and at least num mils for the finish coat .
b. organic zinc coating system .
apply at least num of each of the following coats in the field prime intermediate and finish coats .
ensure that the dry film thickness of the paint is at least num mils for the prime coat at least num mils for the intermediate coat and at least num mils for the finish coat .
num .
prime or spot prime coat .
tint the primer to contrast the base metal .
apply the prime or spot prime coat immediately after obtaining re approval of the surface preparation .
apply the prime or spot prime coat the same day the metal is cleaned but not until the cleaning operation is far enough ahead to eliminate the danger of dirt or other material from the cleaning operations from falling or blowing onto the fresh paint .
prime or spot prime all blast cleaned surfaces the same day before any contamination formation of rust or any other deterioration of the prepared surface .
num .
curing .
comply with the manufacturer recommended curing time between coats .
if the manufacturers recommended curing time is exceeded follow the manufacturers recommendation to prepare the surface for succeeding coats .
num .
striping .
before applying the full prime coat apply a prime coating striping to all edges of plates and rolled shapes corners crevices welds and exposed parts of bolts .
do not apply the full prime coat until the striping has set to touch .
num cleanup .
replace signs that were removed during cleaning and painting to their original position .
remove paint dropped on concrete surfaces and all debris from the cleaning operations from the superstructure and the substructure .
remove oversprays on adjacent portions of the structures .
remove paint containers and refuse from the project limits .
f. stenciling .
stencil the following information on the outside web of both fascia beams on both ends of the structure and as specified below num .
the numdigit structure number .
num .
the month and year of completion .
num .
the paint system code number .
stencil uniform numinch high cseries letters or numerals with the same type of paint except use a color that contrasts the structure .
locate markings at least num inches above the lower flange and not more than num feet from the abutment .
in the case of a bascule bridge stencil information num feet from the heel of the bascule span .
in addition thoroughly clean all memorial or commemorative metal plaques that are affixed to the structure or appurtenance .
submit the method of cleaning along with a sample of the materials intended for use to the re for approval .
clean the plaques to the satisfaction of the re according to the approved method and ensure the removal of accumulated dirt extraneous markings and corrosion without marring eroding or staining the plaques in any way .
g. unsatisfactory paint performance and removal .
the department will consider the paint performance unsatisfactory if rusting occurs if the paint coat lifts blisters wrinkles has excessive runs or sags or shows evidence of application under unfavorable conditions if the workmanship is poor if impure or unauthorized paint has been used or for other such reasons determined by the re .
remove any unsatisfactory paint and reclean and repaint the metal .
num num testing if and where directed the re may direct the contractor to conduct or to obtain the services of others to conduct air quality water quality or such other testing that will determine the quantity of any materials that may be escaping from the containment plan employed on the project .
if it is determined that pollution of the environment adjacent to the site has occurred due to the contractors operations stop cleaning and painting and immediately submit a plan to the re for approval detailing the corrective actions necessary to restore the area .
correct the containment measures .
do not continue cleaning or painting until the re directs the work to begin .
the department may conduct additional testing using the department laboratory .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit pollution control system lump sum handpower tool cleaning and painting lump sum nearwhite blast cleaning and painting lump sum testing if and where directed lump sum the contract quantity of testing if and where directed is lump sum and the bid price is num for each occurrence in the contract .
the department will base payment for testing if and where directed on the actual cost as evidenced by paid receipts from the testing laboratory .
the department will not make payment for overhead or profit for this item .
num division num miscellaneous construction section num pipe num description this section describes the requirements for constructing storm drains for surface drainage for constructing subbase outlet drains and for cleaning existing pipe .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num concrete num mortar num controlled low strength material clsmnum class a beddingnum class b beddingnum class c beddingnum class d beddingnum reinforced concrete pipe rcp num hdpe pipenum corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches num corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe num corrugated steel underdrain pipenum subsurface drainage geotextilenum if corrugated metal pipe or corrugated metal pipe arch is shown on the plans the contractor may use corrugated aluminum alloy or corrugated steel .
use a pipe cap of the same material as the pipe .
num construction num installing pipe a. storing and handling .
handle and store pipe to prevent damage such as cracking denting and breaking .
lift pipe off of the delivery vehicle to avoid damage while unloading .
do not dump or drag pipe off the delivery vehicle .
store pipe in an area where it will not be damaged during construction operations .
use blocks or straps when stacking pipe .
alternate the bells and spigots to reduce the load on the bells .
the re will reject pipe that is damaged bowed or considered unacceptable for other reasons .
b. excavating .
maintain the existing drainage system during construction until the new drainage facilities are completed and placed into service .
excavate the same distance on each side of the centerline of the pipe to ensure that the pipe is in the center of the trench .
ensure that the trench is at least num inches wider than the outside diameter of the pipe .
provide vertical sides for excavations within the traveled way shoulder sidewalk areas and where existing facilities require protection .
except where necessary to maintain flow do not excavate trenches or place drains in embankment until the embankment has been constructed to an elevation of at least num feet above the top of the pipe or to the top of the embankment whichever is lower .
do not excavate trenches more than num feet in advance of installing the pipe unless approved by the re .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the trench is unstable undercut as directed by the re and backfill with class b bedding .
num if the material at the bottom of the trench is rock or other hard material remove at least num inches of the material for rcp or at least num inches of the material below the bottom of the pipe for corrugated metal steel aluminum alloy pipe or hdpe .
backfill the undercut with class c bedding .
for trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within num feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure to match the surrounding pavement before opening to traffic .
the contractor may submit working drawings for approval for temporary protection instead of backfilling trenches .
provide and maintain trench crossings where necessary .
for trenches not in the traveled way and shoulder do not leave trenches open overnight unless protected with fence .
maintain trenches according to num cfr num .
c. bedding .
do not place bedding material until the re approves the depth of excavation and the material at the bottom of the excavation .
if bedding is not shown place pipe directly on the material at the bottom of the trench .
for class a bedding construct a concrete cradle .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete across the area to minimize rehandling .
ensure that concrete is not discharged into windrows or piles .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
for class b class c and class d bedding place the bedding and provide recesses for pipe bells deep enough to ensure that the bell will not rest on the bottom of the recess .
ensure that the recess does not exceed num inches from the edge of the bell along the length of the pipe .
compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
d. installing pipe before the installation of hdpe pipe and as directed by the re provide a technical representative from the pipe manufacturer on the work site for the first day of pipe installation to ensure proper installation procedures .
when installing pipe use a laser system to control the alignment and grade of the pipe .
use end sections of the same material as the adjoining pipe or pipe arch except use concrete end sections for hdpe pipe .
begin installing pipe at the lowest elevation of the pipeline .
ensure that the pipe is in firm contact with the bottom of the excavation or bedding throughout its full length .
place bell ends of pipe facing towards the highest elevation .
when using perforated pipe ensure that the perforations are at the bottom .
when installing pipe through concrete or masonry walls provide a sufficient length of pipe outside of the wall to allow for connections and cut the pipe flush with the inside face of the wall .
seal the connection using mortar .
when pipe enters below the invert of existing structures cut and shape the existing invert to form a new channel .
when constructing storm drains in stages cover the end of the pipe after each stage to prevent material from entering the pipe .
do not cover the pipe if it is required to keep the pipe open for temporary drainage .
when using pipe for a stream diversion install pipe outside of the existing stream bed while maintaining flow in the existing stream .
when installing pipe within an existing stream channel construct a temporary stream diversion while maintaining flow in the existing stream channel .
once the temporary channel is completed divert the stream flow into the temporary channel while constructing the pipe system within the existing stream bed .
when the pipe is completed divert the stream flow into the pipe .
when using heavy construction equipment num kips axle load over or within num feet of hdpe pipe or corrugated aluminum alloy pipe place the manufacturer recommended temporary compacted cover over the top of the pipe .
ensure that the temporary cover is free from stones larger than num inch .
e. joining pipe .
join rigid pipe using mortar or gaskets to form a watertight seal .
with re approval the contractor may use other types of joints that are recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
join corrugated metal pipe with coupling bands .
for mortar joints clean the pipe ends and wet with water before placing stiff mortar .
place mortar in the lower half of the bell of the placed pipe section and then place mortar on the upper half of the spigot of the section to be installed .
join the num pipe sections with their inner surfaces flush .
seal the exterior of the joint with mortar .
fill the lifting holes with mortar .
for circular pipe greater than num inches in diameter and elliptical pipe greater than num num inches ensure that the inside of the joint is finished smooth .
for circular pipe smaller than num inches in diameter and elliptical pipe num greater than num num inches remove protruding mortar from the joint .
if the completed mortar joints are not immediately backfilled with earth protect the mortar joints against rapid drying .
when the ambient temperature is below num f ensure that the mortar temperature is between num and num f. protect the mortar and maintain its temperature above num f for num hours .
for gasket joints install gaskets according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not use split couplings to join fieldcut hdpe pipe unless approved by the re .
ensure that joints are bell and spigot type or bell and spigot type with a gasket according to astm f num to provide a silttight seal .
construct pipe connections according to the manufacturers recommendations for assembly of joint components lubrications and making of joints .
ensure that the pipe fittings are free of inclusions and visible defects .
cut the ends of the pipe squarely so as not to adversely affect joining .
f. backfilling .
when using corrugated aluminum and hdpe pipe backfill from the bottom of the trench to num feet above the top of the pipe with class c bedding .
when using pipe other than corrugated aluminum or hdpe backfill from the bottom of the trench to num feet above the top of the pipe with suitable excavated material free from stones and rock larger than num inches in any dimension .
for distances num feet above the top of the pipe backfill using suitable excavated material .
place backfill material symmetrically on each side of the pipe in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
compact as follows num .
if the backfill material is predominantly granular use vibratory plate compactors .
num .
if the backfill material is not predominantly granular use vibratory rammer compactors .
num .
for heights more than num feet above the pipe the contractor may use a roller .
the re may direct compaction using the density control method as specified in num.d .
remove shoring bracing and sheeting as the backfilling proceeds .
the contractor may use clsm as alternate backfill material when backfilling trenches for drainage pipe .
do not use clsm to replace pavement base courses or drainage layers that form the pavement structure .
the re will not allow combining other backfill materials in the same trench as clsm .
place clsm according to the limitations specified in num.c .
place clsm across the area to minimize rehandling .
protect clsm as specified in num.i .
num installing pipe using alternate methods when installing pipe using methods other than as specified in num at least num days before installation submit working drawings for approval that include the following num .
materials including size and type of pipe .
num .
method of maintaining continuous operation of traffic on the project .
num .
details for installing and removing sheeting bracing and shoring .
num .
method of ensuring horizontal and vertical alignment of the pipe .
num .
complete installation procedure .
num .
method of protecting pipe during installation .
num .
method of excavating and removing material during installation .
num .
method of sealing and finishing pipe joints .
num .
alternate method of pipe installation if original method becomes impossible due to obstructions .
num underdrains and subbase outlet drains a. excavating .
maintain the existing drainage system during construction until the new drainage facilities are completed and placed into service .
excavate the same distance on each side of the centerline of the pipe to ensure that the pipe is in the center of the trench .
do not excavate trenches more than num feet in advance of installation unless approved by the re .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the trench is unstable undercut as directed by the re and backfill with class b bedding .
num if the material at the bottom of the trench is rock or other hard material remove at least num inches of the material for rcp or at least num inches of the material below the bottom of the pipe for corrugated metal steel aluminum alloy pipe or hdpe .
backfill the undercut with class c bedding .
for trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within num feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure to match the surrounding pavement before opening to traffic .
the contractor may submit working drawings for approval for temporary protection instead of backfilling trenches .
provide and maintain trench crossings where necessary .
for trenches not in the traveled way and shoulder do not leave trenches open overnight unless protected with fence .
maintain trenches according to num cfr num .
b .
installing .
begin constructing at the lowest elevation of the drain .
ensure that the perforations are at the bottom .
join underdrains according to the manufacturers recommendations .
seal the dead ends of pipe underdrains with a pipe cap .
c. backfilling .
backfill using coarse aggregate around the underdrains and subbase outlet drains and on top of stone backfill in rock areas .
compact the coarse aggregate with a vibratory pad compactor .
num video inspection of pipe perform video inspection of interior pipelines no sooner than num days after completing the pipe installation .
submit to the re for approval the name and qualifications of the person performing the inspection .
perform the video inspection in dry pipe conditions to ensure viewing of the entire pipe circumference .
ensure that a visual numerical registration of the distance the video camera is traveling from the starting point to the ending point within the pipe drainage structure is recorded on the footage tape at all times .
also ensure that the name of the pipe run and the name of the structure is recorded on the footage tape at all times .
stop the video camera at all joints lateral connections breaks and irregularities to ensure full view at these locations .
ensure that the videotape provides clear sharply focused pictures .
the department will not accept blurred or out of focus footage .
submit a color vhs videotape or equivalent digital media of the inspection to the re to become the property of the department .
number the tapes sequentially and provide a corresponding index for all tapes listing the location date size and type of pipe cross or longitudinal drains berm slope and similar identifying information .
if the pipe is found to be defective because of poor joints deformation breaks poor connections or irregularities correct the defective pipe as directed by the re .
if the pipe can not be corrected remove and replace the defective pipe .
num deflection inspection of hdpe pipe test approximately num percent of the length of hdpe pipe for deflection no sooner than num days after installation .
if testing produces a failure rate of num percent increase the rate of testing to num percent .
perform the deflection testing using either electronic deflectometers calibrated television or video cameras properly sized go nogo mandrel direct measurement extension rulers and tape measures in pipe that allow safe entry or another acceptable device .
if mandrel testing is chosen pull the mandrel through the pipe by hand .
where deflection is more than num percent of the base inside diameter submit a remediation plan to the re for approval .
num cleaning existing pipe at least num days before beginning the work submit a plan to the re detailing the proposed method and equipment to be used .
remove and collect silt debris and material of any kind and prevent material from being discharged into the drainage system .
dispose of materials removed from existing pipe as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ corrugated aluminum alloy pipe linear foot ___ corrugated steel pipe linear foot ___ corrugated metal pipe linear foot ___ reinforced concrete pipe linear foot ___ reinforced concrete pipe class___ linear foot num ___ high density polyethylene pipe linear foot ___ reinforced concrete pipe using alternate methods linear foot ___ corrugated aluminum alloy end section unit ___ corrugated steel end section unit ___ corrugated metal end section unit ___ reinforced concrete end section unit subbase outlet drain linear foot ___ corrugated steel underdrain pipe linear foot ___ corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe linear foot underdrain type ___ linear foot ___ x ___ corrugated aluminum alloy pipe arch linear foot ___ x ___ corrugated steel pipe arch linear foot ___ x ___ corrugated metal pipe arch linear foot ___ x ___ corrugated aluminum alloy end section unit ___ x ___ corrugated steel end section unit ___ x ___ corrugated metal end section unit ___ x ___ reinforced concrete end section unit ___ x ___ reinforced concrete elliptical pipe class ___ linear foot video inspection of pipe linear foot deflection testing of high density polyethylene pipe linear foot cleaning existing pipe ___ to ___ diameter linear foot cleaning existing pipe over ___ to ___ diameter linear foot cleaning existing pipe ___ diameter linear foot when the re directs undercutting of unstable material in a pipe trench the department will make payment as specified in num for the additional excavation .
the department will also make payment as specified in num for the additional bedding if there is not an excess of excavation available .
the department will not include the distance between inner faces of inlet and manhole walls in the linear foot measurement of pipe .
the department will measure pipe with sloped or skewed ends along the invert .
the department will include the length of end sections measured along the bottom of the section in the payment for cleaning existing pipe ___ to ___ diameter cleaning existing pipe over ___ to ___ diameter and cleaning existing pipe ___ diameter .
section num drainage structures num description this section describes the requirements for constructing reconstructing and cleaning inlets and manholes .
this section also describes the requirements for constructing and cleaning concrete culverts and concrete headwalls with a span of less than num feet .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num soil aggregate inum num concrete num mortar num curing materialsnum precast inlet and manholenum reinforcement steelnum castingsnum epoxy bedding compoundnum ladder rungnum num concrete blocknum concrete brick num preformed joint filler num num equipment provide equipment as specified vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num culverts and headwalls excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
num .
precast .
set precast culverts and headwalls on a numinch bed of compacted coarse aggregate .
remove handling devices and fill lifting holes with mortar .
num .
castinplace .
construct castinplace culverts and headwalls as specified in num .
num inlets and manholes excavate as specified in num .
obtain re approval before finishing excavating .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
when surrounding grade is below proposed grade provide temporary drainage into the drainage structure as directed by the re .
repair temporary openings as necessary .
construct inlet and manhole structures as follows num .
precast .
the contractor may use precast concrete inlets and manholes .
if modifications to precast concrete inlets and manholes are required obtain re approval before installation .
after installation fill the lifting holes with mortar .
num block and brick construction .
lay concrete block and brick with staggered joints .
fill with mortar horizontal joints brick vertical joints and concrete block key ways .
ensure that horizontal joints and vertical joints in brick are not more than num inch wide .
coat the outside wall with at least a numinch thick layer of mortar and trowel smooth .
when the ambient temperature is below num f ensure that the mortar temperature is between num and num f. cover the masonry and maintain its temperature above num f for num hours .
ensure that the connection between drainage structures and pipe is leakfree .
set castings in mortar beds or anchor castings to the masonry as shown before finishing adjoining items of work with the same final elevation .
ensure that mortar attains a strength of num pounds per square inch before opening to traffic .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
construct inverts with a smooth and uniform finish that minimizes resistance to flow .
ensure that the shape of the inverts conforms uniformly with the inlet and outlet pipe .
set the manhole cover or inlet grate on the casting .
if the manhole cover or inlet grate is loose or wobbles grind to obtain a tight fit .
num setting castings resetting castings and reconstructing inlets and manholes when modifying less than num foot of an inlet or manhole set or reset the casting .
when modifying num foot or more of an inlet or manhole reconstruct the inlet or manhole .
remove castings damaged wall portions and ladder rungs as directed by the re .
reuse concrete as specified in num.a .
dispose of other material as specified in num.b .
num reconstruct the walls to the elevation shown and if necessary install new ladder rungs .
set castings in mortar beds or anchor castings to the masonry as shown before finishing adjoining items of work with the same final elevation .
if excavation is required to reconstruct backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
set the manhole cover or bicycle safe grate on the casting .
if the manhole cover or bicycle safe grate is loose or wobbles grind to obtain a tight fit .
do not open to traffic until num days after the grout was set .
num converting inlets into manholes remove castings unsound wall portions and ladder rungs as directed by the re .
reuse concrete as specified in num.a .
dispose of other material as specified in num.b .
reconstruct the walls to the shown elevation and install new ladder rungs .
set castings in mortar beds or anchor castings to the masonry as shown before finishing adjoining items of work with the same final elevation .
if excavation is required to reconstruct backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
set the manhole cover on the casting .
if the manhole cover is loose or wobbles grind to obtain a tight fit .
ensure that mortar attains a strength of num pounds per square inch before opening to traffic .
num extension frames and rings if structures contain existing frames or rings remove extension frames or rings .
use the minimum number of frames or rings necessary to achieve the proposed grades .
place the extension frame or ring in the casting and check for fit .
before applying epoxy bedding compound clean the surfaces that will receive the epoxy bedding compound the lower bearing surfaces and sides of the extension frames or rings .
clean by sand blasting or brushing with a mechanically driven wire wheel to ensure that the epoxy bedding compound adheres to the surfaces .
wipe the prepared surfaces with a rapidevaporating degreasing agent .
apply extra epoxy bedding compound where there are gaps in the fit .
apply the epoxy bedding compound according to the manufacturers recommendations and immediately set the extension frame or ring into the epoxy bedding compound .
ensure that the frame or ring is in full contact with the casting and that the epoxy bedding compound fills the gaps .
set the bicycle safe grate or manhole cover on the extension frame or ring .
if the bicycle safe grate or manhole cover is loose or wobbles after being set in the extension frames or rings grind to obtain a tight fit or replace as directed .
repair damage to galvanized coatings according to astm a num .
dispose of materials removed from the existing structure as specified in num .
num manhole covers and bicycle safe grates set the manhole cover or bicycle safe grate on the casting .
if the manhole cover or bicycle safe grate is loose or wobbles grind to obtain a tight fit .
dispose of materials removed from the existing structure as specified in num .
num curb pieces remove curb pieces of existing inlets and install new curb pieces .
dispose of materials removed from existing structure as specified in num .
bolt the curb piece to the frame before setting the frame in concrete or mortar .
ensure that all castings are set firm and snug .
num cleaning drainage structures at least num days before beginning the work submit a plan to the re detailing the proposed method and equipment to be used .
remove and collect silt debris and material .
ensure that the material is not discharged into the drainage system .
dispose of materials removed from the existing structure as specified in num .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit concrete culvert cubic yard concrete headwall cubic yard inlet type___ unit manhole ___ diameter unit inlet type___ using existing casting unit manhole using existing casting unit inlet converted to manhole unit reset existing casting unit set inlet type ___ casting unit set manhole casting unit set square framed manhole casting circular cover unit reconstructed inlet type ___ using existing casting unit reconstructed inlet type ___ using new casting unit reconstructed manhole using existing casting unit reconstructed manhole using new casting unit extension frame for existing inlet type ___ unit extension ring for existing manhole ___ diameter unit manhole cover unit bicycle safe grate unit curb piece unit cleaning drainage structure unit section num slope and channel protection num description this section describes the requirements for constructing various kinds of slope and channel protection .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num fine aggregatenum riprap stonesnum concretenum mortar num curing materials num reinforcement steelnum preformed joint filler num joint sealernum stabilization geotextilenum for rock backfill use num inch dnum riprap stone as specified in num .
num equipment provide equipment as specified vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num num construction num concrete slope gutters excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
each time before using ensure that the forms are thoroughly cleaned and treated with a material that will prevent adherence of the concrete to the forms without discoloring the concrete .
construct numinch wide expansion joints placed at intervals of approximately num feet with preformed joint filler .
ensure that the expansion joint material extends for the full depth .
clean the top and ends of expansion joint material of all excess concrete and trim the expansion joint material slightly below the surface of the concrete .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete across the formed area to minimize rehandling .
ensure that concrete is not discharged into windrows or piles .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
to prevent bowing or misalignment of the transverse joints place concrete simultaneously on both sides of transverse joints without disturbing the joints .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
if a section is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete section and replace .
terminate each days placement at a transverse joint .
if concrete becomes segregated during placement cease operations and correct handling operations .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
strike off the concrete to the required crosssection using a transverse template resting upon the side forms .
finish the concrete using floats and straightedges to obtain a smooth surface .
when the surface of the concrete is free from water and just before the concrete attains its initial set texture with a broom .
round edges using an edging tool with a numinch radius .
cure concrete using curing compound as specified in num.f .
remove forms as specified in num.g .
after removing the side forms backfill the spaces along the slope gutter with suitable material .
place this material in numinch lifts and compact the layers until firm .
num concrete slope protection construct concrete slope protection as specified in num .
place the welded wire mesh halfway between the top and bottom surfaces of the concrete .
construct edge beams and key beams monolithically with the slab .
score numinch deep joints on a numfoot grid pattern .
round scored edges to a numinch radius with an edging tool .
place a numinch preformed joint filler where the concrete abuts any portion of a structure .
num riprap stone slope or channel protection excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
place geotextile over the entire area where riprap is to be placed and extend it at least num inches on each side .
bury the geotextile that is extended outside of the riprap area a minimum of num inches into the soil .
when joining sections of geotextile overlap the geotextile by a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
place a numinch layer of coarse aggregate without damaging or dislodging the geotextile .
firmly bed the riprap stones into the coarse aggregate without damaging or displacing the geotextile .
use larger riprap stones in the lower courses .
fill spaces between the riprap stones with smaller stones of the same type and quality .
firmly ram the smaller stones into place .
provide an even finished surface for the slope or channel protection .
num rock backfill excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
place geotextile over the entire area where riprap is to be placed and extend it at least num inches on each side .
bury the geotextile that is extended outside of the riprap area a minimum of num inches into the soil .
when joining sections of geotextile overlap the geotextile by a minimum of num inches in the direction of flow .
firmly bed the riprap stones without damaging or displacing the geotextile .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit concrete slope gutter ___ thick square yard concrete slope protection ___ thick square yard concrete slope protection reinforced ___ thick square yard riprap stone slope protection ___ thick dnum___ square yard riprap stone channel protection ___ thick dnum___ square yard rock backfill ton section num gabion walls num description this section describes the requirements for constructing gabion walls .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num gabion basket stonenum stabilization geotextilenum gabion wire basketnum num construction num gabion walls excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
install the geotextile .
if sections of geotextile need to be joined overlap the sections a minimum of num inches .
permanently cover the geotextile within num hours of placement .
place and grade coarse aggregate without damaging the geotextile .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the manufacturers installation guide to the re .
ensure that a representative from the manufacturer is at the work site during the first day of assembling the gabion basket and the first day of placing and filling the gabions .
install gabion walls according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit gabion wall cubic yard num section num fence num description this section describes the requirements for constructing fence and gates removing and resetting fence and repairing chainlink fence including replacing damaged fabric .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified concrete num mortar num chainlink fencenum num equipment provide equipment as specified vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucks num num construction num chainlink fence before constructing or placing fence clear the site as specified in num .
remove rock protruding above the ground surface in the fence line .
where aluminumcoated fence or pvccoated fence is not designated the contractor may use either kind .
set terminal posts at the beginning and end of each continuous length of fence at abrupt changes in vertical and horizontal alignment and on each side of gate locations .
install posts to be set in concrete in dug or drilled holes .
place concrete as specified in num.d and allow concrete to cure for at least num hours before stretching fence fabric .
if a concrete foundation is not required the contractor may drive posts to the required depth if ground conditions permit .
when solid rock is encountered install posts not required to be set in concrete by drilling the rock to the required depth and securing with mortar .
num gates install gates necessary for construction operations at selected locations .
set gates according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide gates equipped with locks and num sets of keys .
provide the keys to the re .
keep gates padlocked except when in use during working hours .
num repairing chainlink fence provide and erect new fabric where required .
provide new fence fabric of the same type as existing fence .
if the same fence fabric can not be provided obtain re approval of equivalent .
straighten top rails and posts or replace as necessary as determined by the re .
replace all tension wire and mend all vertical cuts .
follow the construction requirements for new fence as specified in num .
dispose of unusable materials as specified in num .
num temporary chainlink fence before beginning construction operations erect temporary chainlink fence required to enclose construction areas .
construct temporary fence as specified in num .
the contractor may reuse material as approved by the re .
num maintain temporary fence as directed during construction and properly dispose of fence as specified in num after it is no longer required on the project .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel ___ high linear foot chainlink fence pvccoated steel ___ high linear foot chainlink fence ___ high linear foot gate chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel ___ wide unit gate chainlink fence pvccoated steel ___ wide unit gate chainlink fence ___ wide unit repairing chainlink fence linear foot temporary chainlink fence ___ high linear foot the department will measure chainlink fence along the bottom line of the fabric deducting the width of gates .
the department will measure temporary chainlink fence ___ high by the linear foot including gates .
the department will measure repairing chainlink fence by the linear foot and will compute on the basis of the total length of fence fabric repaired plus the prorated quantity of top rails and posts straightened or replaced tension wire replaced and vertical cuts mended as follows per linear foot of top rail replaced num linear foot per linear foot of top rail straightened num linear foot per unit of post replacednum linear feet per unit of post straightenednum linear feet per linear foot of tension wire replaced num linear foot per linear foot of vertical cuts mended num linear foot section num sidewalks driveways and islands num description this section describes the requirements for constructing hma sidewalks driveways and islands and concrete sidewalks driveways and islands .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified dganum hma nummnum concretenum curing materials num reinforcement steelnum welded wire reinforcementnum preformed joint filler num hotpoured joint sealer type num num sleeves num detectable warning surface num for driveways the contractor may use class e concrete as specified in num in order to open the driveway to traffic in num days .
num num equipment provide equipment as specified hma compactornum vibratory drum compactor num bituminous material distributor num sealer application system num vibratornum straightedge num pavement sawnum hotair lance num hma plantnum hma trucks num concrete batching plantnum concrete trucks num num construction num hma sidewalks driveways and islands excavate as specified in num .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
place sleeves for signs and delineator posts at locations shown on the plans .
ensure that sleeves are flush with the finished surface .
fill the sleeves with sand .
immediately before hma placement seal the top num inch with hotpoured joint sealer .
reseal the sleeves when sign or delineator posts are installed .
for sidewalks and islands construct the base course using dga .
for driveways construct the base course using dga as specified in num .
construct the surface course as specified in num using hma .
when compacting use rollers that weigh at least num ton .
num concrete sidewalks driveways and islands a. underlayer preparation .
excavate as specified in num .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
b .
forms .
each time before using ensure that the forms are thoroughly cleaned and treated with a material that will prevent adherence of the concrete to the forms without discoloring the concrete .
c. sleeves .
when signs or delineators are shown place sleeves at locations shown on the plans .
ensure that sleeves are flush with the finished surface .
fill the sleeves with sand .
seal the top num inch with hotpoured joint sealer immediately after curing concrete .
reseal the sleeves when sign or delineator posts are installed .
d. welded wire mesh .
when reinforcement is shown for sidewalks and driveways ensure that the welded wire mesh is free of dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substances before placing .
ensure that the welded wire mesh is halfway between the top and bottom surfaces of the concrete .
e. expansion joints .
construct numinch wide expansion joints placed at intervals of approximately num feet with preformed joint filler .
if the sidewalk driveway or island is constructed on a concrete surface install expansion joints directly over the expansion joints in the underlying concrete surface .
construct expansion joints around all appurtenances such as manholes and utility poles and between new concrete and any fixed structure such as a curb walls buildings or bridges .
ensure that the expansion joint material extends for the full depth .
clean the top and ends of expansion joint material of all excess concrete and trim the expansion joint material slightly below the surface of the concrete .
f. placing concrete .
obtain re approval of forms and joint placement before placing concrete .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete across the formed area to minimize num rehandling .
ensure that concrete is not discharged into windrows or piles .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
to prevent bowing or misalignment of the transverse joints place concrete simultaneously on both sides of transverse joints without disturbing the joints .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
if a slab is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete slab and replace .
terminate each days placement at a transverse joint .
if concrete becomes segregated during placement cease operations and correct handling operations .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
g. finishing concrete .
strike off the concrete using a transverse template resting upon the side forms to the required crosssection .
finish the concrete using floats and straightedges to obtain a smooth surface .
when the surface of the concrete is free from water and just before the concrete attains its initial set texture with a broom .
round edges using an edging tool with a numinch radius .
divide the surface into blocks using a grooving tool .
ensure that groove lines coincide with expansion joints .
ensure that the grooves are cut to a depth of at least num inch .
finish the edges of the grooves using an edging tool with a numinch radius .
h. protection and curing .
cure concrete using curing compound as specified in num.f .
remove forms as specified in num.g .
ensure pedestrians do not use concrete sidewalks islands and driveways until num hours after finishing .
ensure vehicles and other loads are not placed on sidewalks islands and driveways until the concrete has concrete attained compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as determined from num concrete cylinders field cured according to aashto t num .
i. backfilling .
after removing the side forms backfill the spaces along the edges of sidewalks and driveways with suitable material .
place this material in numinch lifts and compact the layers until firm .
num detectable warning surfaces clean and dry the designated area where the detectable warning surface will be installed .
install detectable warning surfaces according to the manufacturers recommendations .
if the detectable warning surface is not integrally colored apply the detectable warning surface coating according to the manufacturers recommendation .
evenly broadcast num grit over the final wet coat at a rate of num pounds per square yard for skid resistance .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit hot mix asphalt sidewalk ___ thick square yard concrete sidewalk ___ thick square yard concrete sidewalk reinforced ___ thick square yard hot mix asphalt driveway ___ thick square yard hot mix asphalt driveway variable thickness square yard concrete driveway ___ thick square yard concrete driveway reinforced ___ thick square yard hot mix asphalt island ___ thick square yard concrete island ___ thick square yard detectable warning surface square yard when the re directs undercutting of unstable material in the excavation area the department will make payment as specified in num for the additional excavation .
the department will also make payment as specified in num for the additional bedding if there is not an excess of excavation available .
num section num curb num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete curb granite curb and hma curb and for resetting granite curb .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified hma nummnum num concrete num mortar num curing materialsnum reinforcement steelnum granite curbnum flexible delineators num preformed joint filler num joint sealer hotpoured num for concrete curb at driveways the contractor may use class e concrete as specified in num in order to open the driveway to traffic in num days .
num equipment provide equipment as specified hma curb machine num bituminous material distributor num sealer application system num vibratornum straightedge num hma plantnum hma trucks num concrete batching plantnum concrete trucks num num construction num concrete barrier curb a .
placing footing .
excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
place footing concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
insert the reinforcement steel into the concrete before initial set .
ensure that it remains perpendicular to the footing until the barrier curb is constructed .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
b. constructing forms .
each time before using ensure that the forms are thoroughly cleaned and treated with a material that will prevent adherence of the concrete to the forms without discoloring the concrete .
construct concrete barrier curb in sections that correspond to the transverse joints in the existing or proposed pavement and at most num feet in length .
reduce this length where necessary for closures but do not construct closure sections that are less than num feet .
where changes in the size or shape are necessary for variable height barrier curb ensure that the transition between the sections is gradual .
num c. installing joints .
place numinch preformed joint filler at the transverse joints and ensure that filler is flush with the top and face of the curb .
install numinch preformed joint filler between the curb and concrete pavement and seal the joint with hotpoured joint sealer .
d. placing concrete .
obtain re approval of forms and joint placement before placing concrete .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
to place concrete between november num to march num submit to re for approval a plan detailing the method of protecting the concrete from salt for at least num days after placing .
do not begin placing concrete until this plan is approved .
place concrete across the formed area to minimize rehandling .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
to prevent bowing or misalignment of the transverse joints place concrete simultaneously on both sides of transverse joints without disturbing the joints .
consolidate the concrete using internal mechanical vibrators .
when required supplement vibrating by hand spading to ensure proper and adequate consolidation .
provide at least an additional standby vibrating unit for individual concrete placements in excess of num cubic yards .
use vibrators to work the concrete around the reinforcement steel and embedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms .
ensure proper vibration of the concrete to avoid honeycombing and voids .
do not use vibrators to move or spread concrete into position .
do not over vibrate concrete .
place reinforcement steel and sleeves for sign posts while placing concrete and ensure that they remain in position until the concrete is set .
if a section is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete section and replace .
terminate each days placement at a transverse joint .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
fill sleeves for sign or delineator posts installed in barrier curb with sand and seal the sleeves with hotpoured joint sealer immediately after installation .
reseal the sleeves if and when posts are installed .
e. finishing concrete .
finish the top of the curb with a wood float and round the top edges .
remove the forms as soon as the concrete holds its shape and immediately finish joint edges using an edging tool with a radius of num inch .
remove lips of mortar and irregularities caused by form joints .
using mortar from the barrier concrete placement patch holes depressions voids and honeycombs to produce a smooth dense uniform surface of concrete .
finish the surface of the barrier curb with a steel float and texture with a broom .
if a rigid type of construction is to be made against any exposed surface leave the exposed surface smooth and uniform to allow free movement of the curb .
f. protecting and curing concrete .
immediately after finishing the concrete apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num .
g. installing flexible delineators .
for delineators located on the right side when facing in the direction of traffic ensure that the retroreflective sheeting is white .
for delineators located on the left side when facing in the direction of traffic ensure that the retroreflective sheeting is yellow .
attach flexible delineators according to the manufacturers recommendations num inches from the top of the barrier curb .
mount the first flexible delineator at the beginning of the concrete barrier curb section .
mount subsequent delineators every num feet .
position each delineator so that the plane face of the center of the reflective area is at an angle of num degrees with a line that is perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
if the distance between the end of the concrete barrier curb and the adjacent delineator is greater than num feet install a delineator on both sides of the barrier curb opening .
num concrete vertical curb and concrete sloping curb a. underlayer preparation .
excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
b. constructing forms .
construct forms as specified in num.b .
c. installing joints .
install joints as specified in num.c .
num d. placing concrete .
obtain re approval of forms and joint placement before placing concrete .
place concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
place concrete across the formed area to minimize rehandling .
continuously place concrete between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
to prevent bowing or misalignment of the transverse joints place concrete simultaneously on both sides of transverse joints without disturbing the joints .
if a section is not completed from transverse joint to transverse joint remove the incomplete section and replace .
terminate each days placement at a transverse joint .
protect concrete as specified in num.i .
e. finishing concrete .
finish the top and front face of the curb as specified in num.e .
f. protecting and curing concrete .
immediately after finishing the concrete apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num .
g. backfilling curb .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c against the curb .
num concrete barrier curb dowelled a. underlayer preparation .
remove dirt bituminous material and other loose or adhering matter from the surface .
drill holes in the concrete that are between num inch and num inch in diameter bigger than the diameter of the reinforcement steel dowel .
set the reinforcement steel dowels in the hole and grout into place .
b. constructing forms .
construct forms as specified in num.b .
c. installing joints .
locate transverse joints in dowelled curb directly over the transverse joints in the concrete pavement and over transverse pavement cracks wider than num inch .
locate additional joints as needed to divide the curb into approximately equal lengths of at most num feet .
place numinch preformed joint filler at transverse joint locations and ensure that it is flush with the top and faces of the curb .
place numinch preformed joint filler between the curb and concrete pavement and seal the joint with hotpoured joint sealer .
d. placing concrete .
place concrete for barrier curb as specified in num.d .
e. finishing concrete .
finish concrete as specified in num.e .
f. protecting and curing concrete .
immediately after finishing the concrete apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num .
protect the concrete as specified in num.i .
g. installing flexible delineators .
install flexible delineators as specified in num.g .
num concrete vertical curb and concrete sloping curb dowelled a. underlayer preparation .
prepare the underlying surface as specified in num.a .
b. constructing forms .
construct forms as specified in num.b .
c. installing joints .
install joints as specified in num.c .
d. placing concrete .
place concrete for vertical and sloping curb as specified in num.d .
e. finishing concrete .
finish the top and front face of the curb as specified in num.e .
f. protecting and curing concrete .
immediately after finishing the concrete apply curing compound as specified in num.f.num .
g. backfilling curb .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c against the curb .
num granite curb excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
place footing concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
num set granite curb in concrete ensuring that the top surface is at the required grade .
ensure that joints are at most num inch wide for dressed and num inch wide for quarrysplit curb .
point the joints using mortar .
place numinch preformed joint filler between the granite curb and concrete pavement .
seal with hotpoured joint sealer .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c against the curb .
num reset granite curb remove granite curb without damaging the existing granite curb sections .
remove the existing foundation and concrete adhering to the granite curb sections to be reset .
reuse concrete as specified in num.a .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
remove unstable material and replace it with suitable material .
once placed compact the replacement underlying material .
place footing concrete according to the limitations specified in num.c .
consolidate the concrete by hand spading or using internal mechanical vibrators .
reset granite curb .
ensure that joints are at most num inch wide for dressed and num inch wide for quarrysplit curb .
point the joints using mortar .
place numinch preformed joint filler between the granite curb and adjacent concrete pavement .
seal with hotpoured joint sealer .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c against the curb .
num hma curb clean the surface where the hma curb will be placed .
construct hma curb using an hma curb machine .
where the hma curb is to be placed on an existing surface that does not have a smooth grade use a method that provides the required curb line and grade .
the contractor may use side forms .
when short sections of hma curb with short radii are required the contractor may use another method as long as the resulting hma curb conforms to the curb as produced by the automatic machine .
perform hma curb construction in a continuous operation in num direction to eliminate curb joints .
however where conditions prevent a continuous operation construct joints to ensure a continuous bond between the old and new sections of the hma curb .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___x___ concrete barrier curb linear foot ___x___ concrete vertical curb linear foot ___x___ concrete sloping curb linear foot ___x___ concrete barrier curb dowelled linear foot ___x___ concrete vertical curb dowelled linear foot ___x___ concrete sloping curb dowelled linear foot ___x variable height concrete barrier curb linear foot ___x variable height concrete barrier curb dowelled linear foot ___x variable height concrete vertical curb linear foot ___x variable height concrete vertical curb dowelled linear foot granite curb linear foot reset granite curb linear foot ___ x___ hot mix asphalt curb linear foot the department will measure curb along the face at the gutter line .
num section num nonvegetative surfaces num description this section describes the requirements for constructing nonvegetative surfaces of hma .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified hma nummnum num nonvegetative surface coatingnum num equipment provide equipment as specified hma compactornum vibratory drum compactor num hma plantnum hma trucks num num construction num nonvegetative surface hma excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
construct nonvegetative surfaces before installing guide rail .
obtain re approval for alternate methods of construction .
deliver hma as specified in num.d .
construct nonvegetative surfaces num inches thick .
place and compact the material to produce a surface free of roller marks and ridges .
spread and grade the hma as specified in num.e .
ensure that the finished surface is smooth even and graded to drain away from the guide rail .
compact hma as specified in num.f .
spread rake and lute areas not accessible to pavers and rollers with hand tools and compact with dynamic compactors .
repair nonvegetative surface damaged by guide rail installation with hma .
use hand tampers around posts and other obstacles where mechanical compactors are not accessible .
num colorcoated nonvegetative surface hma construct colorcoated nonvegetative surfaces as specified in num .
uniformly apply the final color at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard by spraying brushing or squeegeeing over the hma surface course .
ensure that the surface is clean and dry at the time of application .
reapply the coating to any missed spots or areas to obtain a uniform coating .
avoid spilling the color coating on adjacent surfaces .
if the color coating spills immediately clean it with water before the coating dries .
if the coating dries repair as directed by the re .
the re will not allow traffic on the colorcoated surface until it is dry .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit nonvegetative surface hot mix asphalt square yard colorcoated nonvegetative surface hot mix asphalt square yard num when the re directs undercutting of unstable material in the excavation area the department will make payment as specified in num for the additional excavation .
the department will also make payment as specified in num for the additional bedding if there is not an excess of excavation available for use as bedding .
section num beam guide rail num description this section describes the requirements for installing resetting or removing beam guide rail .
num materials provide materials as specified concretenum reinforcement steelnum adhesive anchor systemnum flexible delineatorsnum rail elementnum end treatmentnum postsnum blockouts num rub rail num miscellaneous hardwarenum num construction num beam guide rail install beam guide rail single or dualfaced so that no unprotected end is exposed to approaching traffic .
within the same working day replace all existing beam guide rail or cable guide rail that is removed .
where possible install new beam guide rail exposed to approaching traffic before the removal of the existing system .
before driving or mounting the posts determine the location of utilities that may conflict with the posts .
the contractor may adjust post spacing by num inches as approved to eliminate such conflicts .
after completing the wiring for each electrical system and before making connections perform the following tests on each circuit using suitable equipment in the presence of the re num .
tests for continuity .
num .
tests for ground .
num .
tests for insulation resistance between circuit wires and from circuit wires to ground .
verify that the insulation resistance is at least num megaohms between conductors or between conductor and ground for circuits with a total single conductor length of num feet or more and at least num megaohms for circuits with a total single conductor length of less than num feet .
the re may require additional tests if it is suspected that conduit have been damaged .
locate and repair damage to the electrical conduit due to construction operations .
drive beam guide rail posts to the required position .
ensure that posts are driven plumb properly spaced and to the line and grade shown .
install the required bridge attachment type as shown on the plans .
mount bridge beam guide posts as shown on the plans .
attach the beam guide rail element to the spacer at every post .
align the top edge of the beam guide rail element in a straight line or smooth curve parallel to or concentric with the traveled way .
where a vertical transition is required ensure that the top edge of the beam guide rail element forms the chords of a smooth vertical curve .
if adjustments to the num rail element are necessary obtain re approval before punching drilling or reaming of the rail element .
do not cut or weld the rail element .
install white delineators on the right side of the direction of traffic .
install yellow delineators on the left side of the direction of traffic .
mount flexible delineators on the spacer of beam guide rail using either a u channel base on the i beam spacer or a flat base attached to a wood polymer or other solid top spacer .
attach the base to the spacer using an adhesive recommended by the manufacturer of the base and panel .
mount the first delineator on the beam guide rail end treatment so that the plane face of the center of the reflective area is at an angle of num degrees with a line that is perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
mount subsequent delineators every num feet num sections of guide rail along tangent mainline roadway or every num feet num sections of guide rail along curved mainline roadway with a radius of less than num feet .
if a parabolic flare in the beam guide rail exists place the second delineator at the end of the flared section with subsequent delineators spaced as stated above .
if the distance between the last delineator and the end of the beam guide rail is greater than num feet on tangent mainline roadways or num feet on curved mainline roadways mount a delineator on the last post or end treatment .
repair damage to the galvanized coating according to astm a num .
num rub rail when rub rail is required bolt rub rail consisting of a steel channel or a bent plate to the beam guide rail posts .
num terminals and anchorages at least num days before beginning the work submit the manufacturers recommendations the re .
install terminals and anchorages according to the manufacturers recommendations .
excavate for post holes and concrete anchorages as specified in num .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.c .
num beam guide rail blockouts where required attach blockout on existing beam guide rail between the steel posts and rail elements .
where beam guide rail is attached to a structure attach the blockout to the structure .
reset beam guide rail as specified in num to provide a smooth transition to the existing structure .
num reset beam guide rail when the re determines that the beam guide rail is suitable for resetting dismantle store and protect the components until resetting .
to ensure that the beam guide rail meets the current standards replace existing components replace damaged components and provide necessary new components .
dispose of components not designated for resetting the beam guide rail as specified in num .
when storage is required remove the bolts cables and other hardware from beam guide rail element posts and other members .
sort the components and store until resetting .
stack rail elements and ensure that cables are free of kinks .
replace beam guide rail components that are damaged lost or missing in storage .
reset the existing beam guide rail as specified in num using the salvaged components .
use all the salvaged components before providing new components for resetting .
where feasible use existing rail elements in guide rail sections or portions thereof that are reset with existing posts and use new rail elements in guide rail sections or in portions thereof where new guide rail posts are used .
when it is necessary to use existing and new rail elements in the same guide rail section install a continuous length of each .
num removal of beam guide rail after removing beam guide rail backfill the post holes and compact the area to the elevation of the adjacent surface .
dispose of beam guide rail as specified in num .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit beam guide rail linear foot beam guide rail dualfaced linear foot modified thrie beam guide rail linear foot modified thrie beam guide rail dualfaced linear foot beam guide rail bridge linear foot beam guide rail dual faced bridge linear foot thrie beam guide rail bridge linear foot thrie beam guide rail dual faced bridge linear foot rub rail linear foot flared guide rail terminal unit tangent guide rail terminal unit telescoping guide rail end terminal unit controlled release terminal unit controlled release terminal anchorage unit beam guide rail anchorage unit beam guide rail post unit beam guide rail post ___ long unit beam guide rail element linear foot modified thrie beam guide rail element linear foot beam guide rail blockout unit reset beam guide rail with existing posts linear foot reset beam guide rail dualfaced with existing posts linear foot reset modified thrie beam guide rail with existing posts linear foot reset modified thrie beam guide rail dualfaced with existing posts linear foot removal of beam guide rail linear foot the department will measure the various guide rail items by the linear foot along the face of the rail excluding anchorages and end terminals .
the department will measure the various dualfaced rail items by the linear foot along the face of one rail excluding end terminals .
the department will measure beam guide rail element and rub rail by the linear foot along the face of the rail .
when installing beam guide rail blockout to an existing structure the department will make payment for the reset of the beam guide rail to provide a smooth transition under reset beam guide rail with existing posts .
the department will measure reset beam guide rail with existing posts reset beam guide rail dualfaced with existing posts reset modified thrie beam guide rail with existing posts and reset modified thrie beam guide rail dualfaced with existing posts along the face of the rail excluding anchorages and end terminals .
section num traffic stripes traffic markings and rumble strips num description this section describes the requirements for applying traffic stripes traffic markings and raised pavement markers rpms to hma and concrete surfaces .
this section also describes the requirements for removing traffic stripes traffic markings and rpms removing and replacing rpm lenses and constructing rumble strips .
num num materials num materials provide materials as specified flexible delineators num epoxy traffic stripesnum thermoplastic traffic markings num raised pavement marker rpm num epoxy resin adhesive num lenses num lens to casting adhesivenum num equipment provide equipment as specified grinding machine num epoxy striping equipmentnum thermoplastic applicatornum traffic stripe and marking removal equipmentnum rumble strip cutting machine num pavement sawnum num construction num longlife traffic stripes a. striping plan .
at least num days before beginning the work submit to the re for approval a striping plan that includes num .
schedule of operations for applying traffic stripes .
num .
number and type of equipment .
num .
manufacturers recommendations for use of the materials including but not limited to mixing ratios and application temperatures .
b .
surface preparation .
immediately before striping the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
clean the surface num inches beyond the perimeter of the stripes to be placed .
c. striping test strip .
before beginning longlife traffic striping operations construct num or more striping test strips as specified in num.d .
for each striping test strip apply striping to approximately num linear feet of pavement with the same striping procedure that will be used for the project .
construct a test strip for each applicator unit and longlife material used .
construct additional test strips when major equipment repairs or adjustments are made or when the traffic stripes are determined to be defective .
when the test strip is in compliance as determined by the re proceed with striping operations .
each test strip may remain in place and become part of the finished stripes subject to the requirements of num.e .
d. applying striping .
mix epoxy resin with an automatic proportioning and mixing machine and hotspray the compound at a temperature of between num and num f onto dry surfaces .
apply the compound with a wet film thickness of num num mil .
apply the material during dry weather conditions when the ambient temperature is a minimum of num f and the surface temperature is a minimum of num f. adjust operations as required for the prevailing ambient and surface conditions to achieve a notrack drying time of num minutes or less .
immediately after or in conjunction with the compound application uniformly apply num pounds of large glass beads per gallon of epoxy resin to the compound .
after applying the large glass beads uniformly apply num pounds of small glass beads per gallon of epoxy resin to the compound .
remove all compound that has been tracked or spilled outside of the intended placement areas .
num e. defective stripes .
replace longlife traffic stripes that are determined by the re before acceptance to be defective or that are damaged due to sawcutting or sealing of joints in the hma overlay .
remove defective stripes as specified in num .
replace the entire numfoot skip line if the re determines the line to have a deficiency .
if the re determines based upon calculated and measured yields that the striping has a wet film thickness of less than num mils restripe the entire length with num mils of new compound .
replace the entire length of striping where improper curing or discoloration has occurred .
discoloration is localized areas or patches of brown or grayish colored compound .
where improper curing or discoloration occurs intermittently in intervals of num feet or less throughout the striping length replace the entire length of striping from the beginning of the first occurrence until the end of the last occurrence plus num feet on each end .
replace the entire length of striping that has failed to bond to the pavement or has chipped or cracked .
where more than num spots of chipping cracking or poor bonding have occurred within num linear feet of striping replace the entire num foot length of striping .
replace the entire area of striping where the glass bead coverage or retention is deficient based on yield measurements made during application and on visual comparisons of the production traffic stripes with those of the test strips .
replace the entire nummile length of striping where the initial retroreflectance values for num of num readings for that num mile length are less than num millicandelas per square meter per lux for white or num millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow as measured with a ltlnum retroreflectometer .
f. opening to traffic .
complete each application of all types of traffic stripes and allow to thoroughly dry before opening to traffic .
at a minimum delineate center lines on undivided roadways and broken lines between lanes before the traveled way is opened .
the re will determine when the traveled way can be opened to traffic .
num thermoplastic traffic markings a .
marking plan .
at least num days before beginning the work submit to the re for approval a marking plan that includes num .
schedule of operations for applying markings num .
number and type of equipment and num .
manufacturers recommendations for use of the materials including mixing ratios and application temperatures .
b .
surface preparation .
immediately before marking the pavement surface clean the surface of dirt oil grease and foreign material including curing compound on new concrete .
clean the surface num inches beyond the perimeter of the marking to be placed .
c. applying longlife traffic markings .
place preformed thermoplastic or hot extruded thermoplastic traffic markings on thoroughly dry surfaces and during dry weather conditions .
apply using equipment and procedures that produce markings of the specified color width and thickness with welldefined edges uniform retroreflectivity and proper bonding to the pavement .
apply the thermoplastic material as follows num .
extruded thermoplastic .
uniformly heat the thermoplastic material .
when the ambient and surface temperatures are at least num f apply the melted material at a temperature of between num and num f. extrude the thermoplastic traffic markings on the hma or concrete pavement ensuring a thickness of num num mils .
immediately after or in conjunction with the thermoplastic extrusion uniformly apply glass beads to the wet material at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet of markings .
apply glass beads by mechanical means only .
num .
preformed thermoplastic .
melt the preformed thermoplastic tape to bond the traffic markings permanently in position according to the manufacturers recommendations .
meet the minimum initial retroreflectance value as specified in num.d for thermoplastic tape by applying additional glass beads to the hotwet material in a uniform pattern as necessary .
num d. defective markings .
replace longlife traffic markings that are determined by the re before acceptance to be defective or that are damaged due to sawcutting or sealing of joints in the hma overlay .
remove defective markings as specified in num .
replace the entire area of traffic markings determined to be less than the required thickness to have incorrect color or width to have failed to bond to the pavement or to have chipped or cracked .
the minimum replacement area is an individual word or symbol or entire length of longitudinal line from where the deficiency first occurs to where it no longer exists .
replace the entire area of marking where the initial retroreflectance value is less than num millicandelas per square meter per lux for white or num millicandelas per square meter per lux for yellow .
the re will determine initial retroreflectance as follows num .
the re will perform visual inspections at night to identify defective traffic markings that appear to be below the specified minimum value .
num .
the re will perform retroreflectance measurements with a ltlnum retroreflectometer on a clean dry surface .
num .
for word markings the re will make num random retroreflectance measurements on each letter .
for symbols the re will make num random retroreflectance measurements over the symbol .
num .
the re will average all retroreflectance measurements for each letter or symbol to determine if the minimum retroreflectance requirement is met .
e. opening to traffic .
complete each application of traffic markings and allow to thoroughly dry before opening to traffic .
the re will determine when the traveled way can be opened to traffic .
num raised pavement markers rpm lay out the locations of all rpms before installing to ensure proper placement .
place rpms as follows num .
place rpms on the travel lane side of solid paint lines at a distance of num inches from the near edge of the paint line to the near edge of the rpm .
num .
place amber rpms between double yellow paint lines when there is no conflict with a longitudinal joint .
num .
place rpms located along skip lines on the lines longitudinal center axis and at the midpoint of the unpainted gap between each dash .
num .
when placing rpms near longitudinal joints place at least num inches from the joint .
obtain re approval of rpm locations before beginning sawcutting operations .
if the preinstallation layout determines that a rpm is to be placed at a transverse joint or at a location that shows evidence of cracking checking spalling or the failure of underlying base material relocate the rpm longitudinally .
obtain re approval of the proposed relocation .
ensure that the centertocenter rpm distance does not deviate from the specified distance by num feet .
if the centerto center distance for the proposed relocation deviates from the specified centertocenter distance by num feet do not install the rpm .
when placing rpms on bridge deck surfaces locate reinforcement steel in the bridge decks using a pachometer .
do not place rpms in any location that would expose the existing reinforcement steel .
repair damage to the reinforcement steel or bridge deck that is caused by the installation of rpms .
sawcut roadway grooves to the depth width and diameter specified by the rpm manufacturer .
sawcut only those grooves for rpms that will be installed during the same workday .
ensure that roadway grooves are free of dirt dust oil grease moisture curing compounds loose or unsound pavement or other material that may interfere with bonding of the epoxy compound .
sand blast grooves where necessary .
ensure that the grooves are dry where installing rpms .
apply epoxy compound according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not apply epoxy compound when either the pavement surface or ambient air temperature is less than num f at the time of application .
install rpms according to the manufacturers recommendations .
rpm leveling lugs shall rest on the pavement surface .
do not allow lugs to drop below the pavement surface .
the tips of each rpms snow plow deflecting surface must remain below the roadway surface .
num use reflector adhesive to bond each rpm lens to its casting .
the re will reject a rpm if visible buildup of epoxy compound or reflector adhesive affects its optical performance .
num removal of rpms remove rpms that are not installed to full depth or that have a raised end exposed above the pavement surface .
fill the hole with approved material and install a new rpm longitudinally within num feet .
replace rpms that have been damaged by traffic striping or marking material as a result of improperly located traffic stripes or markings .
dispose of rpms as specified in num .
num removal and replacement of rpm lenses remove existing rpm lenses and install new monodirectional or bidirectional pavement reflector lenses using methods that do not damage the rpm castings .
dispose of rpm lenses as specified in num .
num ground mounted flexible delineators use white for delineators located on the right side when facing in the direction of traffic .
use yellow for delineators located on the left side when facing in the direction of traffic .
drive ground mounted flexible delineators vertically into the ground to a minimum depth of num inches .
position flexible delineators so that the plane face of the center of the reflective area is at an angle of num degrees with a line that is perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
num rumble strips at least num days before constructing rumble strips submit a plan for the cutting and collection of the material to the re for approval .
construct rumble strips after traffic striping operations have been completed .
clean the shoulder area where rumble strips are to be installed .
construct rumble strips by cutting indentations into the pavement perpendicular to the edge of the shoulder without disturbing the surrounding pavement .
collect cuttings and reuse as specified in num.a .
num removal of traffic stripes and markings remove traffic stripes and traffic markings using methods that do not damage the underlying or adjacent pavement and do not cause gouging or create ridges or grooves in the pavement .
before beginning removal operations demonstrate to the re the proposed method to remove at least num percent of stripes or markings without removing more than num inch of pavement thickness .
obtain re approval before beginning removal operations .
the removal area includes the area of the stripe or marking plus num inch on all sides .
only remove traffic stripes or markings that will be replaced during the same workday .
dispose of debris from the removal of stripes and markings as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit traffic stripes longlife epoxy resin ___ linear foot traffic markings thermoplastic square foot rpm monodirectional white lens unit rpm bidirectional white lens unit rpm monodirectional amber lens unit rpm bidirectional amber lens unit removal of rpm unit removal and replacement of rpm lens unit num flexible delineator ground mounted unit rumble strip linear foot removal of traffic stripes linear foot removal of traffic markings square foot the department will measure traffic stripes of the various types and materials by the linear foot for each specified width of stripe .
the department will not measure gaps in striping .
section num crash cushions num description this section describes the requirements for providing and constructing inertial barrier systems and crash cushions .
num materials provide materials as specified sandnum salt num ensure that the sand has a dry density of num to num pounds per cubic foot and a num percent maximum allowable moisture content .
use an inertial barrier system listed on the qpl .
num construction num inertial barrier system place each module in its location on the surface .
paint the outline of the base of the module on the surface and include the weight of the module inside the outline .
do not mix modules from different manufacturers in the same system .
the re may require the system manufacturers representative to be present during the installation .
fill each module with sand to the depth recommended by the manufacturer .
combine num to num percent of salt by weight and evenly disperse throughout the sand .
do not substitute calcium chloride caclnum for salt .
place the lid on the module to ensure that no weather elements come in contact with the sand .
install num equidistant rivets or other fasteners as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the department on the periphery of the lid .
num crash cushion at least num days before beginning the work submit the manufacturers installation guide to the re .
install crash cushions according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the re may require the system manufacturers representative to be present during the installation .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit crash cushion inertial barrier system ___ modules unit crash cushion ___ unit num section num signs num description this section describes the requirements for erecting signs and mounting sign panels .
num materials provide materials as specified concretenum grout num.a reinforcement steelnum sign panels num.a steel u post sign supportsnum breakaway sign supportsnum nonbreakaway sign supportsnum mounting material num obtain type ga breakaway couplings from the department .
num construction num regulatory and warning signs and type ga u post support guide signs if sign placement conflicts with existing conditions obtain re approval to adjust the sign location .
determine the sign post lengths based on the final grade .
mount sign panels on breakaway steel u post sign supports .
for signs located behind guide rails or other roadside barriers mount sign panels on steel u post sign supports without the breakaway assembly .
after mounting sign panels notify the re .
the re will examine the sign panels at night for glare .
if directed by the re adjust the sign panels to eliminate glare .
shim signs mounted on num posts either at all bolts on num of the posts or at the proper upper or lower bolts on both posts .
shim signs mounted on a single post at either the upper or lower bolts whichever best minimizes glare .
install shims between the back of the sign and the post .
ensure that the sign does not deform and that the nuts and bolts are securely tightened .
num type ga breakaway and nonbreakaway support guide signs a .
working drawings .
at least num days before beginning work submit working drawings for certification .
b. excavating .
excavate as specified in num .
shape and compact the underlying material to produce a firm even surface .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the excavation is unstable undercut backfill and compact as directed by the re .
c. constructing pedestals .
set anchor bolts into a template to maintain alignment and elevation .
secure in position to prevent displacement while placing concrete .
place reinforcement steel as specified in num before placing the concrete .
ensure that concrete placement complies with the limitations as specified in num.c .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
cure concrete as specified in num.f .
d. erecting posts .
submit written request to the re for the type and quantity of breakaway couplings required at least num days before erecting posts .
erect posts as specified in num.g .
e. mounting sign panels .
mount type ga guide sign panels on sign support using mounting material .
num type go and type gox guide sign panels mount type go and type gox guide sign panels on sign support structures using mounting material .
after mounting sign panels notify the re .
the re will examine the sign panels at night for glare .
if directed by the re adjust the sign panels to eliminate glare .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit regulatory and warning sign square foot guide sign type ga steel u post supports square foot guide sign type ga breakaway supports square foot guide sign type ga nonbreakaway supports square foot guide sign panel type go square foot guide sign panel type gox square foot the department will make payment for sign support structures as specified in num .
the department will make payment for sign illumination as specified in num .
num division num utilities section num water num description this section describes the requirements for installing water pipe resetting water valve boxes connecting water services installing relocating and resetting fire hydrant assemblies and submitting asbuilt plans .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num concretenum clsmnum structural steelnum bolts and bolting materialnum class b beddingnum class c beddingnum ductile iron water pipe num provide gaskets according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide steel pipe sleeves according to astm a num and galvanize according to astm a num .
provide galvanized channel supports rods bolts nuts washers inserts and other hardware required for the permanent installation according to astm a num or a num .
see the special provisions for additional materials requirements .
num construction num water pipe a. scheduling of work and interruption to water service .
provide the re and the utility with a detailed schedule of the work .
notify the utility in writing at least num days before beginning construction of water facilities .
do not perform work on water facilities that will result in water service interruptions from april num through september num without approval of the utility .
the department may extend this period based on weather conditions and system demand requirements as determined by the utility .
perform the work to minimize adverse impact to the utilitys operations .
perform work in a manner that is acceptable to the utilitys inspector and in coordination with the re .
provide the utilitys inspector with access to the work .
b .
existing utilities and structures .
determine the location of surface and subsurface structures within the work site including but not limited to underground electric telecommunication gas and sewer facilities .
notify the re when excavation is required within num feet of any existing utility and submit a plan to the re for approval detailing the proposed methods of excavating around the existing utilities and the proposed methods of protecting and supporting the existing utilities .
protect and support utility facilities encountered .
notify the re and the utility num days before crossing any existing utilities so that the utility may send a representative to the work site at the time of excavation or construction .
remove and dispose of abandoned pipe services valves boxes thrust blocks and appurtenances unless otherwise shown on the plans as specified in num .
cap or plug pipe that is to be abandoned in a manner that is acceptable to the utility .
c. excavating .
before excavating sawcut the full depth of the existing pavement and sidewalk .
excavate a trench for placing water pipe valves services tees or appurtenances .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if num the re determines that the bottom of the trench is unstable undercut as directed by the re and backfill with class b bedding .
if the material at the bottom of the trench is rock or other hard material excavate an additional num inches of the material below the bottom of the pipe .
backfill the undercut with class c bedding .
ensure that trenches are kept free of any standing water during the installation .
do not excavate for trenches in embankments until the embankment has been constructed to an elevation of at least num feet above the top of the pipe or to the top of the embankment whichever is lower .
do not excavate trenches more than num feet in advance of installing the pipe unless approved by the re .
maintain trenches according to num cfr num .
provide and maintain trench crossings where necessary .
for trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within num feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
the contractor may use temporary protection instead of backfilling trenches in the traveled way and shoulder .
if using temporary protection submit working drawings for approval .
for trenches not in the traveled way and shoulder do not leave trenches open overnight unless protected with caution fence .
d. handling of pipe and accessories .
lift pipe and other items using hoists .
do not drop pipe onto the ground or into a trench and do not permit pipe to roll or skid against other pipe .
e. installing water pipe .
identify areas where pipe will have less than num feet of cover .
provide the re with a report of the identified areas in order to obtain the utilitys approval .
use a laser system to control the alignment and grade of the pipe .
lay water pipe in straight lines .
if deviations from a straight line are approved by the re ensure that the deflection at each pipe joint does not exceed the manufacturers recommended maximum deflection .
provide additional pipe or connections necessary to bypass obstructions or other utilities .
adjust the depth of the pipe to pass obstructions as approved by the re .
when grade changes through curves are required divide the curve among several joints .
install the pipe so that it is solidly supported by the subgrade or pipe bedding as required over its full length except where recesses have been made for joints .
ensure that the interior of the pipe is kept clean and free of intrusion by soil or other foreign material .
ensure that the inside of the pipe is maintained clean and that valves and hydrants are in good working order when installed .
protect open ends of the pipe at all times and securely seal the openings with plugs approved by the utility whenever work is stopped .
remove the plug and inspect and clean the interior of the pipe before resuming pipe installation .
join pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
cut pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure cuts are clean and square .
install gate valves inserting valves tapping sleeves tapping valves valve boxes blowoffs and miscellaneous fittings .
set the fittings and valves true to the pipe lines .
ensure that valve stems are set plumb .
support the valves with concrete blocking set on firm ground that has been compacted using a mechanical plate tamper .
set valve boxes plumb centered with respect to the valve stem and flush with the finished grade .
coordinate the installation of water mains with other work and prevent conflicts and interference with all existing facilities and proposed construction .
install tapping valves and insert valves as wet connections with no loss of water or interruption of flow .
notify the utility num days before performing wet connections .
perform wet connections according to the equipment manufacturers recommendations .
f. hydrostatic pressure testing and leakage testing .
after laying and joining a complete section of pipe between valves and before backfilling pressuretest the pipe line .
expel the air from the pipe line through blowoffs or taps and ensure that the caps plugs and fittings are adequately braced and anchored .
perform pressure testing of the water main according to the awwa standard cnum in the presence of the utility inspector using a minimum test pressure of num pounds per square inch .
maintain the pressure in the pipe for num minutes .
demonstrate that flanged victaulic or welded joint pipe lines exhibit no leaks under pressure .
demonstrate that the leakage for mechanical jointed pipe lines or pushon joint pipe lines do not exceed the allowable leakage rate as computed by num num l nd p where l allowable leakage in gallons per hour n number of joints in length of pipe tested d nominal diameter of pipe in inches p average test pressure during the leakage test in pounds per square inch where it is impractical to maintain an open trench for the full length of any section between valves provide test plugs and perform pressure testing and leakage testing to the satisfaction of the utility g. backfilling .
symmetrically place backfill on each side of the pipe in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement and compact with a flat faced tamper using the directed method as specified in num.c .
where bedding is not required backfill with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter .
reuse excess or excavated material as specified in num.a .
the contractor may use clsm as alternate backfill material when backfilling trenches .
if using clsm install as specified in num.f .
restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans .
h. disinfectionbacteriological testing .
before placing pipelines into service disinfect the system according to the awwa standard cnum except if trench water has entered the main or if the water temperature is less than num f use the continuous feed method .
use hypochlorite or liquid chlorine according to awwa standards bnum and b num respectively .
introduce and distribute the chlorine into the new lines using a minimum dosage of num parts per million .
maintain the chlorinated water in the system for a minimum of num hours .
contact the utility inspector to verify the chlorine residual is num parts per million .
flush the pipe line in a manner approved by the utility until the chlorine concentrations are no higher than generally prevailing in the system .
retain a certified testing laboratory to sample and test the water for bacteriological and turbidity analysis according to the awwa cnum and the federal safe drinking water act num cfr parts num through num .
ensure that the water conforms to the bacteriological standards specified in the new jersey safe drinking water regulations n.j.a.c .
num et seq .
as well as the federal safe drinking water act num cfr parts num through num .
provide the test results to the utility .
i .
thrust blocks .
install thrust blocks at bends greater than num degrees and at tees plugs and valves .
ensure thrust blocks are placed against firm undisturbed ground .
ensure that thrust blocks do not come in contact with other utilities or structures without the approval of the re .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
num water pipe bridge construct water mains on bridges as specified in the special provisions .
num water service connection before performing water service connections check the condition of the meter pit and determine if the enclosed meter is operational .
notify the utility and water service customers at least num days in advance of water shutoff .
schedule the work as specified in num.a .
determine the location of surface and subsurface structures as specified in num.b .
excavate as specified in num.c .
install the temporary and permanent water services required to maintain consistent service .
install the corporation stop .
install the continuous length of copper service pipe between the corporation stop and curb stop .
install the curb stop and curb box .
ensure the curb box is set to the proposed final grade .
install and connect customer water service pipe compatible with the existing customer water service pipe .
if necessary relocate the existing water meter and meter pit .
shut off existing services that are to be abandoned install a plug in the existing curb stop and remove the existing curb box .
backfill as specified in num.g .
num fire hydrant schedule the work as specified in num.a .
determine the location of surface and subsurface structures as specified in num.b .
excavate as specified in num.c .
install the fire hydrant according to awwa section cnum .
install the branch connection to the main including the standard tee gate valve and pipe from the main to the hydrant .
provide additional pipe or connections necessary to bypass obstructions or utilities .
place coarse aggregate around the num base .
ensure that the fire hydrant assembly is set plumb with the pumper nozzles normal to the face of the curb .
install thrust block as specified in num.e .
backfill as specified in num.g .
num relocate fire hydrant remove the existing fire hydrant .
cap the existing branch line .
install the existing fire hydrant as specified in num where shown on the plans .
num reset fire hydrant adjust the height of the existing fire hydrant by adding to the vertical connection to the plug to meet the proposed grade .
do not move or disturb the location of the hydrant branch connection to the main .
num reset water valve box adjust the height of the existing water valve boxes so that it is set flush with the proposed grade without disturbing the existing valve .
num water asbuilt plan upon completion of the water utility work submit to the re and to the utility a scaled asbuilt plan noting the location of the items of water utility construction except reset fire hydrant and reset water valve box .
on the plan show stationing distance references to the curb line and num ties for each valve box curb box and hydrant within num feet to aboveground physical features .
on the plans show the depth of the water pipe and service connection at a minimum of numfoot increments along the line or connection .
provide the asbuilt plans in a format acceptable to the utility .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ ductile iron water pipe class ___ linear foot ___ ductile iron water pipe bridge class ___ linear foot water service connection unit fire hydrant unit relocate fire hydrant unit reset fire hydrant unit reset water valve box unit water asbuilt plan lump sum the department will measure ___ ductile iron water pipe by the linear foot including the lengths of tees sleeves and valves measured parallel to the water pipe outside the limit of a structure .
the department will measure ___ ductile iron water pipe bridge by the linear foot measured parallel to the water pipe within the limits of a structure .
a unit of water service connection includes both temporary and permanent water service connections needed to provide continued service to a structure .
the department will make payment for each structure as a separate unit of water service connection .
the department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans under the various items the pavement structure is composed of .
num section num sanitary sewers num description this section describes the requirements for installing sanitary sewer gravity and force mains sewer lining sanitary sewer manholes sanitary sewer connections miscellaneous fittings and testing .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num num soil aggregate inum num class b beddingnum class c beddingnum concretenum mortar num clsmnum curing materials num precast manholenum reinforcement steelnum reinforced concrete sewer pipe num pvc sewer pipenum corrugated steel sewer pipenum ductile iron sewer pipenum castingsnum epoxy bedding compoundnum ladder rungnum concrete blocknum concrete brick num preformed joint filler num asphalt cement waterproofing num see the special provisions for additional materials requirements .
num construction num sewer pipe a. scheduling of work .
schedule work as specified in num.a .
b .
existing utilities and structures .
comply with num.b .
c. excavating .
before excavating sawcut full depth existing pavement and sidewalk .
excavate a trench for placing sewer pipe and appurtenances .
remove any observable rock and boulders that are within num inches of the pipe .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the trench is unstable undercut as directed by the re and backfill with class b bedding .
ensure that trenches are kept free of standing water during the installation of sewer pipe .
do not excavate for trenches in embankments until the embankment has been constructed to an elevation of at least num feet above the top of the pipe .
do not excavate trenches more than num feet in advance of installing the pipe unless approved by the re .
maintain trenches according to num cfr num .
provide and maintain trench crossings where necessary .
for trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within num feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
the contractor may use temporary protection instead of backfilling trenches in the traveled way and shoulder .
if using temporary protection submit working drawings for approval .
for trenches not in the traveled way and shoulder do not leave trenches open overnight unless protected with caution fence .
d. handling of pipe and accessories .
handle pipe and accessories as specified in to num.d .
also store orings and gaskets in locations where air temperatures are maintained within the manufacturers recommendations .
num e. installing sanitary sewer gravity and force mains .
identify areas where pipe will have less than num feet of cover .
provide the re with a report of the identified areas in order to obtain the utilitys approval .
use a laser system to control the alignment and grade control of the pipe .
lay pipe with bell ends facing the opposite direction of flow .
lay sewer main pipe in straight lines except as approved by the re .
adjust the depth of the pipe to pass obstructions as approved by the re .
install the pipe so that it is solidly supported by the underlying material over its full length except where recesses have been made for joints .
ensure that interior of the pipe is kept clean and free of intrusion by soil or other foreign material .
protect open ends of the pipe at all times and securely seal the openings with plugs approved by the utility whenever work is stopped .
remove the plug inspect and clean the interior of the pipe before resuming pipe installation .
join pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
cut pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure cuts are clean and square .
install plugs vents tapping sleeves valves and miscellaneous fittings .
install tapping valves and insert valves as wet connections with no interruption of flow .
f. thrust blocks .
for sewer force mains install thrust blocks at bends greater than num degrees and at tees plugs and valves .
ensure thrust blocks are placed against firm undisturbed ground .
ensure that s blocks do not come in contact with other utilities or structures without the approval of the re .
place concrete as specified in num.d .
g. sewer pipe testing .
after laying and jointing a complete section of pipe between manholes and before backfilling perform a visual inspection of the pipe by lamping with a light and mirror to show if alignment contains deflection between manholes .
perform the visual inspection in the presence of the utility inspector and to the utilitys standards .
also test the pipe as follows num .
gravity main sewer testing .
perform the leakage testing listed in the special provisions .
a. infiltration testing .
at least num day before performing testing submit a plan to the utility for approval detailing the proposed method to construct weirs or otherwise measure infiltration including installation of pipe plugs and methods of temporary pumping to maintain service as necessary .
submit the approved plan to the re perform the infiltration testing in the presence of the sanitary sewer inspector and according to the utilitys standards .
b. exfiltration testing .
at least num day before performing testing submit a plan to the utility for approval detailing the proposed method to construct weirs or otherwise measure exfiltration including installation of pipe plugs and methods of temporary pumping to maintain service as necessary .
submit the approved plan to the re .
seal the low end of the section being tested and test the entire section of the system including manholes by filling the system with clean water to a minimum of num feet above the top of the pipe in the upstream manhole .
measure the amount of water necessary to maintain a constant head of pressure above the pipe for num hours .
perform the exfiltration testing in the presence of the sanitary sewer inspector and according to the utilitys standards .
num .
force main sewer testing .
at least num day before performing pressure testing submit a plan to the utility for approval detailing the testing .
submit the approved plan to the re .
plug the force main at the tiein manhole .
perform hydrostatic pressure testing of the water main according to awwa standard cnum in the presence of the utility inspector using a minimum test pressure directed by the utility .
maintain the pressure in the pipe for num minutes .
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the utility that sanitary sewer force mains exhibit no leaks under pressure .
h. backfilling .
symmetrically backfill on each side of the pipe in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement and compact with a flat faced mechanical tamper using the directed method as specified in num.c .
where bedding is not required backfill with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter .
reuse excavated material as specified in num.a .
the contractor may use clsm as alternate backfill material when backfilling trenches .
if using clsm install as specified in num.f .
restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans num sanitary sewer pipe bridge construct sanitary sewer pipe on bridges as specified in the special provisions .
num num sanitary sewer pipe lining at least num days before beginning the work submit to the re and the utility for approval a plan detailing a method to temporarily transfer the wastewater flow around the section or sections of the sewer being lined .
divert the wastewater flow from an upstream access point and pump the flow to a downstream access point by providing a pump and bypass lines with adequate capacity to handle peak wastewater flow .
perform sanitary sewer lining by entry from existing manholes .
modify existing manholes to permit sufficient access to perform the work as approved by the re .
before beginning lining internally clean new and existing pipe lines so that they are free from internal deposits .
remove pipe obstructions and sewer service projections into the sewer in a manner approved by the utility .
if an obstruction or sewer service connection projection can not be removed internally perform the removal using an opencut excavation and make any necessary pipe repairs in a manner approved by the utility .
perform liner installation according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the liner neatly fits the internal circumference of the sewer to be lined .
allow for circumferential stretching during insertions according to the manufacturers recommendations .
perform the work to fully impregnate and cure the liner inplace or to reform the folded liner to fully conform the liner to the pipe interior depending upon the method used .
monitor the pressures and temperatures at both ends of the pipe where the liner is being reformed to ensure the recommended pressures and temperatures are available to fully form the liner over the entire length of the liner run .
cool the liner and relieve the pressure for the recommended time to maintain the optimum temperatures and pressures to fully form the liner .
seal the annular space between the newly installed liner and the sewer pipe where the sewer pipe enters and exits each manhole .
finish the seal on the manhole interior with a nonshrink grout .
ensure that the finished liner connection into each manhole has a watertight seal .
reinstall existing sewer service connections into the newly lined pipe .
num sanitary sewer service connections comply with num.b .
notify the utility at least num days in advance of performing sewer service connections .
where new sewer mains are shown to be constructed determine the location of existing service connections .
where service connections are not immediately being reconnected plug the existing service to provide a watertight seal .
maintain uninterrupted wastewater flow from each existing service connection and provide a temporary service bypass connection when necessary .
install sanitary sewer service connections using an approved wye wye saddle or manhole stub .
install sanitary sewer connections so that they are watertight according to the manufacturers recommendations and the utilitys standards .
make the connection to the main using an approved flexible adaptor .
if connecting to a manhole and a stub or knockout bulkhead is not available connect to the manhole using a coring machine .
num sanitary sewer manhole construct sanitary sewer manholes as specified in num .
paint the outside surface of the manhole walls with num coats of asphalt cement waterproofing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide watertight manhole castings unless use of existing castings is specified .
the re will not accept sanitary sewer manholes that are not watertight .
num reconstruct sanitary sewer manhole reconstruct sanitary sewer manholes as specified in num .
paint the outside surface of the manhole walls with num coats of asphalt cement waterproofing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide watertight manhole castings unless using existing castings are specified .
the re will not accept sanitary sewer manholes that are not watertight .
num reset sanitary sewer manhole reset sanitary sewer castings as specified in num .
paint the outside surface of the manhole walls with num coats of asphalt cement waterproofing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide watertight manhole castings unless using existing castings are specified .
the re will not accept sanitary sewer manholes that are not watertight .
num num video inspection of sewer perform video inspection of interior pipelines as specified in num .
provide an additional copy of the tape or digital media to the utility .
num sewer asbuilt plan upon completion of the sewer utility work submit to the re and to the utility scaled asbuilt plans noting the location of all items of sewer utility construction except reset manhole sanitary sewer using existing casting and reset manhole sanitary sewer using new casting .
on the plans show stationing distance references to the curb line and num ties for each wye connection valve vent and service connection within num feet to aboveground physical features .
for gravity sewer mains show rim invert elevations and pipe slopes .
on the plans show the depth of the sewer pipe and service connection at a minimum of numfoot increments along the line or connection .
provide the asbuilt plans in a format acceptable to the utility .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ ductile iron sewer pipe linear foot ___ reinforced concrete sewer pipe linear foot ___ reinforced concrete sewer pipe class___ linear foot ___ polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe linear foot ___ ductile iron sewer pipe bridge linear foot ___ corrugated steel sewer pipe linear foot sanitary sewer pipe lining linear foot sanitary sewer service connection unit manhole sanitary sewer unit manhole sanitary sewer using existing casting unit reconstructed manhole sanitary sewer using existing casting unit reconstructed manhole sanitary sewer using new casting unit reset manhole sanitary sewer using existing casting unit reset manhole sanitary sewer using new casting unit video inspection of sewer linear foot sewer asbuilt plan lump sum the department will measure ___ reinforced concrete sewer pipe class___ by the linear foot including the tees valves and bends measured parallel to the sewer pipe outside the limit of a structure .
the department will measure ___ reinforced concrete sewer pipe bridge class ___ by the linear foot measured parallel to the sewer pipe within the limits of a structure .
the department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans under the various items the pavement structure is composed of .
section num gas num description the work describes the requirements for installing gas mains valves vents service lines and gas valve boxes and resetting gas valve boxes .
num materials provide materials as specified coarse aggregate no .
num soil aggregate inum num concrete num num clsmnum structural steelnum bolts and bolting materialnum class a bedding num class b beddingnum class c beddingnum timber for structuresnum provide steel pipe sleeves as according to astm a num and galvanize according to astm a num .
provide hotdip galvanize channel supports rods bolts nuts washers inserts and other hardware required for the permanent installation as according to astm a num or a num .
num construction num gas main a. prequalification .
only a prequalified contractor approved by the utility may construct or relocate gas mains and appurtenances .
the department will list prequalified contractors for this work in the special provisions .
the work restricted to prequalified contractors does not preclude the contractor from performing sawcutting pavement removal removal of excess gas and temporary or final pavement restoration associated with the work of constructing gas mains .
ensure that the work is performed according to the utilitys general specifications .
b. scheduling work .
schedule work as specified in num.a and according to num cfr num .
c. handling and storing .
the utility will provide and deliver pipe in minimum num foot lengths large fittings and gas protective steel plate .
transport materials within the project limits .
coordinate delivery with the utility pick up other gas main or service specific materials such as pipe pipe sleeves pipe hanger assemblies expansion joints and seals between the pipe and sleeves from the utility at the location specified in the special provisions .
store and protect the pipe and other materials received from the utility .
support polyethylene pipe every num feet during storage and while being transported .
return and deliver excess pipe fitting and other miscellaneous materials provided by the utility to the utility at the location specified in the special provisions .
obtain material receipts from the utility when material is being delivered by the utility or returned to utility and provide a copy to the re d. existing utilities and structures .
comply with num.b .
e. excavating .
before excavating sawcut the full depth of the existing pavement and sidewalk .
excavate a trench for placing gas pipe valves services tees and appurtenances .
obtain re approval before finishing excavation .
if the re determines that the bottom of the trench is unstable undercut as directed by the re and backfill with class b bedding .
if the material at the bottom of the trench is rock or other hard material excavate an additional num inches of the material below the bottom of the pipe .
ensure that trenches are kept free of standing water during the installation .
do not excavate for trenches in embankments until the embankment has been constructed to an elevation of at least num feet above the top of the pipe .
do not excavate trenches more than num feet in advance of installing the pipe unless approved by the re .
maintain trenches according to num cfr num .
provide and maintain trench crossings where necessary .
for trenches in the traveled way shoulder and within num feet of the outside edge of the shoulder backfill and restore the pavement structure and match the surrounding condition before opening to traffic .
the contractor may use temporary protection instead of backfilling trenches in the traveled way and shoulder .
if using temporary protection submit working drawings for approval .
for trenches not in the traveled way and shoulder do not leave trenches open overnight unless protected with caution fence .
f. installing gas mains .
identify areas where pipe will have less than num feet of cover .
provide the re with a report of the identified areas in order to obtain the utilitys approval .
use a laser system to control the alignment and grade control of the pipe .
place class b or c bedding and compact with a mechanical tamper using the directed method as specified in num.c .
install the pipe so that it is solidly supported by the bedding over its full length except where recesses have been made at joint locations .
ensure that interior of the pipe is kept clean and free of num all intrusion by bedding soil or other foreign material .
install elbows and associated fittings .
cut standard elbows of num or num degrees to match the required elbow shown on the plans or as required by field conditions .
install insulating joints valves valve risers valves boxes miscellaneous fittings insulated locating wire pipeline markers and test stations .
maintain a numfoot minimum clearance between utilities .
coordinate the installation of gas main with other work and prevent conflicts and interference with existing facilities and proposed construction .
join pipe as follows num .
welding steel pipe .
at least num days before installing gas mains submit to the re and to the utility a copy of the welders performance qualification record showing the welder has been tested and approved by the utility .
perform welding according api standard num .
perform welding in a manner that is acceptable to the utility .
do not tack ground clamps or other devices to the pipe .
repair arc burn damage to the pipe when the depth of the defect is less than num percent of the nominal wall thickness by grinding smooth .
when the depth of the arc burn physical defect is greater than num percent of the nominal wall thickness remove the defect and the adjacent firth weld .
do not perform welding repairs on gouges scratches arc burns or other defects of the pipe .
the contractor may make field repairs of gouges and groves in the parent metal of the pipe by grinding .
do not grind more than num percent of the nominal wall thickness of the pipe .
remove dents that contain stress concentrations such as scratches gouges groves or arc burns by cutting out the damaged portion of the pipe .
provide an examination of welds by radiographic xray inspection by a qualified inspection company approved by the utility .
deliver the xray films and num copy of the radiographic inspection report to the re and to the utility .
apply or repair pipe coating so that pipe coating passes a holiday detector test .
seal field welds and fittings with raychem unisleeve or with a double layer of cold applied numinchwide corrosion protective tape as directed by the utility inspector .
install cathodic protection including pipe coating anodes and rectifiers insulating joints and test stations .
install the anodes at the lower elevation of the pipe in or below the water table where possible and offset the anodes as far as practical from the pipe .
do not place the anodes where other metallic structures such as conduit cable or pipe is between the main and the anode .
provide temporary blocking to exposed end of gas mains to be abandoned in place using combination beam and column method .
do not backfill around the anodes with class b bedding .
use excavated material for backfill around the anodes .
num .
fusing plastic pipe .
at least num days before installing plastic gas mains submit to the re and the utility the names and training qualifications of personnel intended to perform fusing on the work site for approval .
ensure that personnel fusing and inspecting butt fusion joints are certified according to num cfr num .
before fusing plastic pipe obtain the approval of the utility for the heat fusion equipment .
fabricate steel to plastic transition fittings using an electric arc welder .
num .
thrust restraints and bell joint encapsulation .
install thrust restraints and bell joint encapsulation devices as directed by the utility before excavating other areas around the main .
the number of thrust restraints and bell joint encapsulations is dependent upon field conditions and the location of the tiein and live gas excavations .
num .
hot tap preparation .
when hot taps are performed by the utility in the presence of the utilitys representative weld a spherical tee numway tee line stop fitting or other fitting on the existing steel main or install a split sleeve collar line stop fitting or other fitting on the existing cast iron main .
g. backfilling .
symmetrically backfill on each side of the pipe using class b bedding in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
compact with a flat faced mechanical tamper using the directed method specified in num.c .
when the height of num foot above the pipe is achieved place caution tape .
backfill the remainder of the trench with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
compact with a flat faced mechanical tamper using the directed method as specified in num.c .
for plastic mains with less than num feet cover enclose with steel pipe or protect with a steel plate .
if the pipe is in an area not subject to vehicular traffic the department will not require a steel plate .
reuse excess excavated material as specified in num.a .
restore the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans .
num h. line stop and tiein assistance .
excavate pits as required to provide access to the utility for line stops flow stops bypass insertions bagging and venting hot tops thrust restraints purging and tieins .
protect using temporary fencing or steel plates as directed .
maintain the excavation until the utility has completed its work .
construct a concrete support pad under the pipe at locations requiring a line stop before the arrival of the utilitys line stop crew .
assist the utility in handling the pipe by providing sufficient labor and equipment .
i. tiein and gas out .
perform cutouts and tieins at both ends of the pipe simultaneously .
the utility will purge and cut the pipeline .
once started continue the work of tieins until completed .
keep tiein excavations open or plated as required until the utility has completed its work .
as necessary modify standard tiein pieces to fit connection requirements .
j. airpressure test .
perform an airpressure test on new pipeline including tiein pieces under the direction and supervision of the utility .
perform the test according to the pressures and durations provided in the special provisions .
locate and repair leaks in a manner that is approved by the utility .
pig steel gas mains using a scraper barrel pig or a poly pig when testing plastic mains .
ensure that the pig is in a like new condition that is acceptable to the utility .
if using caps or expansion joints anchor the pipe in a manner that is acceptable to the utility to prevent any movement during the test .
num installing gas mains on bridges install expansion joints in the main as instructed by the utility representative .
comply with the requirements of num for structural shapes and plates for utility supports .
adjust hangers to provide uniform support of the pipe across the bridge and to align it in the abutment sleeves .
clean and paint the hanger supports as directed by the utility .
num gas service connection comply with num.b .
perform work associated with the transfer of service including the excavation of num tiein hole for direct burial and transfer installations and num tiein holes for insert installations .
submit to the re and the utility the names and training qualifications of personnel intended to install fused or mechanical connections for approval .
turn off the gas at the service tee using pressure control equipment before cutting the existing service pipe .
disconnect the service pipe inside the building before the meter .
support the meter to avoid stressing the house piping .
install services either by inserting plastic tubing in the existing service or by directly burying plastic tubing or pipe .
num .
installing services with direct burial of plastic pipe .
excavate as specified in num.e .
install the direct burial plastic service including location wire from the main to the building fuse the pipe and assist the utility to tie the connection into the gas main .
backfill above the pipe with class b bedding in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
compact with a flat faced mechanical tamper .
when the height of backfill reaches num feet above the service connection backfill the remainder of the trench with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
compact with a flat faced mechanical tamper using the directed method as specified in num.c .
install a curb shutoff valve and install a meter shutoff valve at the head of the service .
seal the hole in the foundation wall and surround the service pipe with cement or grout .
electrofuse or weld the self tapping tee to the main and connect it to the service using electrofuse or mechanical fittings .
num .
installing services by plastic tubing insertion .
excavate and remove any curb shutoff offset swing or service drip that may impede the insertion of the plastic pipe .
ream the existing service from the building to the main .
after reaming airblow the existing service from the building to the main .
insert the plastic tubing from the main to the building .
install a curb shutoff valve and install meter shutoff valve at the head of the service .
leave the meter shut off valve open with the plug installed .
electrofuse or weld the self tapping tee to the new main and connect it to the new plastic service using electrofuse or mechanical fittings .
pressure test the service as required and soap test all fuses and mechanical connections .
perform pressure and soap tests in the presence of the utility inspector .
release the pressure tap a self tapping tee and gas out service through the hose from the meter shut off to the outside of the building until a gas reading of greater than num percent is obtained using a combustible gas indicator .
install a tee cap and soap test the cap .
num num reset gas valve boxes adjust the height of the existing valve box so that it is set flush with the proposed grade without disturbing the existing valve .
num gas asbuilt plan upon completion of the work submit to the re and to the utility asbuilt drawings in a cadd format acceptable to the utility .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ gas main linear foot ___ gas main bridge linear foot gas service connection unit reset gas valve box unit gas asbuilt plan lump sum the department will make payment for ___ gas mains by the linear foot including the length projecting into the rear face of the abutment .
a unit of gas service connection includes the permanent installation and any required temporary installation for each property .
the department will make payment for restoring the existing pavement structure to the original condition or as shown on the plans under the various items the pavement structure is composed of .
num division num electrical section num general items num description this section describes the requirements for constructing or installing various electrical items .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified in coarse aggregate no .
num num concretenum grout num.a clsmnum precast concretenum reinforcement steelnum anchor boltsnum miscellaneous hardwarenum pipe beddingnum junction box frames and coversnum coal tar epoxy paintnum conduit and fittingsnum cable and wire num multiplelighting and service wire num bonding and grounding materialsnum resin splicing kits num electrical tape num cable racks num cast boxes and fittingsnum provide materials as specified in the contract and in the new jersey electrical materials specifications that are available on the departments website .
a listing of prequalified materials is also available from the departments website .
the department will allow the use of prequalified materials provided the materials meet the requirements of the contract .
submit materials for approval on a materials questionnaire as specified in num .
include working drawings for certification with the materials questionnaire for materials not prequalified .
follow the accepted standards of ansi nema ul nec ite and astm for materials not specified in the contract .
provide nylon cable ties with a tensile strength of num pounds .
provide true tape with a tensile strength of num pounds .
num equipment provide equipment as specified in vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num num construction num existing systems follow the accepted standards of ansi nema ul nec ite and astm for construction operations not specified in the contract .
ensure that the work complies with the requirements of the utilities having jurisdiction at the device location .
at least num days before starting work on an existing system submit a plan to the re for approval that includes the proposed construction methods and describes how the existing systems will be maintained modified or operated during the performance of the work .
systems are comprised of num or more new or existing items to provide a fully functional operation .
at least num days before starting work on an existing system provide notification as specified in num and arrange a meeting with the department to verify the operational status of the existing systems and responsibilities for maintenance .
document the findings of the meeting and forward a written summary to the attendees .
if work is performed on or damage occurs to an electrical system before the meeting with the department the contractor assumes maintenance responsibility for that electrical system .
do not interfere with the operation of existing systems that are not designated for modification or removal .
if modifying existing systems salvage the existing aboveground materials for use in the modified system or for alternative use as specified by the department .
store salvaged materials at or near the project limits as specified in num .
as directed deliver salvaged materials to the nearest department electrical maintenance yard or to the location specified in the special provisions and unload the materials where directed .
dispose of unused or unsalvaged materials from the project limits as specified in num .
provide connections and coordination with utility services as specified in num.c .
num rigid metallic conduit earth a. excavation .
comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
excavate trenches only for distances to be installed and backfilled during the same day .
prepare the trench bottom to eliminate lumps ridges and hollows .
b .
installation .
do not use aluminum conduit and do not embed aluminum conduit in structural concrete .
do not use disc grinders to cut conduit .
cut conduit square and true and ensure they butt together over their full circumference .
ream rigid metallic conduit ends whether shop or field cut to remove burrs and rough edges .
thread rigid metallic conduit ends according to nema standards and provide the free ends with groundedtype insulated bushings .
for rigid metallic conduit with a diameter less than num inch the contractor may provide impact resistant plastic insulating bushings and bond lock nuts .
thread bonding bushings on the free ends of the conduit and lock bushings in place with set screws .
coat ungalvanized threads on rigid metallic conduit resulting from field cuts and places where the galvanizing on the conduit or fittings has been damaged with a compound that is electrically conductive and prevents oxidation .
construct a conduit run with at least numfoot sections .
the contractor may use a shorter section to complete a conduit run into a foundation or junction box .
cap conduit that does not terminate in a junction box at the end of the workday .
if unable to use a standard coupling use a ulapproved concretetight compression coupling with a permanent stop .
do not use reducing couplings except for expansion joints on bridges if necessary to adapt a service conduit to the meter cabinet .
do not use couplings that use set screws .
do not use slip joints or running threads to couple rigid metallic conduit .
make field bends to rigid metallic conduit with an industryaccepted hydraulic conduit bender .
provide a radius of at least num times the inside diameter of the conduit .
do not install more than two numdegree bends between junction boxes pull boxes and foundations .
num ensure that bends and elbows used in service conduit conform to the utility requirements .
ensure that conduit used for fiber optic cables meets the minimum bend and radius requirements as specified in the contract and as required by the fiber optic cable manufacturer .
when installing rigid metallic conduit in structures rigidly support the conduit before placing concrete .
install expansion joint fittings at structure expansion joints .
if installing conduit in existing junction boxes cut additional holes in the junction boxes to admit the conduit .
grout around conduit installed in junction boxes before installing wire or cables .
if unable to install conduit with sufficient grade to provide drainage install tdrains consisting of standard pipe tee and nipple for conduit at the lowest point of the conduit run .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the meter cabinet and the wire entrance to the controller cabinet with a sealing compound .
clean conduit runs including existing conduit to be used .
after cleaning test each conduit by pulling through a metal ball with a diameter at least num percent of the nominal inside diameter of the conduit to ensure that the conduit is free of any obstruction or foreign material .
if the ball fails to pass through the conduit repair or replace the defective conduit .
install a numpound average breaking strength true tape marked in numfoot increments for the length of the conduit .
cap and seal the conduit leaving the tape inside .
c. backfilling .
ensure that conduit is centered in the trench and is held firmly in place while the trench is backfilled .
backfill with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement .
if the excavations do not provide sufficient material of the quality required for backfilling provide and place the material necessary to make up the deficiency .
compact the backfill using the directed method as specified in num.c .
restore the disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num rigid metallic conduit roadway comply with the requirements specified in num .
submit working drawings for approval detailing the proposed method of jacking or directional drilling .
ensure that jacking or drilling and receiving pits are not within num feet from the edge of the pavement .
excavate the pits as specified in num .
ensure that the force of the jacks is transmitted uniformly to the end face of the end pipe .
replace end sections of pipe that are damaged during jacking .
if obstructions are encountered during conduit installation submit a new working drawing for approval detailing an alternate method of installation .
this may include moving the location horizontally and vertically .
if the alternate method is unsuccessful the re may allow the contractor to use the opencut method to excavate as specified in num.a except sawcut the pavement full depth and no wider than num inches greater than the proposed conduit diameter .
excavate the trench place and maintain the conduit in the center of the trench and fill the trench with clsm to the bottom of the pavement structure .
replace the existing pavement structure in kind .
remove unsuccessful conduit and grout any voids left by the jacking or drilling operations as directed by the re .
the contractor may leave the unsuccessful conduit in place if approved by the re .
note these sections of conduit on the asbuilts as abandoned .
restore disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num rigid metallic conduit exposed comply with the requirements specified in num .
install rigid metallic conduit as specified in num.b .
also install expansion joint fittings at structure expansion joints and provide necessary mounting hardware and fittings for the conduit run .
install and support exposed rigid metallic conduit parallel with or at right angles to the lines of the structure .
install and rigidly support concealed rigid metallic conduit in as direct a line as possible .
ensure the following num .
aluminum conduit connected to steel conduit is separated by a stainless steel coupling .
num .
aluminum flexible conduit connected to a steel coupling is separated by a stainless steel nipple and coupling .
num .
aluminum conduit connected to steel or cast iron boxes is separated by a short stainless steel nipple with stainless steel couplings .
num num .
aluminum resting on or against concrete surfaces has the contact surfaces painted with coal tar epoxy paint .
num rigid nonmetallic conduit a. excavation .
comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
excavate trenches only for distances to be installed and backfilled during the same day .
prepare the trench bottom to eliminate lumps ridges and hollows .
b .
installation .
install conduit on class c bedding material and compact as specified in num .
do not use disc grinders to cut conduit .
cut rigid nonmetallic conduit square and true and ensure they butt together over their full circumference .
construct rigid nonmetallic with at least numfoot sections .
the contractor may use a shorter section to complete a conduit run into a foundation and junction box .
cap conduit that does not terminate in a junction box at the end of the workday .
make rigid nonmetallic conduit connections according to the manufacturers directions using manufacturer recommended solvents .
if connecting nonmetallic conduit to metallic conduit or other existing conduit use a manufacturers recommended adapter .
when installing rigid nonmetallic conduit in concrete use a ulapproved concretetight compression coupling with a permanent stop .
do not use reducing couplings except for expansion joints on bridges if necessary to adapt a service conduit to the meter cabinet .
make field bends to rigid nonmetallic with an industryaccepted flameless heater designed to distribute heat evenly over the section of conduit being bent .
provide internal supports to prevent deformation of the conduit during bending .
the contractor may also use manufactured bends and elbows of material identical to the conduit .
do not install more than two numdegree bends between junction boxes pull boxes and foundations .
ensure that bends and elbows used in service conduit conform to the utilitys requirements .
ensure that conduit used for fiber optic cables meets the minimum bend and radius requirements as specified in the contract and as required by the fiber optic cable manufacturer .
the contractor may cut off damaged ends of rigid nonmetallic conduit and use the remainder of the undamaged conduit on the project provided at least a numfoot length remains .
the re will not allow other repairs to rigid nonmetallic conduit .
do not repair rigid nonmetallic fittings .
remove broken chipped cracked or impaired fittings and replace with new fittings .
if installing num or more rigid nonmetallic use impactresistant plastic spacers .
install the spacers a maximum of num feet on center to provide a separation between conduit equal to at least num percent of the diameter of the conduit .
if installing conduit in existing junction boxes cut additional holes in the junction boxes to admit the conduit .
grout around conduit installed in junction boxes before installing wire or cables .
if unable to install rigid nonmetallic conduit with sufficient grade to provide drainage install tdrains consisting of standard pipe tee and nipple for conduit at the lowest point of the conduit run .
seal the underground rigid nonmetallic entrance to the meter cabinet and the wire entrance to the controller cabinet with a sealing compound .
clean rigid nonmetallic conduit runs including existing conduit to be used .
after cleaning test each rigid nonmetallic conduit by pulling through a metal ball with a diameter at least num percent of the nominal inside diameter of the rigid nonmetallic conduit to ensure that the conduit is free of any obstruction or foreign material .
if the ball fails to pass through the conduit repair or replace the defective conduit .
install true tape marked in numfoot increments for the length of the conduit .
cap and seal the conduit leaving the tape inside .
c. backfilling .
ensure that conduit is centered in the trench and is held firmly in place while the trench is backfilled .
fill the trench sides around the conduit with class c bedding material to the top of the conduit .
if more than num conduit is in the trench then also center fill .
place additional bedding material over the conduit to a depth of num num inches and compact using a vibratory padtype compactor .
above this depth backfill with suitable excavated material that is free from rock larger than num inches in diameter in lifts not exceeding num inches thick loose measurement with a flat faced mechanical tamper .
if the excavations do not provide sufficient material of the quality required for backfilling provide and place the material necessary to make up the deficiency .
restore disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num flexible metallic conduit install according to nec requirements .
num flexible nonmetallic conduit a. excavation .
comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
excavate trenches only for distances to be installed and backfilled during the same day .
prepare the trench bottom to eliminate lumps ridges and hollows .
b .
installation .
install nonmetallic conduit on class c bedding material and compact as specified in num .
cut flexible nonmetallic conduit according to with manufacturers recommendations .
construct flexible nonmetallic conduit runs so that there are no joints or splices in the conduit between junction boxes .
ensure flexible nonmetallic conduit runs are terminated in the junction boxes at the end of the workday .
ensure that conduit used for fiber optic cables meets the minimum bend and radius requirements as specified in the contract and as required by the fiber optic cable manufacturer .
if installing flexible nonmetallic conduit in existing junction boxes cut additional holes in the junction boxes to admit the conduit .
grout around conduit installed in junction boxes before installing wire or cables .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the meter cabinet and the wire entrance to the controller cabinet with a sealing compound .
clean flexible nonmetallic conduit runs including existing conduit to be used .
after cleaning test each flexible nonmetallic conduit by pulling through a metal ball with a diameter at least num percent of the nominal inside diameter of the flexible nonmetallic conduit to ensure that the conduit is free of any obstruction or foreign material .
if the ball fails to pass through the flexible nonmetallic conduit repair or replace the defective conduit .
install true tape marked in numfoot increments for the length of the flexible nonmetallic conduit .
cap and seal the flexible nonmetallic conduit leaving the tape inside .
c. backfilling .
backfill as specified in num.c .
num junction box comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
place precast junction boxes on num inches of course aggregate no .
num .
with each junction box provide num cable racks inserts and fasteners and a ground rod and clamp .
do not provide the cable racks with the circular numinch junction boxes .
num .
precast .
with re approval use precast junction boxes in areas where the slope is less than numhnumv .
submit working drawings for approval for those locations approved .
num .
castinplace .
construct castinplace junction boxes or junction box foundations as specified in num .
keep forms in place for at least num hours after placing concrete .
neatly finish exposed portions of junction boxes with a wood float followed by brushing with a wet softhaired brush .
set junction box covers to grade with the surrounding area .
num .
fabricated .
with re approval the contractor may use fiberglass or polymer concrete junction boxes in areas where the slope is less than numhnumv .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.d .
restore disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num num metal junction boxes comply with the requirements specified in num .
install on structures with mounting attachments according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num junction box foundation comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
place castinplace junction box foundations on num inches of course aggregate .
with each junction box foundation provide num cable racks inserts and fasteners and a ground rod and clamp .
num .
precast .
with re approval use precast junction box foundations in areas where the slope is less than numhnumv .
submit working drawings for approval for those locations approved .
num .
castinplace .
construct castinplace junction box foundations as specified in num .
keep forms in place for at least num hours after placing concrete .
neatly finish exposed portions of junction box foundations with a wood float followed by brushing with a wet softhaired brush .
set junction box covers to grade with the surrounding area .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.d .
restore disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num junction box frame and cover remove the existing junction box frame and cover and the damaged portion of the wall as directed by the re .
reuse concrete as specified in num.a .
dispose of other material as specified in num .
obtain re approval to reuse the cover .
reconstruct the walls to the elevation shown on the plans .
ensure that the junction box frame is set to the correct elevation and held firmly in place .
place concrete as specified in num.d and in accordance with the limitations specified in num.c .
set the cover on the junction box frame .
if the cover wobbles grind to obtain a tighter fit .
num foundations comply with the requirements specified in num .
excavate as specified in num .
set or finish the top of foundations to a level elevation num inch above curb or sidewalk .
where curbs or sidewalks are not constructed or do not exist finish the top of foundations to an elevation num inches above the surrounding lawn or earth .
for foundations used with lighting finish the top of foundations to grade when installed with curb or sidewalk .
where curbs or sidewalks are not constructed or do not exist finish the top of foundations to an elevation num inch above the surrounding lawn or earth .
num .
precast foundations .
with approval the contractor may use precast foundations for lighting standards in areas where the slope is less than numhnumv .
submit working drawings for approval for those locations approved .
num .
castinplace foundations .
construct castinplace concrete foundations as specified in num .
terminate conduit with a coupling flush with the surface of structural concrete and provide the conduit with a close nipple .
provide pipe caps for the conduit during concrete placement .
when the foundation finishing is complete remove the pipe caps and install insulated grounding bushings .
if not immediately installing wiring install the bushings with pushpenny plugs .
ensure that foundations are completely formed .
pour foundations monolithically on firm ground .
place conduit and anchor bolts in proper and plumb position and hold in place using a template until the concrete sets .
keep forms in place for at least num hours after placing concrete .
neatly finish exposed portions of foundations with a wood float followed by brushing with a wet softhaired brush .
allow foundations to cure for at least num days before installing poles standards or other equipment .
place backfill as specified in num.c .
restore disturbed areas to original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num num cable rack a cable rack consists of a cable rack including inserts or fasteners .
when pulling cable and wire through existing junction boxes not equipped with cable racks install cable racks as directed by the re .
in addition provide bonding bushings and bonding wire on metallic conduit ends within these junction boxes .
num meter cabinet install cabinets meters control and distribution systems including the grounding of all materials the photoelectric control and internal wire and wiring .
install the metering systems as required by the utility .
num cable and wire a .
installing .
install cable and wire in the conduit system .
pull cable and wire through junction boxes to allow racking and connection to cabinets standards mast arms and other items .
identify the circuit number of the cables and wires by attaching cable identification tags to each of the cables or wires in all junction boxes and in the cabinets of the load centers or controller .
secure tags to the cable or wire using nylon cable ties .
when pulling wires and cables through conduit do not overstress or stretch and take precautions not to score twist or damage the protective covering or insulation .
ensure wire lubricant is used or an industry approved wire pulling machine .
except for ground wire provide all wires and cables in junction boxes pull boxes and enclosures with adequate slack placed on the cable racks .
include a minimum length of slack as follows table num minimum length of slack item length of slack rectangular junction box rigid metallic conduit num feet rigid nonmetallic conduit num feet numinch junction box circular num feetnum standard base and cabinet num feet num .
secure slack with nylon cable ties and place slack in the bottom of the box .
after installing cables and pending permanent splicing seal the end of each section of cable jacket in junction boxes and service panels or cabinets with rubber tape and then paint the ends with a waterproof sealing compound .
secure conductors to the cable racks using nylon cable ties .
group and identify new and existing conductors in standard bases junction boxes meter cabinets and controller cabinets using cable identification tags .
b .
bonding and grounding .
bond and ground electrical circuits metallic conduit junction boxes junction box foundations aboveground material and all other materials as specified in the nec and as required by the utility .
ensure bare ground wire is used when installing a bonding wire in junction boxes and its items .
secure it to the conduit bushings and to the ground rod .
for traffic signal systems install an insulated colorcoded green ground wire continuously throughout .
secure the ground wire to all ground rods and all materials requiring grounding .
for lighting systems use either an insulated or bare ground wire .
c. connection and coordination with utility services .
install underground conduit and electrical conductors that extend from a meter cabinet or junction box to a point on the service pole or manhole and supply a sufficient length of conductors to extend to the overhead utility service as required by the utility and subject to its approval .
ensure the utility completes the extensions of the conductors from this point on the pole and connections to overhead utility service or the connection inside a service manhole .
service points shown on the plans are approximate only .
contact the serving utility to determine the exact locations .
install the service conduit as required by the utility .
notify the utility and complete the required applications for inspection .
provide permits fees and access for inspections .
num if the meter socket is not provided by the utility obtain the meter socket as required by the utilitys regulations .
verify the dimensions of the socket and meter to ensure proper installation in the cabinet and conformance with utilitys requirements .
obtain and provide for utility services required for testing and operation of the electrical systems until substantial completion or as directed by the re .
d. testing .
after completing the wiring for each electrical system and before making connections perform the following tests on each circuit using suitable equipment in the presence of the re num .
tests for continuity .
num .
tests for ground .
num .
tests for insulation resistance between circuit wires and from circuit wires to ground .
verify that the insulation resistance is at least num megaohms between conductors or between conductor and ground for circuits with a total single conductor length of num feet or more and at least num megaohms for circuits with a total single conductor length of less than num feet .
complete the electrical system including connections and repeat continuity ground and insulation resistance testing starting from the control cabinet .
record the observed readings with their respective circuits .
submit num copies of the wiring test results to the re .
record on the test results the project title the date of the test and the atmospheric conditions .
energize each electrical system with the exception of traffic signals for a minimum of num consecutive periods of normal operation .
in addition test traffic signal and system loop detectors by checking the complete loop wire and detector lead for continuity using a suitable tester .
before placing the sealant perform an insulation resistance test on the loop and lead wire to ensure that the resistance to ground is num megaohms or greater .
if the resistance to ground is less than num megaohms perform corrective measures as necessary to obtain the desired readings .
perform an inductance test on the loop using a loop inductance meter .
provide a tabulation of the results for the loops .
replace defective material discovered during testing and retest as required .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit ___ rigid metallic conduit linear foot ___ rigid nonmetallic conduit linear foot ___ ___ flexible nonmetallic conduit linear foot ___ flexible metallic conduit linear foot ___ junction box unit ___ x ___ junction box unit ___ x ___ x ___ metal junction box unit junction box foundation unit junction box frame and cover unit foundation type ___ unit cable rack unit meter cabinet type ___ unit ground wire no .
___ awg linear foot multiple lighting wire no .
___ awg linear foot service wire no .
___ awg linear foot the department will make payment for test pits as specified in num .
the department will include the payment for bonding wire under ground wire .
the department will make payment for each conduit when multiple conduits are installed in a run for rigid metallic conduit rigid nonmetallic conduit and flexible metallic conduit .
num section num traffic signals num description this section describes the requirements for providing and installing a complete traffic signal system including temporary and interim traffic signal systems .
terms used are according to nema standard publication no .
tsnum section num entitled traffic control systems .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified in coal tar epoxy paintnum loop detector lead num loop wirenum traffic signal cablenum cabinets num panel boards and circuit breakers num standard and mast armsnum lampsnum provide materials as specified in the contract and in the new jersey electrical materials specifications that are available on the departments website .
a listing of prequalified materials is also available from the departments website .
the department will allow the use of prequalified materials provided the materials meet the requirements of the contract .
submit materials for approval on a materials questionnaire as specified in num .
include working drawings for approval with the materials questionnaire for materials not prequalified .
follow the accepted standards of ansi nema ul nec ite and astm for materials not specified in the contract when signs are mounted on traffic signal mast arms use vertical mounted type highstrength aluminum alloy swing sign brackets with stainless steel materials heavy duty stainless steel straps adaptable to any pole diameter and removable stainless steel damper springs .
use adjustable swing sign brackets for leveling .
use led modules for all signals .
for fittings and mounting hardware not specified follow the manufacturers recommendations .
num equipment provide equipment as specified in pavement sawnum hotair lancenum num construction before working on an existing traffic signal system meet the requirements of num .
num controller before delivery of a controller to the project limits bench test the controller as a complete unit according to the timing schedule for each location .
at least num days before the bench testing notify the department for approval of the bench testing location .
the department may choose to witness part of the bench test .
the department will approve the controller only after num hours of continuous troublefree operation .
if unsatisfactory performance of the controller occurs correct the problem and repeat the entire bench test .
provide the certified results of bench testing at the time of delivery on forms provided by the department .
num securely bolt the controller cabinet to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
if temporarily installing a controller cabinet on top of a meter cabinet fasten it in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
seal the joint between the cabinets with a neoprene gasket and seal the wireway with sealing compound .
num standards leave the factory wrapping on standards for as long as the manufacturer recommends .
install the standard with the wrapping in place and maintain the standard and other material in original factory appearance .
when erecting the standard and other material use methods that prevent scratching or abrasion .
num .
traffic signal standard .
bolt the standard securely to the foundation and erect the standard with sufficient rake to assume a vertical position after all attachments and appurtenances are in place .
for aluminum standards the contractor may install leveling shims to a maximum height of num inch .
provide and install the standard with ground studs either in the base for aluminum or in the standard for steel .
install a ground wire that extends to the ground rod from the standard .
num .
pedestrian signal standard .
bolt the pedestrian signal standard to the foundation securely in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
if signs are to be mounted to a standard provide the necessary mounting hardware .
num traffic signal mast arm leave the factory installed wrapping on the arm for as long as the manufacturer recommends .
install the arm with the wrapping in place and maintain it in original factory appearance .
erect mast arms with methods that prevent scratching or abrasions .
install a traffic signal arm on a traffic signal standard with a pole clamp as required mast arm hanger grommet safety chains swing sign brackets as required and miscellaneous fittings and hardware .
provide for all modifications or adjustments that may be required for staged construction .
num traffic signal cable install multiconductor cable and cable identification tags .
individually wire each push button traffic signal face and pedestrian signal face using the specified colors for each with an insulated locking spade terminal .
perform splices at the bottom of the standard .
attach the terminations in meter cabinets or controller cabinets to barrier type terminal blocks .
ensure that the terminal blocks are clearly identified .
terminate and clearly identify spare wires .
provide slack cable in standards mast arms and cabinets as specified in table num .
color code traffic signal circuits and wire as follows table num conductor cable assignments function color number pedestrian push button black num twoconductor cable neutral white num spare black num neutral white num red red num green green num fiveconductor cable traffic signal yellow orange num num table num conductor cable assignments function color number spare black num neutral white num dont walk red num walk green num five conductor cable one pedestrian signal spare orange num walk num black num neutral white num dont walk red num walk green num five conductor cable two pedestrian signal dont walk num orange num green arrow spare black num neutral num white num red num red num green num green num yellow num or yellow arrow orange num arrow neutral spare blue num neutral num whiteblack num red num redblack num green num greenblack num tenconductor cable traffic signal yellow num orangeblack num if splices are required above ground use a compression solderless connector and mechanically and electrically secure them with the proper tool .
clean the conductors with a minimum of the insulation removed .
insulate splices located in standards using insulating tape to provide num times the insulation rating of the original conductor .
coat the taped splices with an electrical grade sealant and bonding compound .
if splices are required below ground in junction boxes or junction box foundations use a compression solderless connector and mechanically and electrically secure them with the proper tool .
before splicing clean the conductors with a minimum of the insulation removed .
complete splice with a resin splicing kit .
num traffic signal head assemble traffic signal faces using a wrench designed for that purpose .
use mounting fittings designed to function with the unit and that provide the proper clearance to aim and adjust the traffic signal head .
if directed by the department install dull black louvers of the specified cutoff angle inside the signal visor using stainless steel sheetmetal screws .
when attaching the visors backplates or adaptors ensure that they conform and readily fasten to existing mounting surfaces without affecting the water and light integrity of the traffic signal head .
make field adjustments of louvers and optically programmed traffic signal heads as directed by the department .
install cable from the traffic signal head to the foundation and make connections .
if replacing an existing traffic signal head remove the existing head and cable and dispose of as specified in num .
num pedestrian signal head install a pedestrian signal head with pole clamp mounting miscellaneous fittings and hardware and grommet including drilling the standard as required .
install cable from the pedestrian signal head to the foundation and make connections .
if replacing an existing pedestrian signal head remove the existing head and cable and dispose of as specified in num .
num num push button install a push button that operates on logic ground including its housing and instruction signage .
install cable from the push button to the foundation and make connections .
install the instruction sign and ensure that it conforms to the mutcd .
if replacing an existing push button remove the existing head and cable and dispose of as specified in num .
num image detector install a camera mounted to a mast arm with an automatic control unit a pointing device and all materials needed to provide accurate vehicle detection at the specified location .
mount and install according to the manufacturers recommendation including all cable and cable connections from the camera to the control unit without splices .
num loop detector sawcut the pavement as shown on the plans .
after sawcutting immediately collect the slurry from the sawcut cavity and surrounding pavement surface and dispose of as specified num .
clean sawcuts with a numpoundspersquare inch water blast to remove remaining debris in the sawcut cavity and then blow sawcuts with a hotair lance to provide a dry surface .
if not immediately installing the loop wire install a filler to prevent the sawcut from collapsing .
place a continuous length wire in the sawcut .
install wire by laying turns of the wire in the sawcut so there are no kinks or curls .
do not strain or stretch the wire insulation around the corners of the sawcut or in the junction box .
when seating the wire in the bottom of the sawcut do not damage the wire .
do not splice the wire .
twist the num wires that form the leadin wires together in the trench and in the conduit to the nearest junction box .
extend the wire from the sawcut to the nearest junction box .
connect the loop wire to the loop detector cable using a compression solderless connector and mechanically and electrically secure them with the proper tool .
clean the conductors with a minimum of insulation removed .
insulate the joints and splices using a resin splicing kit .
after placing the wire recheck the wire for slack raised portions or tightness .
correct slack raised portions and tightness in the wire .
after testing the loop for continuity seal the sawcut with a joint sealant applied according to the manufacturers recommendation .
if installing a loop on a grade steeper than num percent use type num joint sealant .
do not place the joint sealant in the sawcut at temperatures below num f or during precipitation .
completely fill the sawcut with the joint sealant so there are no air bubbles below the surface .
prevent joint sealant from running out of the trench and on to the roadway .
remove joint sealant applied to the roadway .
allow the joint sealant to harden before allowing opening to traffic .
when the roadway in the area of the loop detector is to be resurfaced or when constructing a new section of roadway install the loop detector immediately below the top layer of pavement .
ensure that the joint sealant is hardened before the installation of the pavement .
num loop detector cable install loop detector cable continuously from the controller to the junction box nearest to the loop .
do not splice the loop detector cable .
num temporary and interim traffic signal systems after placing the temporary or interim traffic signal system into operation inspect the traffic signal system every num months .
fill out a contractor maintenance traffic signal inspection report form elnumc when the temporary or interim traffic signal system becomes operational when the temporary or interim traffic signal system is modified and at every nummonth inspection .
maintain asbuilt drawings of each signal modification .
place copies of the asbuilt drawings for each traffic signal system modification forms elnumc and forms elnumc in a plastic pocket mounted inside the cabinet door of each controller cabinet .
also provide a copy of all forms and asbuilt drawings to the re .
if the temporary or interim traffic signal system fails or becomes damaged repair and restore the temporary or interim traffic signal system to normal operation .
begin repair of the temporary or interim traffic signal system within num hours of num receiving notice of damage or malfunction from the department state police or local authorities .
ensure that workers assigned to such repair work continuously until the traffic signal resumes normal signal operation .
for each response to a system failure or damage fill out a contractor maintenance emergency call record form el numc and place it in a plastic pocket mounted inside the cabinet door of each controller cabinet .
if the contractor fails to respond to a failure or damage notification and begin work within num hours of notification or does not continue to work until the temporary or interim traffic signal system resumes normal operation the department in the interest of safety will respond with its own forces to restore normal operation .
if the department mobilizes its forces to effect repairs the contractor agrees to pay the department a sum of num for costs of mobilizing its forces and equipment .
in addition the contractor must pay the department the actual cost of material used for the repair and pay the actual costs of police traffic protection .
the department will recover the total amount as specified in num .
perform requirements that are specific to temporary or interim traffic signal systems as follows num .
temporary traffic signal system .
a temporary traffic signal system includes but is not limited to temporary wiring span and tether wire signal heads relamping mast arms poles traffic signal cables junction boxes foundations conduit detectors controllers and timing sequences cabinets associated lighting units providing and maintaining electric services and necessary hardware .
if the plans do not specify the design at least num days before starting the installation submit working drawings for approval .
prepare and design the system according to the department design manuals .
include complete structural design calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
before energizing the temporary traffic signal system provide the re with the contact information of the contractors personnel should a failure occur .
provide only individuals who are familiar with traffic signal construction and operation .
num .
interim traffic signal system .
install a modification to an existing traffic signal system to provide the timing and operation as shown on the plans .
an interim traffic signal system includes but is not limited to temporary wiring span and tether wire signal heads relamping mast arms poles traffic signal cables junction boxes foundations conduit detectors controllers and timing sequences cabinets associated lighting units obtaining electric services and necessary hardware .
the contractor may use aboveground traffic signal materials designated for removal in interim traffic signal systems with the res approval .
maintain an interim traffic signal system from the first alteration of the existing traffic signal installations until the work of revising the existing traffic signal installations is fully operational inspected and partially accepted by the department .
before modifying the existing traffic signal system provide the re with the contact information of the contractors personnel should a failure occur .
provide only individuals who are familiar with traffic signal construction and operation .
upon removal of the interim traffic signal system salvage existing aboveground material for department use .
salvaged material becomes property of the department .
store salvaged material near or within the project limits .
as directed deliver salvaged material to the nearest department electrical maintenance yard and unload the material as directed .
num controller turn on controller turnon consists of supplying a technician authorized by the controller manufacturer at the work site when each controller is placed into flash mode and into final operation .
provide the re a letter from the controller manufacturer stating the technician is authorized and qualified to perform the work .
ensure that the technician is available at all times during flash mode testing .
ensure that traffic signals complete a successful flash period for num consecutive days as part of the required testing .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit controller ___ phase unit traffic signal standard aluminum unit traffic signal standard steel unit pedestrian signal standard unit traffic signal mast arm aluminum unit traffic signal mast arm steel unit traffic signal cable ___ conductor linear foot traffic signal head unit pedestrian signal head unit push button unit image detector unit loop detector linear foot loop detector cable linear foot temporary traffic signal system location no .
___ lump sum interim traffic signal system location no .
___ lump sum controller turnon unit the department will measure a unit of controller turnon for each controller that the technician turns on unless the controller does not function as specified .
the department will make payment for loop detector measured by linear foot of sawcut in which the wire is installed .
section num highway lighting num description this section describes the requirements for providing and installing complete highway lighting systems temporary and interim highway lighting systems sign lighting underdeck lighting and complete tower lighting systems .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified in concrete num grout num.a reinforcement steelnum anchor bolts num miscellaneous pole hardwarenum coal tar epoxy paintnum cable connectors num panel boards and circuit breakersnum photoelectric controlsnum standard lighting mast armnum tower polesnum lampsnum provide materials as specified in the contract and in the new jersey electrical materials specifications that are available on the departments website .
a listing of prequalified materials is also available from the departments website .
num the department will allow the use of prequalified materials provided the materials meet the requirements of the contract .
submit materials for approval on a materials questionnaire as specified in num .
include working drawings with the materials questionnaire for materials not prequalified .
follow the accepted standards of ansi nema ul nec ite and astm for materials not specified in the contract .
for fittings and mounting hardware not specified follow the manufacturers recommendations .
include with each shipment and its invoice a list of all the parts on that specific shipment .
either box or bundle bolts nuts and other hardware and identify each by the packing list .
num equipment provide equipment as specified in vibratornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction before working on an existing highway lighting system meet the requirements of num .
num lighting standard leave the factory installed wrapping on the standard for as long as the manufacturer recommends .
install the standard with the wrapping in place and maintain the standard and other material in original factory appearance .
when erecting the standard and other material use methods that prevent scratching or abrasion .
repair abrasions and scratches .
bolt the standard securely to the foundation and erect the standard with sufficient rake to assume a vertical position after all attachments and appurtenances are in place .
for aluminum standards the contractor may install leveling shims to a maximum height of num inch .
provide and install the standard with ground studs either in the base for aluminum or in the standard for steel .
install a ground wire that extends to the ground rod from the standard .
num lighting mast arm leave the factory installed wrapping on the arm for as long as the manufacturer recommends .
install the arm perpendicular to centerline of roadway and attach to the standard .
when mounting the arm and other materials use methods that prevent scratching or abrasions .
repair abrasions and scratches .
provide modifications or adjustments that may be required for staged construction .
num luminaire attach the luminaire plumb to the end of the arm or on the standard .
ensure proper and accurate placement of the luminaire reflector .
provide and install lamp ballast terminals cable connectors fused and nonfused and num no .
num awg colorcoded multiplelighting wires extending from the ballast terminals to the distribution wires in the base of the standard or in the adjacent junction box .
tag lighting wire by identifying the area circuit and luminaire number .
use colorcoded singleconductor multiplelighting wire for lighting circuits .
pull conductors through conduit and junction boxes to allow racking and connection to luminaire and meter cabinet .
seal the underground conduit entrance to meter cabinets or transformer enclosures with a sealing compound .
except for neutral and ground circuits colorcode lighting wire with plastic colored tape overlapped from duct edge to duct edge within each junction box .
clearly identify neutral white and ground green circuits with continuous color compound along their entire lengths within the junction box .
identify the circuit number of conductors by attaching cable identification tags to each conductor in all junction boxes and at the meter cabinets of the load centers .
secure tags to the conductor using nylon cable ties .
num if pulling multiplelighting wire through existing junction boxes not equipped with cable racks install cable racks .
for cable splices in boxes use a type c copper pressure connector and mechanically and electrically secure splices with the proper tool .
clean the conductors with a minimum of insulation removed .
for multiplelighting wire splices use a resin splicing kit as follows num .
use an inline type splicing kit for joining a single conductor to another to form num continuous through conductor .
num .
use a tap or wyetype splicing kit where it is necessary to obtain a tap connection at a through conductor or where it is necessary to join together more than num conductors .
keep the conductors and splicing connector centered within the mold so an even amount of resin surrounds the splice .
if fastening electrical boxes to masonry with expansion fasteners provide fasteners of sufficient size and strength to provide adequate support .
use stainless steel mounting bolts and anchors .
if not using a boss secure conduit entering electrical boxes to the box using lock nuts on the inside and outside of the box .
when a luminaire is shown on the plans as being replaced install a luminaire and cable connectors fused and nonfused .
also install num no .
num awg colorcoded multiplelighting wires extending from the ballast terminals to the cable connectors in the base of the standard or to the mounting box for wall mounted replacements .
num sign lighting securely bolt sign luminaires to the sign support perpendicular to the sign face .
seal underground conduit entering sign service cabinets meter cabinets or transformer enclosures with sealing compound .
install colorcoded singleconductor multiplelighting wire for sign circuits .
ensure conductors run through the conduit and are properly trained through the junction boxes to permit racking and connection to sign service cabinets and to meter cabinet installations .
ensure splices form continuous circuits that are complete and ready for operation .
splice cables as specified in num .
use at least num circuits for each sign panel and ensure fixtures are distributed alternately among the circuits .
place wire for luminaires from the fixture to sign service cabinet .
install an electrical outlet junction pull and device boxes where required to facilitate the pulling supporting or connecting of wires and cables .
ensure conduit entering metal boxes except threaded boxes exposed to the weather is installed with num lock nuts num flat washers a lead washer and bushing .
when boxes are aluminum ensure the lock nuts and flat washers are stainless steel .
ensure ground bushings are the insulated bushing type .
ensure bushing caps remain in place until just before conductors are installed .
secure continuous ground by bonding where required .
install exposed rigid metallic conduit parallel with or at right angles to the lines of the structure and ensure that they are supported .
install concealed rigid metallic conduit in as direct a line as possible and ensure that they are supported .
ensure aluminum conduit to be installed exposed on tubular aluminum sign structures are supported with clamps or bands with stainless steel saddles .
num underdeck lighting install an underdeck luminaire lamp and num no .
num awg colorcoded multiplelighting wires extending from the ballast terminals in the luminaire to the distribution cables in the adjacent junction box for both new and replacement underdeck lighting .
num tower lighting construct the foundation as specified in num .
place reinforcement steel as specified in num .
install the tower structure on the foundation according to the manufacturers requirements including anchor bolts base plate pole head frame assembly luminaire support ring lowering device including the winch assembly circuit breaker num panel power receptacles terminal box structural and power cables secondary wiring and luminaires .
install cable and wire from the lighting to the foundation and make connections .
do not blast or finish the surface of the poles .
either permanently stamp or weld a beam plate to each pole base plate indicating the manufacturers name date and pole design reference number .
num temporary highway lighting system at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for approval that include the following num .
structural design calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
num .
calculations in ies electronic format that are signed and sealed by a professional engineer electrical with num years experience in design of lighting systems according to the departments design manuals .
num .
luminaires and ballasts .
num .
lighting mast arms and standards .
num .
temporary lighting ground and tether wire .
num .
method of splicing cable and wire .
num .
method of tagging and clearly identifying items .
num .
junction boxes and foundations .
num .
conduit .
num .
meter cabinets and lighting circuitry .
num .
method of electrifying the system .
num .
other items necessary to provide a complete system for the project .
ensure that the lighting system is designed according to the departments design manuals .
ensure the temporary highway lighting system is operational before removing existing lighting .
the contractor may use the existing aboveground highway lighting material designated for removal for the temporary highway lighting system .
obtain and pay electric current cost for new temporary electric service if required to maintain the existing highway lighting system in operation during construction .
obtain electric service for the temporary system from the utility in the name of the contractor .
before energizing the temporary highway lighting system provide the re with the contact information of the contractors personnel should a failure occur .
provide only individuals who are familiar with highway lighting construction and operation .
ensure that the asbuilt drawings of each lighting unit modification are maintained at the project limits .
place copies of the asbuilt drawings in a plastic pocket mounted inside the cabinet door of each lighting cabinet and also provide copies of the asbuilt drawings to the re .
upon removal of the temporary highway lighting system salvage existing aboveground materials for department use .
salvaged materials becomes the property of the department .
deliver the salvaged materials to the nearest department electrical maintenance yard or to the location specified in the special provisions and unload the materials where directed .
if storage is necessary store salvaged materials within the project limits .
if the temporary lighting system fails or becomes damaged repair and restore the system to normal operation .
begin repair of the temporary signal system within num hours of receiving notice of damage or malfunction from the department state police or local authorities .
ensure workers assigned to such repair work continuously until the lighting system is restored to normal operation .
for each response to a system failure or damage fill out a contractor maintenance emergency call record form el numc and place it in a plastic pocket mounted inside the cabinet door of each controller cabinet .
if the contractor fails to respond to a failure or damage notification and begin work within num hours of notification or does not continue to work until the temporary lighting system is restored to normal operation the department in the interest of safety will respond with its own forces to restore normal operation .
if the department mobilizes its forces to effect repairs the contractor agrees to pay the department a sum of num for costs of mobilizing its forces and equipment .
in addition the contractor must pay the department the actual cost of material used for the repair and pay the actual costs of police traffic protection .
the department will recover the total amount as specified in num .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit lighting standard aluminum unit lighting standard steel unit lighting standard fiberglass unit lighting mast arm aluminum unit lighting mast arm steel unit luminaire unit sign lighting structure no .
___ lump sum underdeck lighting type ___ unit tower lighting unit temporary highway lighting system lump sum section num intelligent transportation systems its num description this section describes the requirements for providing installing configuring calibrating testing and placing into operation advanced traveler information systems atis and advanced traffic management systems atms .
num materials num materials provide materials as specified in coarse aggregate no .
num concrete num grout num.a precast concretenum reinforcement steelnum anchor bolts num miscellaneous hardwarenum coal tar epoxy paintnum conduit and fittingsnum cable and wirenum loop detector leadnum loop wire num bonding and grounding materialsnum resin splicing kitsnum electrical tape num cable racksnum cabinetsnum panel boards and circuit breakersnum standardsnum follow the accepted standards of ansi nema ul nec ite and astm for materials not specified in the contract .
for fittings and mounting hardware not specified follow the manufacturers recommendations .
provide materials as specified in the contract and in the new jersey electrical materials specifications that are available on the departments website .
a listing of prequalified materials is also available on the qpl .
submit electrical material information including any materials selected from the prequalified materials in a complete package with the working drawings for approval for each system item .
electrical materials must be approved in the num working drawings before use on the contract .
after approval of the working drawings submit the materials in a material questionnaire form as specified in num .
label its electronic components with machine printed laminated selfadhesive labels using the industry standard format and nomenclature described in the common language equipment identification clei publication grnum core for communications and electronic devices .
for materials provided and installed provide a minimum numyear warranty from the date of substantial completion or partial acceptance against any imperfections in workmanship or materials .
submit a warranty certificate to the re from each material manufacturer with the department named as holder of the certificate .
num equipment provide equipment as specified in vibratornum pavement sawnum hotair lancenum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum num construction num general system gs a .
components .
a gs consists of the specified items needed to modify an existing system or construct a proposed system .
the system includes but is not limited to electronic and electrical devices cabinets wiring programming configuration communication and electric service connections service charges utility software grounding and surge protection b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num .
junction box its .
excavate as specified in num .
install junction boxes only in areas where the slope is not less than numh numv .
place junction boxes on num inches of coarse aggregate no .
num .
with each junction box provide num coiling brackets inserts and fasteners and a ground rod and clamp .
a ground rod is only required for locations where electrically conductive material is present .
backfill and compact using the directed method as specified in num.d .
restore disturbed areas to the original conditions the conditions specified in the contract or as directed by the re .
num .
communication cable .
install communication cable from the utility pole or manhole to the controller .
provide and install the material necessary to provide a complete installation including a weathertight terminal block enclosure on the utility pole as required by the utility cable ties cable tags labels clamps jumpers and connectors .
ensure that there are no splices in the section of cable between the terminal block and the devices .
provide the standard allowable slack for cable and wire as specified in num.a within the inground rectangular junction boxes .
provide num feet of slack with an appropriate connector in the cabinet for connection to devices and utility service .
provide num feet of slack to allow for the utility to make their connections in the manholes or on utility poles .
num .
foundation its .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
num .
controller its .
at least num days before beginning the work submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram illustrating the interconnections of the system components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
num securely bolt the controller equipped with communications and electronic devices for a fully functional and operational system to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
num .
communication hub .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram illustrating the interconnections of the system components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
install system alarms with communications back to the designated control center central software system .
ensure alarms are operational to monitor the following humidity high and low smoke temperature high and low door open and power failure .
num .
control center system .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram illustrating the interconnections of the system components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
c. testing .
perform wiring and cable testing as specified in num.d before performing any other system testing .
record the results of the testing on department provided forms .
within num days of completing the testing submit the forms to the re for approval .
do not begin subsequent testing until the previous testing has been approved by the re .
num .
device testing .
before beginning system testing complete all individual device testing as follows a .
level a .
demonstrate that the individual devices at each work site are fully operational .
b .
level b .
demonstrate that each device is full operational from the designated control center to the work site with the original equipment manufacturers software .
the department will operate and monitor the device for a minimum of num days to observe its functionality .
c. level c. demonstrate that each device is fully operational from the designated control center to the device work site after integration into the designated control center software management systems .
conduct a test to verify that the device and communications meet the specified requirements of the contract .
after the contractors verification test the department will conduct a numday observational and functional test period .
provide support as needed during this testing including adjustments to or replacements of any of the equipment and materials installed modified or otherwise disturbed until the full numday observation period is completed without failure as determined by the department .
num .
project testing .
after completion of device testing verify the operation of the individual devices from all locations interconnected and functioning as a complete and integrated system by exercising control with the central control software of level c. in the presence of the re ensure that the manufacturers authorized technician is present to assist with installation configuration and testing of system hardware and software .
after the contractors verification test the department will conduct a numday observational and functional test period .
provide support including adjustments to or replacements of equipment and materials until the numday observation and functional test period is completed .
in the event of a failure as determined by the re the re will suspend the observation and functional test period until corrective action is completed .
after the corrective action is completed the re will resume the observation and functional test period .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as follows num .
regular maintenance .
perform regular maintenance and repairs as specified in num and as follows num .
troubleshoot malfunctioning equipment within num hours of failure notification by the re .
num .
if the contractor can not complete the repairs in the time specified by the re the department may repair the equipment and recover the cost as specified in num .
the department will assess liquidated damages at a minimum of num per hour .
num .
record the work performed and submit the record to the re .
include an explanation of the exact repairs made and identification of parts replaced by part number and circuit number .
if the contractor fails to respond to a failure or damage notification and begin work within num hours of notification the department may respond with its own forces to restore normal operation .
if the contractor begins the work but does not finish the work within a reasonable time period as determined by the re the num department will also respond with its own forces to restore normal operation .
if the department mobilizes its forces to perform repairs the contractor agrees to pay the departments cost of performing the work including the cost of material and labor used for the repair and the actual costs for police traffic protection and maintenance and protection of traffic .
num .
operational maintenance .
if an item has completed system device testing before substantial completion perform operational maintenance in num month intervals as follows num .
exercise the equipment functionality including uploads downloads fans lights and sensors .
num .
replace filters clean lenses and check communications .
num .
run diagnostics .
num .
record all work and submit it to the re .
e. final documentation .
submit num sets of the complete schematics and maintenance manuals of the equipment for each type of device provided .
include a complete subcomponent parts list with each maintenance manual .
submit asbuilt documentation showing the function and detail of each individual fiber and termination connection installed .
submit asbuilt drawings for each subsystem including wiring and set up configurations and software versions .
provide drawings and diagrams in the departments cadd format in accordance with the file structure and standards of the department .
provide reports in ms word format .
at a minimum also include the following documentation num .
controller equipment layout and wiring .
num .
system wiring diagram that illustrates the connections and crossconnections between equipment components from the field device through to the designated control center equipment and rack profiles .
include work site and designated control center set up configurations and firmware versions installed .
num .
licensed copies of the software needed for complete operation and testing of the system .
include software necessary to read the electronic files of the test results and documentation and needed to program and configure devices for any software not covered by an existing department license .
ensure software is compatible with the departments current operating software .
num .
controller communication protocol and system development kit .
num .
asbuilt gps inventory report on forms provided by the department and in the required format .
num .
provide the original signature certification from an independent laboratory that the devices have been tested and comply with the ntcip protocol requirements of this contract .
num .
supply num cdr copies of the final documentation and num paper copies .
compile and organize the test results in numring binders .
num .
provide troubleshooting guidelines that identify symptoms rank their possible causes in order of highest probability and recommend remedial actions and the required testing equipment .
num .
installation operation configuration programming maintenance data and schematic manuals .
f. equipment training .
provide for use by the department equipment necessary for proper instruction demonstration and testing of the system materials .
submit software used for testing to the department for use in equipment maintenance .
the software will become the property of the department .
provide training for installation control testing and maintenance of the systems for num department personnel .
schedule the training with the designated control center personnel to avoid interruption of daily department operations .
if necessary conduct the training over several sessions or in multiple groups .
num camera surveillance system css a .
components .
css consists of the specified items in order to provide a complete system capable of processing video and control data to and from the designated control center .
the system also includes but is not limited to wiring communication and power connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num num .
foundation css .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
num .
camera standard .
bolt the standard securely to the foundation and erect the standard with sufficient rake to assume a vertical position after all attachments and appurtenances are in place .
install a ground wire that extends to the ground rod from the standard .
num .
camera .
mount the camera housing and camera according to the manufacturers recommendation .
ensure that the cameras field of view is unobstructed .
perform tree trimming and site clearing to provide an unobstructed field of view as directed by the re .
set up num preset views for each camera and establish a proposed system of pan and tilt zones .
title each zone as specified by the department .
ensure the camera is equipped with video and control cables that have weatherproof connectors and strain relief .
ensure cables are factory assembled and tested according to the camera manufacturers recommendations .
make all wire and cable camera connections to the camera controller .
apply a polymer spray recommended by the camera manufacturer to enhance rainwater sheeting and runoff on the dome and positional housing .
if directed by the re provide a bucket truck with safety equipment that can reach the height of the camera .
operate the bucket truck for the department to use to determine the cameras final location and orientation and for testing .
num .
controller camera .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram illustrating the interconnections of the css components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
mount the camera controller cabinet to a foundation as specified in num.b.num .
ensure that the conduit entry points are properly closed off with duct sealing compound .
install the controller according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num fiber optic cable a .
components .
when installing fiber optic cable provide a complete communications path between num or more its devices .
installing fiber optic cable includes but is not limited to providing and installing conduit junction boxes cables splicing communication and power connections service charges terminations software and grounding .
at least num days before beginning work submit to the re for approval a fiber optic installation plan that lists the following items and includes a brief narrative on each num .
cable layout with splice locations and linear distances between splice points .
num .
fiber specific connection assignments to devices .
num .
catalogue cut of the cable lubricant .
num .
the manufacturers minimum allowable cable and fiber strand bending radii .
num .
pulley wheel sizes .
num .
manufacturers maximum outer jacket pulling tensions and monitoring device .
num .
if using an air pressure system list the blowing pressures applied to each cable size and conduit type .
num .
provide certifications from the fiber optic splice unit otdr and power meter equipment manufacturer that verify the qualifications of each individual employed to perform the work .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
provide and install the material necessary for a complete functional installation including cables cable ties jumpers cable identification tags pigtails breakout kits connectors patch panels splices splice enclosures num testing end caps consumables attenuators and related documentation .
ensure that cable tags follow the industry standard clei grnumcore format and nomenclature for communications and electronic components .
after the connections are completed provide the minimum amount of slack for each cable that enters a junction box or termination enclosure as specified in table num .
provide additional slack as required to meet the proposed installation as follows num .
for an its junction box provide num feet of slack num .
for a hub provide num feet of slack num .
for a cabinet provide num feet of slack attach cable tags to cables at junction boxes that contain multiple cables and at all cabinets .
secure them with nylon cable ties .
for armored cables install a ground rod ground and bond all armor casings at any existing or proposed junction box at which electrical power conductors are also present .
before installing the tracer wire obtain re approval of the installation locations of the tracer wire .
install a continuous tracer wire in the conduit .
do not splice tracer wire in the conduit .
provide num feet of slack in each junction box .
if approved by the re the contractor may splice the tracer wire in the junction box .
if more than one conduit is installed in a single trench the contractor may install the tracer wire in only one conduit .
ensure that splices are fusion splices .
install splices only in its junction boxes or its cabinets .
use splice enclosures for splices made in junction boxes .
cut only those individual fiber strands needed for connection to the devices .
for those fibers designated for trunk line communications do not cut the fibers or install cables that require splices at lengths less than num feet .
splice a fiber optic breakout kit with st type connectors to each end of the strands for a cable that terminates at a device cabinet .
label each strand using machineprinted laminated selfadhesive labels .
fully document the connections and individual splices in the asbuilt drawings .
c. testing .
perform wiring and cable testing as specified in num.d before performing any other testing .
the department will provide forms detailing the testing requirements for the following tests num .
level num .
test each splice with the fusion splicing unit at the time the splice is made .
record each splice decibel value electronically with the splicing machine at num nanometers .
provide num paper copies and num electronic copy of the results immediately to the re for review and approval .
clearly identify each fiber on the report .
ensure that the maximum splice loss does not exceed num decibels .
if the numdecibel value can not be reached in num attempts the re may employ a third party vendor to redo the work with the costs deducted from the contract .
provide the re with certification from the equipment manufacturer that the splice machine was calibrated within num months of its use on the contract .
recalibrate the splice machine at num month intervals .
num .
level num .
perform the following level num tests a. otdr .
test each individual fiber after completion of all splicing and connections .
perform the testing at num and num nanometers in both directions .
ensure that the maximum decibel loss for any single event is not greater that num decibels at num nanometers however ensure that the otdr machine threshold is set to record all events greater than or equal in absolute value to num decibels along the positive and negative axes .
events revealed by the otdr machine bidirectional trace average to exceed num decibels are cause for the rejection of the cable .
if directed remove and replace the cable .
ensure that the net result of the bidirectional trace average at num nanometers across a splice event is not greater than num decibels .
redo splices revealed by the otdr machine to be greater than num decibels up to num additional times in order to achieve num decibels or less .
if the numdecibels value can not be reached in num attempts the re may employ a third party vendor to redo the work .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
ensure that reflectance at each connector is better than num decibels .
ensure the fiber loss across each fiber segment is not greater than num decibels per kilometer when tested at num nanometers .
num also test and include in the report the dark fiber segments that are not being utilized by the signal transmission equipment .
provide connectors as necessary to test unterminated fibers .
provide num paper copies and num electronic copy of the results immediately to the re for review and approval .
clearly identify each fiber on the report .
provide re with certification from the equipment manufacturer that the otdr was calibrated within num months of its use on the contract .
recalibrate the otdr at nummonth intervals .
b .
power meter .
measure and record all fiber segment optical budgets including each end connector according to the meter manufacturer instructions .
compile the test results in a binder and submit num copies with the final documentation .
perform power meter tests at num nanometers and num nanometers in both directions after completion of all cable and connector splicing .
ensure that the maximum connector loss tested at num nanometers is num decibels with the average of all connectors in the tested fiber segment being num decibels .
provide num paper copies and num electronic copy of the results immediately to the re for review and approval .
clearly identify each fiber on the report and the work site location of the end points .
provide the re with a certification from the equipment manufacturer that the power meters were calibrated within num months of their use on the contract .
recalibrate at nummonth intervals .
record the results of the testing on the department provided forms .
within num days of completing the testing submit the forms to the re for approval .
do not begin subsequent testing until the previous testing has been approved by the re .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the following num .
individual splice connection asbuilt drawings in the format specified by the department .
num .
splice machine otdr and power meter readings with manufacturers software disks to read the test results .
include power meter test results for each individual fiber section showing the optical budget between the termination point connectors .
include all unused fibers .
include otdr electronic trace files and computer software so that the user can set any threshold values desired for all parameters and can view all ranges of events .
num .
cable identification key sheet .
num .
spreadsheets that identify the file names of the same fiber shot in both directions .
identify the individual common events and calculate the true event loss by averaging the point value of the fiber traces from each direction .
include this calculation in the spreadsheet tables .
supply num cdr copies of the final documentation and num paper copies .
compile and organize the test results in numring binders .
num .
licensed copies of splice and test equipment software .
ensure that the software is compatible with windows xp operating system .
num .
communications system equipment fiber optic interconnections including patch panel cross connections .
num .
inventory report on the form provided by the department .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num controlled traffic signal system ctss a .
components .
ctss consists of the items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of controlling a series of interconnected signalized intersections and processing control data to and from the designated control center .
the system also includes but is not limited to electronic and electrical devices cabinet wiring programming configuration communication and electric service service charges connections software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num num .
controller ctss .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the ctss components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
construct as specified in num .
num .
ctss controller unit .
submit working drawings that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the ctss components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
provide and install a traffic controller unit nema d panel and harness to maintain compatibility in the existing traffic signal controller cabinet perform all wiring configuration programming and testing and remove the existing controller unit from the traffic signal control cabinet .
clean dust dirt and debris from the inside of the cabinet and replace air filters and light fixtures .
employ a manufacturers certified representative to program and configure the controllers with the timing plan directive parameters .
place the intersection into cabinet flash during installation of the ctss controller unit .
num .
controller ctss turn on .
provide an authorized representative that is trained and certified by the controller manufacturer and is on the work site when the ctss controller is being placed into operation .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c .
also before delivery to the project limits perform a numhour burn in test period for the assembled programmed and configured ctss controller and ctss controller unit following the requirements of num for continuous operation without failure .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e and the following num .
for ctss controller provide a detailed drawing of all controller backpanel and subpanel wiring and equipment layout .
for ctss controller unit provide the detailed d harness wiring drawing and the connections to the back panel .
num .
original signature certification of the ctss controller and ctss controller unit to verify that the equipment has been programmed configured wired functions and operates as specified in the contract .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num travel time systems tts a .
components .
a tts consists of the specified items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of measuring traffic speed time and volume can process data to and from the designated control center and is integrated into the central control system for the purpose of determining and reporting travel time information .
the system also includes but is not limited to the electronic and electrical equipment wiring central system database configurations communication and electric service connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num .
foundation tts .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
num detector standard .
bolt the standard securely to the foundation and erect the standard with sufficient rake to assume a vertical position after all attachments and appurtenances are in place .
install a ground wire that extends to the ground rod from the standard .
num controller tts .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the tts components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
num securely bolt the controller cabinet to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the controller with a sealing compound .
num tts detector .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the tts components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
install the detector according to the manufacturers recommendations .
mark all wire and cable detector connections to the controller .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e including configuration data and parameters with channel assignments per traveled lane .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num road weather information system rwis a .
components .
a rwis consists of the specified items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing sensor and control data to and from the designated control center for wind speed and direction gusts precipitation visibility humidity pavement surface and subsurface temperature .
the system also includes but is not limited to the electronic and electrical equipment cabinet wiring configuration communication and power connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num .
weather station .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the rwis components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model number and clei number .
install rwis devices and materials including cabinet enclosure camera electric power devices remote microprocessor controlled unit software back panel main power disconnect surge suppression communication modems atmospheric sensors road subsurface and bridge sensors sensor leads grounding and all wires and incidental material .
aim the camera for proper functioning of the system .
follow the manufacturers recommended installation calibration and configuration instructions .
install sensors embedded in the pavement according to the manufacturers recommendations .
sawcut the pavement pressure wash and dry the sawcut before installing the sensors .
install each cable from the sensor in a separate individual saw cut to the conduit at the curb leading to the nearest junction box .
install bridge sensors according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not splice cables and sensor leads .
if not connected into the fiber optic network obtain and provide communications with a utility service provider from the field microprocessor to the existing department rwis designated control center .
num .
weather station roadway devices .
install sensors embedded in the pavement and on bridges according to the manufacturers requirements for connections into existing weather stations .
sawcut the pavement pressure wash and dry the sawcut before installing the sensors .
install each cable from the sensor in a separate individual saw cut to the conduit at the curb leading to the nearest junction box .
do not splice cables and sensor leads .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c .
num d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e and the following num .
configuration data and parameters port and channel assignments for each traveled lane .
num .
calibration coefficient data for each sensor .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num dynamic message system dms a .
components .
dms consists of the specified items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing control data to and from the designated control center .
the system also includes but is not limited to wiring communication and power connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
construct components as follows num .
foundation dms .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
num .
dms standard .
bolt the standard securely to the foundation and erect the standard with sufficient rake to assume a vertical position after all attachments and appurtenances are in place .
install a ground wire that extends to the ground rod from the standard .
num .
dms sign .
at least num days before beginning construction submit working drawings for approval that include sign mounting and lifting calculations .
ensure the calculations are signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
mount the sign on the standard or structure and install the controller according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure control cables are factory assembled and tested according to the sign manufacturers recommendations .
make all wire and cable connections to the dms sign controller according to the sign manufacturers recommendations .
perform tree trimming and site clearing to provide an unobstructed field of view up to num feet from the sign as directed by the re .
num .
dms sign with controller .
at least num days before beginning construction submit working drawings for approval that include sign mounting and lifting calculations .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
ensure the calculations are signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
mount the sign with controller on the standard .
ensure control cables are factory assembled and tested according to the sign manufacturers recommendations .
make all wire and cable connections to the dms sign controller according to the sign manufacturers recommendations .
perform tree trimming and site clearing to provide an unobstructed field of view up to num feet from the sign as directed by the re .
num .
dms sign install and dms sign with controller install .
submit working drawings that include sign mounting and lifting calculations .
pick up as specified in the special provisions the type of dms signs shown on the plans for installation .
before transport test and confirm the functionality of the dms material .
provide a manufacturers representative to be present during the tests .
mount the sign on the standard and install the controller .
perform tree trimming and site clearing to provide an unobstructed field of view up to num feet from the sign as directed by the re .
num .
controller dms .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the dms components from the field location to the designated control center .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
num securely bolt the controller to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the controller with a sealing compound .
install cables and wire connections between the sign and controller according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the conduit entry points are properly closed off with duct sealing compound .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num weigh in motion system wims a .
components .
a wims consists of the specified items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing pavement sensor and control data to and from the control center in trenton .
the wims is composed of electronic and electrical equipment pavement sensors cables wiring control cabinet site processor remote communication modems operating software and software used to process and generate reports on the collected raw vehicle record files .
the system also includes but is not limited to wiring cabinet foundation communication and power connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
if not connected into the fiber optic network obtain and provide communications with a utility service provider from the field microprocessor to the department wims control center in trenton .
make operational electronic and electrical components to monitor volume speed length gap headway vehicle type classification by axle configuration and axle weights .
the roadway sensors are composed of inductive loop detectors loop leads weight sensors and temperature sensor .
the wims electronics are installed at each work site with electrical power and communications for remote station programming monitoring and failure diagnosis and data retrieval .
construct components as follows num controller wims .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
at least num days before beginning construction submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the wims components from the field location to the control center in trenton .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
securely bolt the controller cabinet to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the controller with a sealing compound .
num .
wim roadway devices .
install the devices according to the manufacturers requirements .
pressure wash and dry the sawcut as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure that sensors loop detector wires and cables are installed in separate conduit per type of device and that conduit is waterproofed and sealed .
ensure that the temperature sensor is installed in a schedule num pvc conduit in the shoulder of the roadway .
maintain at least num feet of space between the saw cut loops and the sensors .
after completion of the hma reestablish the location of each loop edge to facilitate and mark for cutting of the slot for the axle weight sensor .
ensure that the lengths of weight sensors do not exceed the width of the lanes .
do not splice cables .
grind the top of the encapsulation material flushed with the road .
ensure that the piezoelectric sensors are installed perpendicular to the flow of traffic and are without twists or curls .
shorter sensors num feet length are positioned to one side in a wheel path not in the center of the lane longer sensors are typically centered in the lane .
cut a slot for the sensor that is num inches longer than the sensor .
do not mix or place the epoxy until the re has approved all cleaning operations .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c except do not perform level b as specified in num.c.num.b .
also perform the testing as follows num use an lcr meter to measure the capacitance resistance and dissipation factor of each sensor .
when the lane is opened to traffic perform a functional test on the sensor using an oscilloscope .
provide a numaxle tractortrailer combination numaxle tractor and numaxle semitrailer and driver for calibration of the wim system .
weigh the calibration truck on a certified multidraft public scale .
also weigh the steering axle drive tandem axles and trailer tandem axles .
record and provide the weight data to the re at the start of the test .
include the total gross weight of the combination .
ensure that the truck has an airride suspension and is in good mechanical condition .
ensure that the trailer is a dry van type and loaded with a nonshifting load so that the gross weight of the tractortrailer combination is between num and num pounds .
ensure that the axleloads do not exceed new jersey title num limits and do not violate the federal bridge formula .
drive the truck over each lane a minimum of num times and record the axle and gross weights as determined by the wim system by each sensor for each pass .
use the average values among the num passes to calculate a calibration factor for each sensor .
perform this test twice .
after the calibration ensure that the average values recorded by the wim system are within num percent of each axle weight average axle weight of each axle group and within num percent of the gross weight of the combination of the weights recorded at the public scale .
if the system can not be properly calibrated after num attempts the re may employ a third party vendor to redo the work .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e and the following num .
configuration data and parameters port and channel assignments for each traveled lane .
num .
calibration coefficient data for each sensor .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num traffic volume system tvs a .
components .
a tvs consists of the specified items needed to provide a complete system that is capable of processing traffic control data to and from the control center in trenton including pavement loop and vehicle detectors electronic devices to measure and record vehicle volume speed length gap and headway in each lane connected to the respective monitoring devices in a cabinet .
the system also includes wiring cabinet foundation communication and power connections service charges software grounding and surge protection .
b .
installation .
before beginning the work and during the work comply with the requirements of num .
the allowable time frame for existing system shutdown and the cost of damages for exceeding the allowable time frames is specified in the special provisions .
the department will recover the cost as specified in num .
if not connected into the fiber optic network obtain and provide communications with a utility service provider from the field microprocessor to the department tvs control center in trenton .
construct components as follows num .
controller tvs .
construct the foundation as specified in num .
submit working drawings for approval that include a block wiring diagram that illustrates the interconnections of the tvs components from the field location to the control center in trenton .
identify each component by manufacturer model and clei number .
make operational electronic and electrical components to monitor volume speed length gap and headway .
the roadway sensors are composed of inductive loops and loop leads .
the tvs electronics are installed at each work site with electrical power and communications for remote station programming monitoring and failure diagnosis and data retrieval .
securely bolt the controller cabinet to the foundation in a vertical position using stainless steel hardware .
seal the underground conduit entrance to the controller with a sealing compound .
num .
tvs roadway devices .
sawcut the pavement .
pressure wash then dry the sawcut according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that sensors loop detector wires and cables are installed in num separate conduit per type of device and that the conduit is waterproofed and sealed .
maintain at least num feet of space between the saw cut loops and the sensors .
do not splice cables .
grind the top of the encapsulation material flush with the road .
c. testing .
perform testing as specified in num.c except do not perform level b as specified in num.c.num.b .
also perform the testing as follows use an lcr meter to measure the capacitance resistance and dissipation factor of each sensor .
when the lane is opened to traffic perform a functional test on the sensor using an oscilloscope .
measure the ratio of loop inductance to lead inductance and ensure it is within the requirements of the sensor manufacturer .
d. maintenance .
perform maintenance as specified in num.d .
e. final documentation .
provide the documentation specified in num.e and the following num .
configuration data and parameters port and channel assignments .
num .
calibration data for each sensor .
f. equipment training .
provide training as specified in num.f and in the special provisions .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit junction box its type ___ unit communication cable linear foot foundation its type ___ unit controller its unit communication hub unit control center system location ___ lump sum foundation css type ___ unit camera standard type ___ unit camera unit controller camera unit fiber optic cable type ___ linear foot controller ctss unit ctss controller unit unit controller ctss turn on unit foundation tts type ___ unit detector standard unit controller tts unit tts detectors type _____ unit weather station unit weather station roadway devices ____ lanes unit foundation dms type ___ unit dms standard type ___ unit dms sign unit dms sign with controller unit dms sign install unit dms sign with controller install unit controller dms unit controller wim unit wim roadway devices ____ lanes unit controller tvs unit tvs roadway devices ____ lanes unit num the department will make payment for each item except for fiber optic cable type___ standards junction boxes and foundations as follows work completed payment installing the item num of total contract price successful completion of level a testing num of total contract price successful completion of level b testing num of total contract price successful completion of level c testing num of total contract price if a level of testing is not required the department will include the percentage specified for that level of payment in the installing the item percentage .
the department will make payment for fiber optic cable type___ as follows work completed payment installing the fiber optic cable num of total contract price successful completion of level num testing num of total contract price successful completion of level num testing num of total contract price num division num landscaping section num selective vegetation removal num description this section describes the requirements for removing live and dead trees both standing and fallen shrubs and other vegetation and debris to produce irregular foliage lines to create a natural transition between the artificial edge of the woods to create bays in wooded areas to establish new vegetation limits along roadsides and to open views .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num fertilizer num rationum grass seed mixture type anum mulch num herbicidenum num construction num selective thinning a .
site preparation .
notify the re num days before beginning work .
the department will designate trees shrubs and other vegetation to be removed within the designated areas .
ensure that work is supervised by a skilled person .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the name and qualifications to the re for approval .
b .
selective thinning .
fell trees to prevent damage to adjacent vegetation structures utility wires and property .
remove trees stumps and all debris in a manner that does not compact or disturb the soil .
in open areas remove stumps to at least num inches below the existing ground surface .
backfill stump holes with topsoil as specified in num and fertilize seed and mulch the area as specified in num .
in wooded areas and on slopes of numhnumv or steeper cut off stumps at the existing ground surface .
treat live stumps with herbicide immediately after cutting .
if suckering occurs apply herbicides or perform mechanical operations to ensure that regrowth does not occur .
remove dead dying diseased interfering objectionable and weak branches up to a height of num feet .
c. site clean up .
dispose of cleared material stumps and resulting debris as specified in num .
repair damage to remaining trees and vegetation as directed by the re .
repair damaged turf areas as specified in num .
num selective clearing a .
site preparation .
prepare the site as specified num.a .
b .
selective clearing .
fell trees to prevent damage to adjacent vegetation structures utility wires and property .
remove stumps of trees shrubs and vines to at least num inches below the existing ground surface .
backfill stump holes with topsoil as specified in num to eliminate depressions .
the re may direct the area to be fertilized seeded and mulched as specified in num .
in wooded areas and on slopes of numhnumv or steeper cut off stumps at the existing ground surface .
treat live stumps with herbicide immediately after cutting .
if suckering occurs apply herbicides or perform mechanical operations to ensure that regrowth does not occur .
c. site clean up .
clean up the site as specified in num.c .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit selective thinning acre selective thinning square yard selective clearing acre selective clearing square yard the department will measure the area of selective thinning and selective clearing using the perimeter defined by the edge of the existing canopy .
section num trimming and removing trees num description this section describes the requirements for removing trees and defective or undesirable limbs and for repairing injuries or wounds on existing trees .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num fertilizer num rationum grass seed mixture type anum mulchnum disinfectantnum herbicidenum num construction num trimming existing trees notify the re num days before beginning work .
the department will designate trees to be trimmed .
ensure that tree trimming is supervised by a skilled person .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the name and qualifications to the re for approval .
remove all dead dying diseased interfering objectionable and weak branches .
do not remove healthy low branches unless directed .
when removing the lower bottom branches of trees for underclearance ensure a symmetrical appearance and minimize cuts to ensure normal sap flow .
make clean cuts as close as possible to the trunk or parent limb without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub so that closure can start .
cut branches that are too heavy to handle in multiple sections to prevent splitting or peeling of the bark .
where necessary lower branches to the ground by ropes or equipment to prevent tree or property damage .
on trees known to be diseased disinfect tools after each cut when there is a danger of transmitting the disease on tools .
inspect old injuries and trace those not closing properly and where callus growth is not already completely established .
reuse waste material and debris resulting from trimming existing trees as specified in num.a .
num removing existing trees notify the re num days before beginning work .
the department will designate trees to be removed .
ensure that tree trimming is supervised by a person skilled in the work .
at least num days before beginning the work submit the name and qualifications to the re for approval .
num fell trees to prevent damage to adjacent vegetation structures utility wires and property .
remove trees and their stumps to at least num inches below the existing ground surface .
backfill stump holes with topsoil and fertilize seed and mulch the area as specified in num .
in wooded areas and on slopes of numhnumv or steeper cut off stumps at the existing ground surface .
treat live stumps with herbicide immediately after cutting .
if suckering occurs apply herbicides or perform mechanical operations to ensure that regrowth does not occur .
repair damage to remaining trees and vegetation as directed by the re .
repair damaged turf areas as specified in num .
reuse waste material and debris resulting from tree removal as specified in num.a .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit trimming existing tree over ___ to ___ diameter unit trimming existing tree over num diameter unit tree removal over ___ to ___ diameter unit tree removal over num diameter unit the department will determine the quantity of trimming existing trees over ___ to ___ diameter and tree removal over ___ to ___ diameter by the number of trees in each diameter category .
the department will measure the diameter of the tree num feet above the ground .
section num preparation of existing soil num description this section describes the requirements for preparing existing soil for seeding .
num materials provide materials as specified soil aggregate inum num num construction num preparing existing soil clear the surface of the existing soil of all stumps brush weeds and debris .
cultivate the soil to a depth of num to num inches to prepare a seed bed .
where depressions exceed num inches in depth backfill with inum soil aggregate and cover with num inches of topsoil .
bring the entire area to a smooth grade free from any depressions that would collect water .
if necessary use additional topsoil to fill depressions .
dispose of waste material and debris resulting from preparation of existing soil as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit preparation of existing soil acre preparation of existing soil square yard the department will make payment for ___ soil aggregate as specified in num .
num section num topsoiling num description this section describes the requirements for preparing and placing topsoil .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num num construction num topsoiling store topsoil in stockpiles as specified in num.b .
scarify the area to be topsoiled to improve the bond between slope and topsoil .
remove from the scarified area stones num inches or larger in any dimension and other debris such as wires cables tree roots pieces of concrete clods and lumps .
for slopes of numhnumv or steeper create ridges such as by a dozer track in the subsoil surface parallel to the bottom of the slope .
after the re has approved the prepared surface elevations spread topsoil and smooth to grade to produce the required thickness .
for slopes of numhnumv or steeper create ridges such as by a dozer track in the topsoil surface parallel to the bottom of the slope to hold the seed in place and to retain moisture .
ensure that ground areas are not damaged by the delivery handling or storage of materials by washouts due to drainage diversion by workers or by equipment .
repair such damage by grading fertilizing seeding and mulching as specified in num .
num borrow topsoil provide borrow topsoil from offsite sources .
store borrow topsoil in stockpiles as specified in num.b .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit topsoiling ___ thick square yard borrow topsoil cubic yard the department will include areas designated for planting pits in the measured area for topsoiling ___ thick .
the department will determine the quantity of borrow topsoil by the average end area method as specified in num .
section num turf repair strip num description this section describes the requirements for regrading and repairing the area immediately adjacent to the shoulder .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num fertilizer num rationum pulverized limestonenum num grass seed mixture type anum wood cellulose fiber mulchnum num construction num turf repair strip remove soil and vegetation immediately adjacent to the edge of existing pavement .
if necessary form a windrow adjacent to the pavement .
after completing resurfacing restore the soil and add topsoil as required .
fertilize and seed as specified in num .
apply fiber mulch at the minimum rate of num pounds per acre .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit turf repair strip linear foot section num fertilizing and seeding num description this section describes the requirements for providing and placing pulverized limestone fertilizer and seed mixtures and for preparing seeding and mulching wildflower seed beds .
num materials provide materials as specified fertilizer num rationum pulverized limestonenum grass seed mixturenum wildflower seed mixturenum straw mulchnum tackifiers num num construction num turf seeding a. optimal seeding seasons .
seed from march num to may num and from august num to october num .
when weather and soil conditions are suitable the re may allow seeding at other times for soil erosion and sediment control .
notify the re num hours before the seeding operation .
b .
soil preparation .
when the topsoil to be seeded has a ph value of less than num incorporate sufficient pulverized limestone to increase the soil ph value to num .
recommended quantities of total oxides calcium and magnesium to raise the ph of a numinch layer of soil to approximately num as specified in table num .
table num recommended quantities of total oxides per soil class pounds per acre soil ph loamy sand sandy loam loam silty loam num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num ensure that the quantity of pulverized limestone required is in proportion to its total oxide content .
cultivate areas to be seeded to provide a reasonably firm but friable seedbed to a depth of num to num inches .
on slopes steeper than numhnumv the re may reduce the depth of cultivation .
remove all vegetation stones num inches or larger in any dimension and other debris from areas to be seeded .
c. seed and fertilizer application .
sow grass seed mixtures at the rate of num pounds per acre .
use only num type of fertilizer to establish turf throughout the project limits .
at the time of seeding apply fertilizer at the rate necessary to yield num pounds of nitrogen per acre .
place seed and fertilizer by either of the following methods num .
hydraulic method .
mix the seed and fertilizer in water and then apply under pressure at the specified rates .
retreat all areas inadequately covered .
num .
dry method .
spread fertilizer in dry form separately from seed at the specified rates .
use mechanical spreaders to achieve even distribution .
for areas inaccessible to mechanical spreaders use handoperated spreaders .
smooth finished seeded areas to the grades shown on the plans .
d. mulching .
mulch seeded areas as specified in num .
e. turf establishment .
protect and maintain seeded areas .
repair damage to seeded areas caused by pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other causes .
if the initial application of fertilizer was performed between january and june repeat the fertilizer application the following september .
if the initial application of fertilizer was performed between july and december repeat the fertilizer application the following march .
if a stand of grass practically weed free and containing plants in reasonable proportion to the various kinds of seed in the grass seed mixture is not established on areas of seeding prepare a viable seed bed refertilize reseed and remulch until a satisfactory stand of grass is established .
num wildflower seeding a. seeding seasons .
seed wildflowers from august num to october num and from april num to may num inclusive .
b .
bed layout .
stake bed outlines at a maximum spacing of num feet using num num numinch wood stakes driven num foot into the ground .
the staking defines the limits for seed protection from mowing overspray of herbicides and other potential damage .
c. soil preparation .
do not fertilize or seed grass mixes in the wildflower seed areas .
spray existing vegetation within the areas proposed for wildflowers during the active growing season with glyphosate at the manufacturers recommended rates for total control of all plant material .
where necessary reapply glyphosate num days after the first application .
mow the dead vegetation as close as possible to the existing ground and then cultivate to a depth of num to num inches .
d. preparation of seed mixtures .
provide wildflower seed mixture as specified in num.b .
in the presence of the re combine the mixture with a carrier of clean dry saltfree sand at a volume ratio of num parts sand to num part wildflower seed mixture .
e. seed application .
evenly spread the prepared blend of seed and sand using a handoperated handheld broadcast spreader .
lightly drag the seeded area with a piece of chainlink fence to mix the seed into the soil surface .
f. mulching .
mulch seeded areas within num days of wildflower seeding .
uniformly spread straw mulch in a layer num to num inches thick loose measurement .
bind in place with a tackifier as specified in num .
g. wildflower establishment .
protect and maintain seeded areas .
repair damage to seeded areas caused by pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other causes .
if a stand of wildflowers practically weed free and containing plants in reasonable proportion to the various kinds of seed in the wildflower seed mixture is not established on areas of seeding reseed and remulch until a satisfactory stand of wildflowers is established .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit fertilizing and seeding type ___ square yard wildflower seeding square yard the department will not make payment for fertilizing and seeding areas disturbed by construction operations beyond the specified grading limits in islands and medians and between specified grading limits and the row .
the department will not include payment for mulch under fertilizing and seeding type ___ and wildflower seeding .
the department will make payment for mulching under the various items in num .
section num topsoil stabilization num description this section describes the requirements for providing and placing jute and excelsior mats erosion control mulch blankets turf reinforcement mats and mechanically bonded fiber matrices on prepared topsoiled surfaces .
num materials provide materials as specified fertilizer num rationum pulverized limestonenum grass seed mixturenum wildflower seed mixturenum straw mulchnum tackifiers num type num matnum type num matnum type num matnum type num matnum provide staples that are made of numinch lengths of no .
num plain iron wire .
num construction num installing topsoil stabilization matting before placing erosion control mats ensure that topsoil is smooth friable and free of depressions clods mounds stones or other debris that may prevent the matting from making complete contact with the topsoil .
num .
type num .
after grading topsoil fertilize seed and mulch the area as specified in num .
lay the mats and anchor them with staples to ensure the matting is in full contact with the topsoil .
ensure that there are no voids between the topsoil and the matting .
place staples num inches apart across the matting and blankets at num foot intervals and at critical locations such as at inlets check slots if required overlapping joints and ends .
drive staples at an uphill angle of approximately num degrees from the perpendicular surface of the slope .
when jute or excelsior matting is required in swales or medians the contractor may install the matting in multiple widths .
when laying excelsior matting unroll the material in the direction of the flow of water .
snugly butt seams .
cut bulging seams in the matting material .
when laying jute matting unroll parallel to the primary direction of flow .
bury the uphill end num inches vertically in a trench and overlap the downhill end over the next roll .
overlap side seams .
num num .
type num mat .
after grading topsoil fertilize and seed as specified in num.c .
use erosion control mulch blanket instead of mulch .
lay and anchor erosion control mulch blanket as specified in num .
num .
type num mat .
after grading topsoil lay the mat parallel to the direction of flow on unseeded topsoil .
anchor and overlap mat as specified in num .
infill the numdimensional matrix with topsoil to the thickness of the mat then fertilize seed and mulch the area as specified in num .
num .
type num mat .
after grading topsoil fertilize and seed as specified in num.c .
install mechanically bonded fiber matrix according to the manufacturers recommendations applying at least num pounds of dry product per acre .
use mechanically bonded fiber matrix instead of mulch .
use approved hydrospraying machines with fantype nozzle numdegree tip .
to achieve optimum topsoil surface coverage apply to the topsoil surface from opposing directions .
mix num pounds of mechanically bonded fiber matrix per num gallons of water confirm loading rates with the equipment manufacturer .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit topsoil stabilization type ___ mat square yard section num sodding num description this section describes the requirements for providing and placing topsoil and sod .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num fertilizer num rationum pulverized limestonenum sod num pegsnum num construction num placing sod before placing sod place num inches of topsoil as specified in num .
incorporate fertilizer applied at a rate that yields num pounds of nitrogen per acre .
incorporate pulverized limestone if necessary to adjust the ph of the topsoil to num as specified in num.b .
with each delivery of sod submit to the re a delivery slip indicating the time and date of harvest and the quantity of sod and a new jersey department of agriculture certification .
within num hours of harvesting deliver and lay the sod .
lay sod with staggered joints pressed closely together .
match the ends of sod strips so that the ends and sides always lie flush with each other .
press sod into the underlying soil by hand tamping and rolling to produce an even surface .
on slopes start placing sod at the bottom .
at the top of slopes turn the upper edge of the sod strips into the soil and cover with topsoil .
on slopes steeper than numhnumv hold sod in place with pegs driven flush with the surface of the sod .
do not space the pegs more than num foot apart .
use at least num pegs for each strip of sod .
water until infiltration occurs through the root zone and into the topsoil zone in a manner that provides equal distribution and coverage to all areas sodded .
rewater as necessary until a firm root mass is established .
num do not place sod when the moisture content of the topsoil may adversely affect the sod .
if the upper numinch of topsoil is dry moisten the soil immediately before laying the sod .
immediately replace sod that is dead or unhealthy .
after a firm root mass is established and before the turf reaches the height of num to num inches mow the turf to a height of num num to num inches with a machine that does not produce ruts contribute to soil compaction or damage the sod .
subsequently mow as directed .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit sodding square yard the department will make payment for mowing as specified in num .
section num mulching num description this section describes the requirements for providing and spreading mulch and for tacking straw mulch .
num materials provide materials as specified grass seed mixture type fnum mulch num tackifiers num num construction num straw mulching uniformly spread straw mulch in num to numinch loose layers over turf areas within num days of seeding .
bind the mulch in place using num of the following tackifiers num .
fiber mulch .
mix fiber mulch with water and apply using hydraulic pressure equipment .
apply fiber mulch as recommended by the manufacturer except do not apply less than num pounds of the dry product per acre .
evenly distribute the mixture over the straw mulch .
num .
synthetic plastic emulsion .
apply synthetic plastic emulsion using hydraulic pressure equipment at a rate of num gallons num pounds of undiluted material per acre .
dilute the synthetic plastic emulsion with water at a ratio of num .
do not apply synthetic plastic emulsion in precipitation or in freezing weather .
num .
vegetablebased gels .
mix vegetablebased gels with water and apply using hydraulic pressure equipment .
apply vegetablebased gels as recommended by the manufacturer except thoroughly mix at least num pounds of the dry material with num gallons of water per acre .
do not apply vegetablebased gels in precipitation or in freezing weather .
when immediate protection of newly graded slopes is necessary at times other than during optimum seeding seasons apply straw mulch with a temporary seed mixture .
leave straw mulch in place and allow to disintegrate .
if straw mulch is displaced before the grass reaches a height of num inches refertilize reseed and remulch the area .
num num fiber mulching the contractor may only use fiber mulch during the optimum seeding seasons and with the approval of the department .
apply fiber mulch over turf areas within num days of seeding .
mix fiber mulch with water and apply using hydraulic pressure equipment .
following the manufacturers recommendations apply at least num pounds of dry fiber mulch per acre .
leave fiber mulch in place and allow to disintegrate .
if fiber mulch is displaced before the grass is num inches high refertilize reseed and remulch the area .
num mulching plants mulch the specified plant pits of individual trees or shrubs including the saucer to its outer edge and the entire area where material is planted in beds with a num to numinch layer of wood chips stone gravel or shredded hardwood bark as specified .
for hemerocallis and perennial beds mulch the entire area with a numinch layer of wood mulch .
in naturalized areas individually mulch each hemerocallis plant with a numinch layer of wood mulch .
mulch plants within num days of installation .
replace mulch that is displaced .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit straw mulching square yard fiber mulching square yard stone mulching square yard gravel mulching square yard shredded hardwood bark mulching square yard wood mulching square yard wood mulching num thick square yard section num mowing num description this section describes the requirements for mowing new and existing turf within the row .
num materials intentionally blank num construction num mowing seeded areas mow to a height of num to num inches designated seeded turf areas when vegetation reaches a height of num to num inches .
use hand mowing methods and light equipment in areas where the use of heavy equipment may damage the turf or soil or cause soil compaction .
before beginning mowing operations pickup and remove litter and debris in the areas of seeded turf to be mowed .
dispose of waste material and debris as specified in num .
remove excessive cuttings as specified in num .
num mowing existing turf mow to a height of num to num inches designated existing turf areas when vegetation reaches a height of num to num inches .
use hand mowing methods and light equipment in areas where the use of heavy equipment may damage the turf or soil or cause soil compaction .
num before beginning mowing operations pickup and remove litter and debris in the areas of existing turf to be mowed .
dispose of waste material and debris as specified in num .
remove excessive cuttings as specified in num .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit mowing acre mowing square yard mowing existing turf acre mowing existing turf square yard section num planting num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing delivering and installing plants .
num materials provide materials as specified topsoil num fertilizer num rationum pulverized limestonenum mulch num plant materials num antidesiccantnum herbicidenum waternum num construction num planting a .
furnishing delivering installing and caring for plants .
submit to the re the current materials questionnaire form for landscaping material as specified in num num days before delivery with a copy to the bureau of landscape architecture and environmental solutions .
handle and pack plants to prevent injuries during transit .
do not dump or drop plants while unloading .
protect the roots of all plants from freezing or desiccating by heelingin watering covering or keeping shaded or placing in a climate controlled building or trailer .
coordinate work to prevent delays in planting that may expose the root systems of plants to the air sun or freezing conditions .
num b. optimal planting seasons .
table num optimal planting season type of plant season broad leaf and coniferous evergreen trees shrubs vines and ground covers march num to may num august num to december num deciduous trees shrubs vines ornamental grasses and perennials march num to may num october num to december num container grown plant materials march num to may num august num to december num narcissus october num to december num hemerocallis march num to may num when planting outside the optimal planting seasons ensure that plants installed are kept watered and protected from freezing and desiccation .
c. layout .
before planting stake plant locations and bed outlines and obtain department approval .
immediately notify the re to arrange for departmental guidance if existing conditions prevent planting at the exact locations shown on the plans .
the department may adjust plant locations to meet field conditions .
d. planting beds .
spray existing vegetation within proposed planting beds during the growing season with glyphosate at the manufacturers recommended rates .
the department may direct the reapplication of glyphosate num days after the first application .
mow the dead vegetation as closely as possible to existing ground or turn it into the soil .
if the use of glyphosate is ineffective mechanically remove existing vegetation from the bed area and cultivate to a depth of num inches .
cultivate perennial planting beds to a depth of num to num inches and grade beds smooth immediately before planting .
plant narcissus bulbs to a depth of num inches .
e. excavation for plant pits and beds .
before excavating for plant pits and beds ensure that the areas conform to the specified lines and grades .
on slopes steeper than numhnumv excavate pits no more than num days in advance of planting .
excavate pits for balled and burlapped plants to a minimum of num times the width of the root ball and no deeper than the root ball as measured from the bottom of the trunk flare to the bottom of the ball .
excavate pits for containerized plants to a minimum of num times the width of the container and no deeper than the actual height of the root mass within the container .
ensure that side slopes of all pits taper down from the rim of the pit to the outer edge of the bottom of the ball .
ensure that the sides of the pits are loosened and roughened to promote root penetration .
obtain re approval before reusing topsoil from the excavated pits for seedlings vines ground covers and perennials excavate pits to a minimum numinch diameter and numinch depth .
reuse excavation as specified in num.a .
dispose of sod weeds roots and other objectionable material as specified in num .
if the contractor does not plan to plant excavated pits before the end of the working day provide a plan to the re for approval num days before planting that details the measures to ensure safety .
f. pruning .
prune according to ansi a num to preserve the natural character of each plant .
limit pruning at the time of planting to the removal of dead conflicting and broken branches .
do not prune the leaders of trees .
ensure that experienced personnel using properly conditioned equipment and methods in keeping with accepted horticultural practice perform all pruning .
g. setting plants .
set plants plumb and at the same depth at which they were grown in the nursery except set trees with a trunk flare num to num inch above the surrounding grade to allow for settling .
set roots for the various conditions as follows num num .
balled and burlapped plants .
handle and move plants only by the ball .
either remove or loosen and fold back the burlap from the upper num of the ball .
when balled and burlapped plants are in wire baskets remove the entire wire basket preserving the integrity of the ball .
num .
containerized plants .
immediately before planting remove the container and make num vertical cuts equidistantly spaced around the perimeter of the root mass .
make each cut num inch deep from the top of the rootearth mass to the bottom .
h. backfilling .
backfill with topsoil around the root system .
handtamp the topsoil and water at the rate of num gallons per square yard of pit area to settle the topsoil and to remove air pockets .
ensure that the topsoil is not frozen at the time of backfilling .
where necessary backfill areas that have settled with topsoil .
form a numinch high compacted berm using topsoil around individual plants to a diameter equal to that of the pit .
ensure that the berm functions properly throughout the plant establishment period .
i. watering .
water plants with sufficient frequency and quantity to ensure that the soil surrounding the root system remains moist but not saturated j. staking and guying .
immediately after planting stake or guy trees either num inch or more in caliper or more than num feet in height .
ensure that guy wires allow for normal sway .
ensure that trees remain plumb .
k. tree protection .
install tree protectors to a height of num feet above the ground surface on all planted malus and crataegus species to prevent damage from bark consuming rodents .
l. mulching .
treat all beds with a preemergent herbicide before placing mulch .
mulch plants as specified in num .
neatly edge the beds to produce a smooth flowing edge line .
m. caring for plants .
maintain plants in a healthy growing condition during the life of the contract by watering weeding spraying with pesticides pruning remulching maintaining guys and stakes and other operations as necessary .
n. restoration and cleanup .
where existing turf areas have been damaged during planting operations restore the disturbed areas as specified in num .
dispose of debris as specified in num .
num plant establishment period upon completion of all plantings request that an inspection be made by the department to determine if the plants are alive and healthy .
the department will inspect plantings between may num and october numst .
replace plants as specified in num that are missing or not alive and healthy .
if replacing plants outside of the optimal planting season as specified in table num only use containerized or balled and burlapped plants that are certified as being dug dormant .
the plant establishment period will begin when the department determines that num percent of the plants are alive and healthy .
ensure the plantings are cared for during the plant establishment period by keeping the plants in a healthy growing condition by watering weeding spraying with pesticides pruning remulching disturbed areas maintaining guys and stakes and by other operations as horticulturally necessary .
the department will reinspect the plants approximately num year after the start of the plant establishment period .
if the department determines that plants need to be replaced replant plants as specified in num within num weeks .
if replanting outside of the optimal planting season as specified in table num only use containerized or balled and burlapped plants that are certified as being dug dormant .
the department will reinspect the plants approximately num years after the start of the plant establishment period .
if the department determines that plants need to be replaced replant plants as specified in num within num weeks .
if replacing outside of the optimal planting season as specified in table num only use containerized or balled and burlapped plants that are certified as being dug dormant .
remove stakes guys and guy wires within the last month of the conclusion of the plant establishment period .
at the conclusion of the plant establishment period remove and dispose of weeds debris and damaged plant material as specified in num .
treat planting beds with a preemergence herbicide .
when the establishment period extends beyond completion provide the departments bureau of landscape architecture and environmental solutions with the following for the remaining duration of the establishment period num num .
highway occupancy permit .
obtain a highway occupancy permit from the njdot regional operations permits office .
provide num copies of the approved permit to the departments bureau of landscape architecture and environmental solutions .
include the following in the permit num .
project description location and copy of the landscape plans details and specifications .
num .
description of the establishment care work during the establishment period .
num .
work schedule describing when the establishment care work will occur .
num .
maintenance bond .
provide a bond to the department in the amount specified in the special provisions .
num measurement and payment the department will measure and make payment for items as follows item pay unit large deciduous tree ___ unit large deciduous tree seedling ___ unit small deciduous tree ___ unit evergreen tree ___ unit evergreen tree seedling ___ unit deciduous shrub ___ unit evergreen shrub ___ unit ground cover or vine ___ unit perennial ___ unit bulb unit corm unit tuber unit root unit rhizome unit plant establishment period lump sum num division num materials section num aggregates num source use aggregates from a single source and geological classification in any num construction item unless otherwise authorized .
use only sources of aggregate that are listed on the qpl .
the me may allow aggregates from different sources if they are of the same geological classification and have similar specific gravities and aggregate properties .
use test methods for gradation according to the appropriate provisions of aashto t num or t num unless otherwise noted .
gradations of aggregates in the various tables of this and other sections are the percentages passing by weight .
the aggregate producer shall submit annually to the me for approval a quality control plan for the aggregate products .
the aggregate producer may obtain guidelines for developing the quality control plan from the me upon request .
num stockpiles provide an area for each stockpile of adequate size reasonably uniform in crosssection well drained and cleared of foreign materials .
at concrete and hma mixing plants stockpile a sufficient quantity of aggregate to provide for a minimum of num days operations .
place the aggregate stockpiles on a firm hard surface such as a compacted aggregate hma or concrete surface .
construct the stockpile by placing the aggregates in layers of not more than num feet thick .
locate the piles so that there is no contamination by foreign material and no intermingling of aggregates from adjacent piles .
do not use steeltracked equipment on the stockpiles .
do not store aggregates from different sources geological classifications or of different gradings in stockpiles near each other unless a bulkhead is placed between the different materials .
if blending aggregates of different gradings and from different sources proportion through weigh hoppers .
the me may allow loader blending of aggregate stockpiles if included in the approved aggregate producers quality control plan .
the department will reject aggregates found segregated or contaminated .
if a stockpile is rejected for segregation the contractor may reconstruct it for further evaluation .
use methods that prevent segregation when charging aggregates from stockpiles .
do not use washed aggregates sooner than num hours after washing or until the surplus water has drained out and the material has a uniform moisture content .
do not stockpile rap higher than num feet .
cover or otherwise protect stockpiles of rap for use in hma to prevent buildup of moisture .
num coarse aggregate obtain coarse aggregate as specified in num .
use coarse aggregate that is broken stone or washed gravel graded as specified table num .
stockpile coarse aggregate as specified in num .
the me will sample coarse aggregate as specified in table num .
num table num standard sizes of coarse aggregate amounts finer than each laboratory sieve percentage by weight no .
nominal size num num num num num num num num num num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num no .
num num num num table num coarse aggregate sampling coarse aggregate no .
sample size pounds frequency num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num tons or num cubic yards num num num stone sand num num tons or num cubic yards num broken stone use broken stone that is uniform in texture and quality and that conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for broken stone aggregate property test method maximum percent weathered and deleterious stone njdot anum num broken stone other than that classification approved for use njdot anum num flat and elongated pieces for graded material no .
num and larger length greater than num times the thickness or width astm d num num absorption in cold water no .
num and larger aashto t num num stone sand only no .
num aashto t num num sodium sulfate soundness loss aashto t num num adherent fines in coarse aggregates hma njdot anum num concrete njdot anum num percentage of wear los angeles abrasion test hma surface course aashto t num num hma intermediate or base course aashto t num num concrete surface course and bridge decks aashto t num num concrete other aashto t num num densegraded aggregate base course aashto t num num num the geologic classifications are as follows num .
argillite .
a thoroughly indurated and cohesive rock composed predominantly of silt size or smaller particles of clay quartz and feldspar or the finegrained thermal recrystallization products of this assemblage hornfels .
ensure rock is bedded thickly enough so as not to break into thin pieces at planes of stratification .
num .
carbonate rock .
a thoroughly indurated and cohesive rock composed predominantly of calcite and dolomite bedded thickly enough so as not to break into thin pieces at planes of stratification .
minerals insoluble in hot hydrochloric acid are discrete grains of quartz clay and mica .
num .
gneiss .
a metamorphic rock consisting principally of quartz and feldspar .
ensure rock has a dense structure with a uniform distribution of minerals that will not break into thin pieces at lines of stratification .
num .
granite .
an equigranular or porphyritic igneous rock consisting principally of quartz and feldspar .
num .
quartzite .
a metamorphic rock composed principally of quartz .
quarry rock so that only the nonarkosic uniformly compacted quartzites are included in the graded products .
ensure quartzite is not schistose in structure .
num .
trap rock .
an igneous rock locally either basalt or diabase with a uniform distribution of constituent minerals .
amygdaloidal or vesicular basalt is not considered trap rock and is considered a deleterious material for testing purposes .
num washed gravel use washed gravel that is either crushed or uncrushed as specified and that conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for washed gravel aggregate property test method maximum percent weathered and deleterious gravel njdot anum num sodium sulfate soundness loss aashto t num num soft particles as determined by scratch hardness test njdot anum num absorption in cold water no .
num and larger aashto t num num stone sand only no .
num aashto t num num clay lumps organic material coal and other foreign or deleterious matter percent by weight or volume whichever is greater aashto t num num chloride content aashto t num num crushed gravel material with at least num fractured face nicked gravel is not considered crushed astm d num num adherent fines in coarse aggregates hma njdot anum num concrete njdot anum num quartz gravel is composed of natural pebbles of which the majority is coarsely crystalline quartz .
ensure that the individual crystals within each pebble are intergrown into a tenacious nonporous interlocking texture that fractures as a single unit .
ensure that the percent of wear determined according to the los angeles abrasion test is as specified for the various uses except that the percent maximum loss for quartz gravel is num percent .
when the sodium sulfate soundness and scratch hardness tests total num percent or more the me will perform a petrographic analysis to determine the amount of unsound and weathered material .
num blast furnace slag obtain blast furnace slag as specified in num .
use as blast furnace slag the aircooled residue resulting from the production of pig iron .
ensure that the blast furnace slag consists of tough durable angular fragments that are uniform in density absorption and quality and are free from flux stone dirt or other objectionable material .
stockpile blast num furnace slag as specified in num .
ensure that blast furnace slag conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for blast furnace slag aggregate property test method requirement weight per cubic foot loose measure pounds aashto t num num minimum percentage of wear los angeles abrasion test aashto t num num maximum sulfur percentage by weight astm c num num maximum num aggregates for hma num coarse aggregate use coarse aggregate for hma that is broken stone conforming to num except that the contractor may use carbonate rock for the surface course only in shoulder areas parking areas or driveways .
num fine aggregate for hma surface course use fine aggregate that is manufactured stone sand or natural sand .
manufacture stone sand from aggregates conforming to num with not more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
when the percent passing the no .
num sieve exceeds num percent blend the stone sand with another approved sand so that the combination contains no more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve based on stockpile samples theoretically combined .
feed each sand source into the plant through a separate cold feed hopper .
use natural sand consisting of material composed of predominantly angular particles of quartz or other hard durable minerals conforming to the quality and gradation requirements specified in table num and table num respectively .
table num quality requirements for fine aggregate used in hma aggregate property test method maximum percent mica njdot anum num absorption cold water aashto t num num sodium sulfate soundness loss aashto t num num clay and clay lumps aashto t num num table num gradation requirements for fine aggregate used in hma sieve size percent passing num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num for hma surface course wash and grade the natural sand .
natural sand does not need to be washed if it conforms to the requirements of num except that the allowable percent passing the no .
num sieve is num to num percent .
the me will sample fine aggregate at a frequency of num pounds for each num tons .
num mineral filler use mineral filler for hma that is free from lumps and foreign materials .
produce mineral filler from broken stone conforming to num fly ash conforming to num.a kiln dust from cement manufacture or baghouse fines from an hma plant .
produce baghouse fines from a consistent geological source of coarse and fine aggregate .
ensure that a hma mixture containing the filler retains num percent of its initial strength after an immersion cycle of num days when prepared according to aashto t num and tested according to aashto t num .
num use mineral filler that when tested according to aashto t num conforms to the gradation requirements specified in table num .
table num gradation requirements for mineral filler sieve size percent passing no .
num num num no .
num num num num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap process rap for hma through screening and crushing operations to ensure that it is num percent passing the maximum aggregate size for the mixture .
use rap containing asphalt binder that is free from solvents or other contaminating substances .
ensure that the coarse aggregate contained in the rap conforms to the requirements of num for broken stone and to the requirements of num for gravel .
ensure that the fine aggregate contained in the rap conforms to the quality requirements in num .
num crushed recycled container glass crcg use container glass that is derived from items such as bottles .
use glass that when crushed does not produce thin sliver and flakelike fragments .
ensure that no more than num percent of the material is glass derived from thin walled items such as test tubes and other laboratory glassware which are not considered to be container glass .
use crcg that is num percent passing a numinch sieve .
ensure that the crcg contains no more than the maximum allowable percent of foreign materials specified in table num .
table num allowable percentages of foreign materials in crcg foreign material maximum percentnum paper num metal num plastic num other num num .
determine the percent by dividing the weight of a foreign material retained on the no .
num sieve by the total weight of material retained on the no .
num sieve .
num ground bituminous shingle material gbsm use gbsm that is derived from preconsumer roofing shingles and is num percent passing a numinch sieve and that conforms to the composition requirements specified in table num .
table num components of gbsm material composition by weight petroleum asphalt num num fibers num maximum mineral matter num num submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for the gbsm .
submit test methods and results along with the certification .
add the gbsm to the mixture through a feed system that individually proportions the gbsm and is approved by the me .
num remediated petroleum contaminated soil aggregate rpcsa for use as a coarse aggregate fine aggregate or both in hma base course the contractor may use a maximum of num percent remediated idnum petroleum contaminated soil produced by a njdep approved class b recycling center num operating pursuant to n.j.a.c numa provided it conforms to all quality requirements specified in num and num .
num aggregates for concrete mortar and grout the me will test aggregates used in concrete according to aashto t num for potential expansion due to alkalisilica reactivity .
the me will classify aggregates that produce expansion of num percent or more after num days in solution as potentially reactive .
use potentially reactive aggregate in concrete only in conjunction with remedial agents such as fly ash slag or low alkali cement at the minimum addition rates specified in num .
num coarse aggregate use coarse aggregate that is broken stone or washed gravel conforming to num or num respectively except do not use carbonate rock for concrete surface courses bridge approach or bridge decks .
use coarse aggregate that is the size or sizes shown in table num and table num .
wash the coarse aggregate at least num hours before use .
num fine aggregate for all classes of concrete and mortar use fine aggregate that is washed and sized through a sand classifier plant and composed of quartz or other hard durable particles .
ensure that the fine aggregate is subangular to angular in shape and free of soft particles .
derive fine aggregate from either a natural sand deposit resulting from glacial or water action or produce a manufactured stone sand from the mechanical crushing of quarried rock or gravel that conforms to num .
ensure that the fine aggregate also conforms to num and num and the gradation specified in table num .
table num gradation requirements for fine aggregate used in concrete mortar and grout sieve size percent passing num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num ensure that the fine aggregate does not have more than num percent passing any sieve and retained on the next sieve and that the fineness modulus according to aashto m num is from num to num for concrete .
ensure that the fine aggregate conforms to the quality requirements specified in table num .
table num quality requirements for fine aggregate used in concrete mortar and grout aggregate property test method minimum percent maximum percent mica njdot anum num absorption cold water aashto t num num sodium sulfate soundness loss aashto t num num chloride content aashto t num num lightweight pieces aashto t num num numday mortar strength njdot anum num the me will test the fine aggregate for organic impurities and will reject it if it produces a color darker than the standard .
ensure that the mortarmaking properties of the fine aggregate for concrete and mortar are not less than num percent of those of standard ottawa sand .
the me will sample fine aggregate at a frequency of num pounds for each num tons .
num num lightweight aggregate manufacture lightweight aggregate by expanding or sintering material such as slate or shale by the rotary kiln process .
grade the lightweight aggregate to the size designation requirements for numinch to no .
num sieves of table num of astm c num .
ensure that the lightweight aggregate producer has at least num years experience and a record of successful production and use of such product .
submit to the me a certification of compliance as specified in num .
ensure that the lightweight aggregate conforms to astm c num and the following requirements num .
sodium sulfate soundness .
use a lightweight aggregate that has a sodium sulfate soundness loss of weight that does not exceed num percent after num immersion and drying cycles when tested according to aashto t num .
use a sample of sufficient size to provide the amounts specified in table num of the various sieve sizes table num sampling for sodium sulfate soundness testing sieve size weight num to num num pounds num to num num pounds num to num num pounds num to no .
num num pounds num .
percentage of wear .
use a lightweight aggregate with a loss that does not exceed num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
num grit use grit for spreading over the epoxy waterproofing that is a subangular natural num percent silica sand .
ensure that num percent of the total sample by weight falls between the no .
num and no .
num sieves with num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num riprap stones use riprap stones that consist of a uniformly graded mixture of rock conforming to num such that num percent of the mixture by weight is equal to or larger than the designated median stone size dnum .
ensure that the stones are a well graded mixture composed primarily of the larger stone sizes but with a sufficient quantity of other sizes to fill the progressively smaller voids between the stones .
ensure that the diameter of the largest stone size is less than num times dnum .
num gabion basket stone to fill gabion baskets use crushed stone consisting of trap rock granite or gneiss and conforming to the requirements of num .
to prevent breakdown after placement use aggregate that is free of cracks due to jointing faulting or other causes .
ensure that the aggregate conforms to the size requirements specified in table num .
table num gabion basket stone size requirements basket height minimum maximum less than num inches num inch num inch greater than or equal to num inches num inch num inch num densegraded aggregate dga use a dga that is listed on the qpl .
for gradation acceptance the me will sample dga according to aashto t num for each num cubic yards .
the me will apply the gradation requirements to the material after it has been placed and compacted on the project .
num virgin produce virgin dga from broken stone conforming to num crushed gravel conforming to num or blast furnace slag conforming to num except that at least num percent of all fragments shall contain at least num fractured face .
ensure that the dga conforms to the following requirements and gradation num num .
moisture content .
ensure that the moisture content of dga immediately before placement is num num percent based on dry weight .
if densegraded aggregate is to be paid for on a weight basis do not deliver dga to the project with the moisture content exceeding num percent .
num .
plasticity and gradation .
when tested according to aashto t num ensure that the portion passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic .
ensure that the gradation conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num gradation requirements for dga sieve size percent passing num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num recycled concrete aggregate rca the contractor may produce dga from recycled concrete aggregate that conforms to the gradation and plasticity requirements specified in num and to the following num .
composition .
ensure that the composition as determined according to njdot anum conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num composition requirements for rca aggregate property minimum percent maximum percent concretenum num hma num brick cinder block schist concrete washout and other friable material num reactive material num wood num num .
to meet the minimum requirement for concrete the contractor may add broken stone vitreous china or crushed gravel .
use broken stone conforming to num or crushed gravel conforming to num except that it need not be washed .
num .
percentage of wear .
ensure that the loss does not exceed num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
num .
reporting of recycled materials usage .
report the tonnage of concrete aggregate being recycled to the solid waste management district of origin according to n.j.a.c numa .
num virgin and rap mixture the contractor may also produce dga by mixing a maximum of num percent rap conforming to num with previously approved virgin dga .
use a method of mixing that will ensure that the blended mixture is homogeneous with regard to particle size and composition .
ensure that the blended mixture meets the following requirements num .
composition .
ensure that the composition as determined according to njdot anum conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
num table num composition requirements for virgin dga and rap mixture aggregate property percent by weight maximum rap num concrete num brick schist and other friable material num reactive material num wood num num .
plasticity and gradation .
use a blended material that is nonplastic when the portion passing the no .
num sieve is tested according to aashto t num .
ensure that the dga containing rap conforms to the gradation for dga as specified in num except that the percent passing the no .
num sieve is num to num percent when tested according to njdot anum .
num .
density control .
perform density control as specified in num except for the method for determining the dry density .
after determining the wet density according to aashto t num direct transmission mode the me will take a numgram sample of the dga for subsequent weighing drying and reweighing in the laboratory to determine the moisture content .
the me will calculate the dry density using the wet density measured according to aashto t num and the moisture content measured from the lab tested sample .
the me will use the dry densities to determine the q statistic for acceptance of the density .
num soil aggregate use soil aggregates that are natural or prepared mixtures consisting predominately of hard durable particles of stone gravel or sand .
mixtures may contain some silt clay or stone dust .
ensure that stone conforms to num and that gravel is crushed or uncrushed and conforms to num .
use sand that is either natural sand resulting from the weathering process or stone sand produced by grinding or crushing of rock .
ensure that stone sand is manufactured from an aggregate source as specified in num .
provide natural sand consisting of material composed of predominantly angular particles of quartz or other hard durable minerals .
the contractor may use soil aggregate produced from rpcsa produced by a njdep approved class b recycling center operating pursuant to n.j.a.c numa .
do not place soil aggregate obtained from subaqueous sources until the me has determined that its moisture content is not excessive .
ensure that soil aggregate conforms to the following num .
composition of soil aggregate .
ensure that the soil aggregate is free from elements or chemicals which in the presence of water would produce detrimental effects to pavements structures or utility lines and is free of organic matter garbage metal debris lumps of clay or other deleterious matter .
produce designations inum inum inum inum inum inum inum inum inum and inum from sand gravel or stone .
produce designation inum from hard durable gravel or stone mixed with sand or stone dust so that it can be compacted into a hard dense mass .
ensure that the coarse aggregate fraction of the inum is composed of at least num percent by weight of hard durable aggregate of a geologic type conforming to num as determined by lithologic analysis performed according to njdot anum .
ensure that designations inum inum and inum consist of clean freedraining sand gravel or stone .
for designation inum use material that is composed of soil aggregate and rock .
the material may also contain recycled concrete or hma .
ensure that the proportion of soil aggregate is sufficient to fill all voids in the rock and larger pieces of recycled material .
num .
gradation .
use soil aggregate that conforms to the gradation specified in table num for the various designations .
the gradation requirements shall apply to the material after it has been placed and compacted on the project .
where compaction is not prescribed the requirements for any given type shall apply to the material at the time of placement .
should the source contain oversize material the re may require the contractor to eliminate such oversize material .
num for designation inum ensure that the portion of material passing the numinch sieve contains no more than num percent by weight of material passing the no .
num sieve .
ensure that the proportion of soil aggregate is sufficient to fill all voids in the rock and larger pieces of recycled material .
when embankments are constructed outside the row in areas where the state has purchased slope rights to construct embankments use material that is num percent passing the numinch sieve to construct the top num feet .
when driving piles through the embankment use material that is num percent passing the numinch sieve .
table num standard soil aggregate gradations gradation designations percentage by weight passing square mesh sieves num num num num num num num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num inum num num num num num num inum num num num num num inum num num num num num inum num num num num num num num num inum num num num num num inum num num num num num num inum num num num num num num num inum num num num num num inum num num num num num num num num inum num num num num num num num num inum num num num num num num inum num num num num inum num num num inum see text .
inum num num num num num num .
combining and mixing .
if bankrun or other materials conforming to the requirements are not available the contractor may produce materials that conform to requirements by combining and mixing or by washing .
the contractor may combine materials and mix on the grade only with re approval .
do not blend designation inum to meet gradation requirements .
perform blending on the grade using a traveling highspeed rotor mixer capable of cutting and thoroughly mixing to a minimum depth of num inches .
num .
electrochemical requirements for designation inum .
ensure that designation inum conforms to the electrochemical requirements specified in table num .
table num electrochemical requirements for designation inum property test method requirement resistivity ohmcm aashto t num greater than num ph aashto t num acceptable range of num num organic content aashto t num num maximum chloride aashto t num less than num ppm sulfates aashto t num less than num ppm if the resistivity is greater than or equal to num ohmcm the department will waive the chloride and sulfates requirements .
test designation inum at a rate of once for every num cubic yards of material placed to ensure conformance to the electrochemical limits specified in table num .
whenever the appearance or behavior of the material changes the me may require additional samples .
ensure that the material has a sodium sulfate loss of less than num percent after num cycles as determined according to aashto t num .
provide the re with a certification of compliance as specified in num certifying that the designation inum conforms to the requirements of this section .
attach a copy of the test results representative of material used on the project .
num the me will sample soil aggregate as specified in table num .
table num soil aggregate sampling soil designation samplingfrequency inum inum inum inum inum inum inum inum inum inum according to aashto t num for each num cubic yards inum inum inum inum according to aashto t num for each num cubic yardsnum inum according to aashto t num for each num cubic yards num .
after initial num cubic yards have been sampled the me will take num sample for each num cubic yards except if any sample fails or is borderline then the me will revert to num sample for each num cubic yards .
the me will continue with the num sample for each num cubic yards sampling frequency until the me determines that the gradation requirements are consistently being met .
the me may sample stockpiles before placement but the department will make the final and governing determination of conformance or nonconformance based on sampling and testing of the materials after they have been placed as specified in the contract .
remove materials that do not conform and replace with conforming materials or correct the deficiencies of the nonconforming materials .
if corrective action has been taken the me will take an additional sample and if necessary one check sample .
if the materials still do not conform after corrective action the me will not perform further testing until the contractor tests and certifies that the rejected material has been corrected .
after this certification the me will analyze an additional sample and if this sample does not meet the requirements the contractor shall remove and replace the material .
section num asphalt num bituminous materials use the following temperaturevolume correction tvc factors to convert the volume of bituminous materials measured at the temperature at the point of use to the volume at num f num .
for pg binder and mc num use the following equation tvc num num num t f num num t fnum num .
for all other cutbacks use the following equation tvc num num num t f num num t fnum num .
for emulsified asphalts use table num .
table num tvc factors for emulsified asphalt material temp f factor temp f factor temp f factor temp f factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num tvc factors for emulsified asphalt material temp f factor temp f factor temp f factor temp f factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num asphalt binder use asphalt binder that conforms to aashto m num table num .
use grade num except the me may direct that an asphalt of softer grade be used when the mixture contains a high percentage of rap and except where otherwise specified .
when specified use pg num asphalt binder that is a storagestable preblended homogeneous polymer modified asphalt binder using styrenebutadiene or styrenebutadienestyrene formulations .
ensure that the binders rolling thin film oven test aashto t num residue has a minimum elastic recovery astm d num procedure a of num percent when tested for at num c. the asphalt binder producer shall provide the asphalt binder quality control plan annually to the me for approval .
ensure that the quality control plan conforms to aashto r num .
submit to the me a certification of compliance as specified in num for the asphalt binder .
the me will perform quality assurance sampling and testing of each asphalt binder lot as defined in the approved quality control plan .
num cutback asphalts use cutback asphalt of the rapidcuring types conforming to aashto m num and cutback asphalt of the mediumcuring types conforming to aashto m num .
for cutback asphalt that will not be used as a penetrating prime coat use and store according to n.j.a.c num et seq .
which includes a limitation for use only between october num and april num .
the cutback asphalt producer shall provide the cutback asphalt quality control plan annually to the me for approval .
submit to the me a certification of compliance as specified in num for the asphalt binder .
the me will perform quality assurance sampling and testing of each cutback asphalt lot as defined in the approved quality control plan .
num emulsified asphalts use emulsified asphalts of the rapidsetting rs mediumsetting ms and slowsetting ss types conforming to aashto m num .
use cationic emulsified asphalts of the rapidsetting crs mediumsetting cms and slowsetting css types conforming to aashto m num .
num the emulsified asphalt producer shall provide the emulsified asphalt quality control plan annually to the me for approval .
submit to the me a certification of compliance as specified in num for the asphalt binder .
the me will perform quality assurance sampling and testing of each emulsified asphalt lot as defined in the approved quality control plan .
num polymer modified tack coat use a tack coat consisting of homogeneous cationic emulsified asphalt modified using styrenebutadiene styrene butadienestyrene natural latex or synthetic latex and conforming to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for polymer modified tack coat tests on emulsion test method minimum maximum elastic recovery on residue num c aashto t num num total residue by distillation aashto t num num viscosity num c ssf aashto t num num num particle charge aashto t num positive storage stability test num day aashto t num num sieve test mass num m aashto t num num demulsibility aashto t num num num .
aashto t num modified to maintain a temperature of num num c for num minutes .
use an astm numc thermometer to monitor the temperature of the emulsion during distillation .
num .
for demulsibilty testing use num ml of num percent dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate solution .
num hot mix asphalt hma num mix designations the requirements for specific hma mixtures are identified by the abbreviated fields in the item description as defined as follows hot mix asphalt numhnum surface course num .
hot mix asphalt hot mix asphalt is located in the first field in the item description for the purpose of identifying the mixture requirements .
num .
num the second field in the item description designates the nominal maximum size aggregate in millimeters for the job mix formula sizes are num num num num num and num mm .
num .
h the third field in the item description designates the design compaction level for the job mix formula based on traffic forecasts as listed in table num levels are llow mmedium and hhigh .
num .
num the fourth field in the item description designates the high temperature in c of the performance graded binder options are num num and num c. all binders shall have a low temperature of num c unless otherwise specified .
num .
surface course the last field in the item description designates the intended use and location within the pavement structure options are surface intermediate or base course .
num composition of mixtures provide materials as specified aggregates for hot mix asphaltnum asphalt binder num mix hma in a plant that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements for hma plants as specified in num .
composition of the mixture for hma surface course is coarse aggregate fine aggregate and asphalt binder and may also include mineral filler and up to num percent reclaimed asphalt pavement rap .
ensure that the finished mix does not contain more than a total of num percent by weight contamination from crushed recycled container glass crcg .
num the composition of the mixture for hma base or intermediate course is coarse aggregate fine aggregate and asphalt binder and may also include mineral filler and up to num percent of recycled materials .
the num percent of recycled materials may consist of a combination of rap crcg ground bituminous shingle material gbsm and rpcsa with the following individual limits table num use of recycled materials in hma base or intermediate course recycled material maximum percentage rap num crcg num gbsm num rpcsa num combine the aggregates to ensure that the resulting mixture meets the grading requirements specified in table num .
in determining the percentage of aggregates of the various sizes necessary to meet gradation requirements exclude the asphalt binder .
ensure that the combined coarse aggregate when tested according to astm d num has less than num percent flat and elongated pieces retained on the no .
num sieve and larger .
measure aggregate using the ratio of num comparing the length longest dimension to the thickness smallest dimension of the aggregate particles .
ensure that the combined fine aggregate in the mixture conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
ensure that the material passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic when tested according to aashto t num .
table num additional fine aggregate requirements for hma mix compaction level course uncompacted void content of fine aggregatenum minimum percent sand equivalentnum minimum percent l surfaceintermediate num num l base num num m h surfaceintermediate num num m h base num num num .
according to aashto t num method a .
num .
according to aashto t num .
num mix design submit a mix design including a job mix formula jmf for each mixture on forms supplied by the me .
include a statement naming the source of each component and a report showing that the results conform to the criteria specified in table num table num and table num .
if a change in sources or properties of materials occur the me may require the hma producer to establish a new mix design and to obtain approval before production can continue .
to establish the jmf for each mix design determine the percentage of dry weight of aggregate passing each required sieve size and an optimum percentage of asphalt binder based upon the weight of the total mix .
determine the optimum percentage of asphalt binder according to aashto m num and r num .
combine the aggregates to ensure that the resulting mixture conforms to the grading requirements specified in table num .
in determining the percentage of aggregates of the various sizes necessary to conform to gradation requirements exclude the asphalt binder .
num table num hma mixtures nominal maximum size of aggregate grading of total aggregate nominal maximum aggregate size control point percent passing num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm sieve size min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num gyratory compaction effort for hma mixtures compaction level esalsnum millions ndes nmax l num num num m num to num num num h num num num num .
design esals equivalent numkn singleaxle loads refer to the anticipated traffic level expected on the design lane over a numyear period .
table num hma requirements for design voids in mineral aggregate vma minimum compaction levels required density of theoretical max .
specific gravity nominal max .
aggregate size mm ndes num nmax num num num num num num voids filled with asphalt vfanum dustto binder ratio l num num num num num num num num num num num num m num num num num num num num num num num num num h num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
for nummm nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa is num percent for all design traffic levels .
num .
as determined from the values for the maximum specific gravity of the mix and the bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture .
maximum specific gravity of the mix is determined according to aashto t num .
bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture is determined according to aashto t num .
for verification specimens must be between num and num percent of maximum specific gravity at ndes .
for mix designs that include rap or gbsm also include the following based on the weight of the total mixture num .
percentage of rap or gbsm .
num .
percentage of asphalt binder in the rap or gbsm .
num .
percentage of new asphalt binder .
num .
total percentage of asphalt binder .
num .
percentage of each type of virgin aggregate .
at the mes request test the mix design to ensure that it meets a minimum tensile strength ratio of num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
the me will require tensile strength ratio testing for new aggregate sources and for aggregates suspected of stripping susceptibility .
for each mix design submit with the mix design forms num gyratory specimens and num loose sample corresponding to the composition of the jmf .
the me will use these to verify the properties of the jmf .
compact the specimens to the design number of gyrations ndes .
for the mix design to be acceptable all gyratory specimens must comply with the num requirements specified in table num and table num .
the me reserves the right to be present at the time the gyratory specimens are molded .
the mes may verify a mix on an annual basis rather than on a projecttoproject basis if the properties and proportions of the materials do not change .
if written verification is submitted by the hma supplier that the same source and character of materials are to be used the me may waive the requirement for the design and verification of previously approved mixes .
num sampling and testing a .
general acceptance requirements .
the re or me may reject and require disposal of any batch or shipment that is rendered unfit for its intended use due to contamination segregation improper temperature lumps of cold material or incomplete coating of the aggregate .
for other than improper temperature visual inspection of the material by the re or me is considered sufficient grounds for such rejection .
for pg num or pg num ensure that the temperature of the mixture at discharge from the plant or surge and storage bins is at least num f when the ambient temperature is less than num f or is at least num f when the ambient temperature is greater than or equal to num f. for pg num ensure that the temperature of the mixture at discharge from the plant or surge and storage bins is at least num f above the manufacturers recommended laydown temperature .
do not allow the mixture temperature to exceed num f at discharge from the plant .
combine and mix the aggregates and asphalt binder to ensure that at least num percent of the coarse aggregate particles are entirely coated with asphalt binder as determined according to aashto t num .
if the me determines that there is an ongoing problem with coating the me may obtain random samples from num trucks and will determine the adequacy of the mixing on the average of particle counts made on these num test portions .
if the requirement for num percent coating is not met on each sample modify plant operations as necessary to obtain the required degree of coating .
b .
sampling .
the me will take num stratified random samples of hma for volumetric acceptance testing from each lot of approximately num tons of a mix .
when a lot of hma is less than num tons the me will take samples at random for each mix at the rate of one sample for each num tons .
the me will perform sampling according to aashto t num njdot bnum or astm d num .
use a portion of the samples taken for volumetric acceptance testing for composition testing unless composition is determined by hot bin analysis .
if using hot bin analysis at a fully automated batch plant take num samples from each lot corresponding to the volumetric acceptance samples under the supervision of the me .
c. quality control testing .
the hma producer shall provide a quality control qc technician who is certified by the society of asphalt technologists of new jersey as an asphalt technologist level num .
the qc technician may substitute equivalent technician certification by the midatlantic region technician certification program martcp .
ensure that the qc technician is present during periods of mix production for the sole purpose of quality control testing and to assist the me .
the me will not perform the quality control testing or other routine test functions in the absence of or instead of the qc technician .
the qc technician shall perform sampling and testing according to the approved quality control plan to keep the mix within the limits specified for the mix being produced .
the qc technician may use acceptance test results or perform additional testing as necessary to control the mix .
to determine the composition perform ignition oven testing according to aashto t num .
for fully automated plants the qc technician may determine composition using hot bin analysis according to njdot bnum .
use only one method for determining composition within a lot .
for each acceptance test perform maximum specific gravity testing according to aashto t num on a test portion of the sample taken by the me .
sample and test coarse aggregate fine aggregate mineral filler and rap according to the approved quality control plan for the plant .
when using rap ensure that the supplier has in operation an ongoing daily quality control program to evaluate the rap .
as a minimum this program shall consist of the following num .
an evaluation performed to ensure that the material conforms to num and compares favorably with the design submittal .
num num .
an evaluation of the rap material performed using a solvent or an ignition oven to qualitatively evaluate the aggregate components to determine conformance to num .
num .
quality control reports as directed by the me .
d. acceptance testing and requirements .
the me will determine volumetric properties at ndes for acceptance from samples taken compacted and tested at the hma plant .
the me will compact hma to the number of design gyrations ndes specified in table num using equipment according to aashto t num .
the me will determine bulk specific gravity of the compacted sample according to aashto t num .
the me will use the most current qc maximum specific gravity test result in calculating the volumetric properties of the hma .
the me will determine the dusttobinder ratio from the composition results as tested by the qc technician .
ensure that the hma mixture conforms to the requirements specified in table num and to the gradation requirements in table num .
if num samples in a lot fail to conform to the gradation or volumetric requirements immediately initiate corrective action .
the me will test a minimum of num sample per lot for moisture basing moisture determinations on the weight loss of an approximately numgram sample of mixture heated for num hour in an oven at num numf .
ensure that the moisture content of the mixture at discharge from the plant does not exceed num percent .
table num hot mix asphalt requirements for control voids in mineral aggregate vma minimum compaction levels required density of theoretical max .
specific gravity nominal max .
aggregate size mm ndesnum num num num num num num dustto binder ratio l m h num num num num num num num num num num num .
as determined from the values for the maximum specific gravity of the mix and the bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture .
maximum specific gravity of the mix is determined according to aashto t num .
bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture is determined according to aashto t num .
e. plants producing for multiple projects .
when a plant is producing hma for num or more department projects at the same time the me will establish num common lot for each mix and will use the sample results for the lot to represent the hma for each contract on which a part of that lot was used .
num opengraded friction course ogfc and modified opengraded friction course mogfc num composition of mixtures mix ogfc and mogfc in a plant that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements for hma plants as specified in num .
composition of mixture for ogfc and mogfc is coarse aggregate fine aggregate and asphalt binder .
ensure that the mixture conforms to the following requirements num .
use aggregate for ogfc and mogfc that conforms to num except for coarse aggregate use broken stone of gneiss granite quartzite or trap rock .
do not use rap crcg gbsm or rpcsa .
num .
use asphalt binder for ogfc and mogfc that is pg num as specified in num .
num .
for mogfc add a stabilizing additive consisting of mineral fiber or cellulose fiber to the mix .
use a stabilizing additive that conforms to the requirements for stabilizing additives in aashto mp num .
use only num type per mix design .
if using mineral fibers use a dosage rate of num percent by weight of total mix .
if using cellulose fibers use a dosage rate of num percent by weight of total mix .
the dosage rate may be increased as necessary to prevent draindown as measured by the visual draindown determination of asphalt content in njdot bnum .
accurately control proportioning the fibers into the mixture within num percent of the required weight and use equipment that ensures uniform dispersion of the fibers .
store fibers in a dry location with a storage temperature not to exceed num f. the supplier of the cellulose or mineral fibers shall provide a certification of compliance as specified in num that the material supplied conforms to aashto mp num .
ensure that a technical representative from the additive supplier is at the work site for the first full day of construction for technical assistance .
num num mix design submit a mix design including jmf for each mixture on forms supplied by the department .
include a statement naming the source of each component and a report with the results for the criteria specified in table num .
design the mix to meet the criteria in table num .
in the jmf for each mixture establish the percentage of dry weight of aggregate passing each required sieve size and an optimum percentage of asphalt binder based upon the weight of the total mix .
determine the optimum asphalt binder content for ogfc as specified in njdot bnum .
determine the optimum asphalt binder content for mogfc as specified in njdot bnum .
ensure that the jmf is within the master range specified in table num .
prepare compacted test specimens for submittal to the me at least num days before the initial production date .
prepare these specimens from material mixed according to the final jmf using num gyrations of the superpave gyratory compactor according to aashto t num .
the me will test num specimens to verify that the final jmf produces a mixture that has a minimum void content as specified in table num .
the me will determine percent air voids according to aashto t num and either njdot bnum or aashto tp num .
the me will test num specimens according to aashto t num except for the following num .
no specific air void level is required .
num .
compact specimens with num gyrations using the superpave gyratory compactor .
num .
apply a vacuum of num inches of mercury for num minutes to saturate the compacted specimen .
no specific saturation level is required .
num .
submerge the specimen in water during num freezethaw cycle .
if the tensile strength ratio falls below num percent adjust the mixture to satisfy the minimum requirement .
adjustments may include the use of antistripping agents .
for mogfc only the me will test num test specimens for abrasion and impact resistance using a modified l.a. abrasion test according to njdot bnum .
the maximum allowable loss as calculated by this method is num percent .
do not modify the jmf unless the me approves the modification .
num sampling and testing perform and meet requirements for quality control testing as specified in num.c .
during production the me will take one random acceptance sample from each num tons of production to verify composition .
conduct air voids and draindown tests as directed by the me .
if the composition testing results are outside of the production control tolerances specified in table num for an acceptance sample determine if a plant adjustment is needed and immediately run a quality control sample .
if the quality control sample is also outside of the control tolerances in table num immediately take corrective action to bring the mix into compliance .
take additional quality control samples after the corrective action to ensure that the mix is within the production control tolerances .
if num consecutive acceptance samples are outside the tolerances specified in table num immediately stop production .
obtain me approval of a plant correction plan before resuming production .
upon restarting production do not transport mixture to the project limits before the results of a qc sample from the mixture indicate that the mixture meets jmf tolerances .
the me will reject mixture produced at initial restarting that does not meet tolerances .
the me will perform sampling according to njdot bnum or astm d num and will perform testing for composition according to aashto t num or njdot bnum .
perform testing for air voids and draindown according to njdot bnum or njdot bnum .
num table num jmf master ranges and mixture requirements opengraded friction course mixture designations passingnum sieve sizes ogfc num mm mogfc num mm mogfc num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num minimum asphalt binder num num num num minimum air voids design num num num minimum lift thickness design num num num num .
aggregate percent passing to be determined based on dry aggregate weight .
asphalt binder content to be determined based on total weight of mix .
table num production control tolerances for ogfc and mogfc mixtures sieve sizes production control tolerances from jmfnum num num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num asphalt binder aashto t num num asphalt binder njdot bnum num minimum air voids num less than design requirement num .
production tolerances may fall outside of the wide band gradation limits in table num .
num ultrathin hma num composition of mixture mix ultrathin hma in a plant listed on the qpl conforming to the requirements for hma plants specified in num .
use ultrathin hma that consists of coarse aggregate fine aggregate and polymer modified asphalt binder and that may contain mineral filler .
do not add rap crcg gbsm or rpcsa .
combine the material in such proportions that the total aggregate and asphalt binder conform to the composition percentages specified in table num .
to produce the ultrathin hma use aggregates and asphalt binder that conforms to the following num .
for asphalt binder use pg num conforming to the requirements of num .
num .
for fine aggregate use stone sand conforming to num .
ensure that the combined gradation with coarse aggregate conforms to table num .
num .
use coarse aggregate that conforms to num and table num .
permissible geologic classifications for coarse aggregate are argillite gneiss granite quartzite or trap rock .
ensure that the combined gradation with fine aggregate conforms to table num .
table num coarse aggregate properties tests test method maximum percent percentage of wear los angeles abrasion test aashto t num num micro deval aashto t num num num .
use mineral filler if necessary that conforms to num .
num num mix design at least num days before the initial production date submit a jmf within the limits of table num to the me for approval on forms supplied by the department .
include in the submission a statement naming the source of each component and the results of all applicable tests .
if the source of any component material changes submit a new jmf and obtain me approval before using the new material .
when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary the me may require a new jmf .
design the ultrathin hma so that it has a draindown of less than num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
when tested for moisture sensitivity according to aashto t num ensure that the ultrathin hma has a tensile strength ratio of at least num percent .
prepare specimens according to aashto t num and test according to t num except for the following num .
before compaction condition the mixture for num hours according to aashto r num section num .
num .
compact specimens with num gyrations .
num .
extrude specimens as soon as possible without damaging .
num .
use aashto t num to determine void content .
num .
record the void content of the specimens .
num .
if less than num percent saturation is achieved repeat the procedure unless the difference in tensile strength between duplicate specimens is greater than num pounds per square inch .
num .
if visual stripping is detected modify or readjust the mix .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in proportions so that the grading of total aggregate and asphalt binder in the jmf conform to the composition by mass percentages specified in table num .
table num jmf requirements for ultrathin friction course sieve size total passing by mass production control tolerances from jmf num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num asphalt num num ignition oven num hot bins num num sampling and testing maintain the temperature of the mix between num f and num f. perform and meet requirements for quality control tested as specified in num.c .
during production the me will take one random acceptance sample from each num tons of production to verify composition .
conduct draindown tests as directed by the me .
if the composition testing results are outside of the production control tolerances specified in table num for an acceptance sample determine if a plant adjustment is needed and immediately run a quality control sample .
if the quality control sample is also outside of the control tolerances in table num immediately take corrective action to bring the mix into compliance .
take additional quality control samples after the corrective action to ensure that the mix is within the production control tolerances .
if num consecutive acceptance samples are outside the tolerances specified in table num immediately stop production .
obtain me approval of a plant correction plan before resuming production .
upon restarting production do not transport mixture to the project limits before the results of a qc sample num from the mixture indicate that the mixture meets jmf tolerances .
the me will reject mixture produced at initial restarting that does not meet tolerances .
the me will perform sampling according to njdot bnum or astm d num and will perform testing for composition according to aashto t num or njdot bnum .
perform testing for draindown according to njdot bnum or njdot bnum .
num stone matrix asphalt sma num composition of mixture mix sma in a plant that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements for hma plants as specified in num .
the composition of the sma mixture is coarse aggregate fine aggregate mineral filler mineral fibers or cellulose fibers and polymer modified asphalt binder .
use asphalt binder for sma that is pg num as specified in num .
for coarse aggregate in sma use crushed stone conforming to num and table num .
table num coarse aggregate properties for sma tests test method maximum percent percentage of wear los angeles abrasion test aashto t num num flat and elongated num to num material retained on the no .
num sieve astm d num num flat and elongated num to num material retained on the no .
num sieve astm d num num for fine aggregate use stone sand conforming to num .
ensure that the combined fine aggregate in the mixture conforms to the requirements for compaction level h as specified in table num .
for mineral filler use rock dust or crushed limestone conforming to aashto m num .
ensure that the mineral filler has a plasticity index of less than num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
do not add rap crcg gbsm or rpcsa to the mixture .
add stabilizing fibers consisting of mineral fiber or cellulose fiber conforming to aashto mp num .
use only one type per mix design .
if using mineral fibers use between num and num percent by weight of total mix .
if using cellulose fibers use between num and num percent by weight of total mix .
provide control to accurately proportion the fibers into the mixture within num percent of the required weight and use equipment that ensures uniform dispersion of the fibers .
if using prepackaged bags of fibers added to the pugmill during the dry mix cycle follow the manufacturers recommendations for the dry and wet mixing time .
store fibers in a dry location with a storage temperature not to exceed num f. the supplier of the cellulose or mineral fibers shall provide a certification of compliance as specified in num for the fibers .
ensure that a technical representative from the fiber supplier is at the hma plant for the first full day of production for technical assistance .
num mix design design the sma to meet the requirements in table num and table num .
prepare the jmf according to aashto pp num .
determine the jmf at num percent air voids and num gyrations of the superpave gyratory compactor .
num table num sma specification band passing nominalmaximum aggregate size production control tolerancesnum sieve size num mm passing num mm passing num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num coarse aggregate fraction portion retained on no .
num sieve portion retained on no .
num sieve portion retained on no .
num sieve minimum lift thickness num inches num inch num inch num .
production tolerances may fall outside of the wide band gradation limits .
table num sma mixtures volumetrics for design and plant production property production control tolerances requirement air voids num num voids in mineral aggregate vma num minimum vcamix less than vcadry draindown production temperature num maximum asphalt binder content bin analysis num num minimum asphalt binder content ignition oven num num minimum tensile strength ratio num minimum num sampling and testing perform quality control testing as specified in num.c .
during production at the plant the me will take a sample from each num tons of production to verify composition and air voids .
conduct draindown vcamix vcadry and vma testing as directed by the me .
perform tests according to aashto pp num .
if the testing results are outside of the production control tolerances specified in table num and table num num for an acceptance sample determine if a plant adjustment is needed and immediately run a quality control sample .
if the quality control sample is also outside of the control tolerances in table num immediately take corrective action to bring the mix into compliance .
take additional quality control samples after completing the corrective action to ensure that the mix is within tolerances .
if num consecutive acceptance samples are outside the tolerances specified in table num and table num immediately stop production .
obtain me approval of a plant correction plan before resuming production .
upon restarting production do not transport mixture to the project limits before the results of a qc sample from the mixture indicate that the mixture meets jmf tolerances .
the me will reject mixture produced at initial restarting that does not meet tolerances .
the me will perform sampling according to njdot bnum or astm d num and will perform testing for composition according to aashto t num or njdot bnum .
perform testing for draindown according to njdot bnum or njdot bnum .
num num asphaltstabilized drainage course asdc num composition mix asdc in a plant that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements specified in num .
the mixture shall consist of asphalt binder and aggregate .
use asphalt binder that is pg num as specified in num .
use aggregate that conforms to num and the gradation requirements specified in table num .
table num gradation requirements and tolerances for asdc production tolerance variation from jmf sieve size jmf percent passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num design the mixture to have an asphalt binder content of num num percent by weight of dry aggregate .
num mix design submit to the me for approval a jmf for the material that includes the source of each component .
establish with the jmf the percentage of dry weight of aggregate passing each required sieve size and the optimum percentage of asphalt binder based upon the weight of the total mix .
ensure that the design values of percent passing each sieve size are within the gradation band specified in table num .
design the mix to have a permeability of num num feet per day .
at least num days before the production of the asphaltstabilized drainage course submit a mix design for approval .
in addition submit samples of the component materials to the me for verification .
submit the following quantities table num verification samples for asphaltstabilized drainage course component quantity each aggregate component num pound asphalt binder num gallon antistripping agent if needed num gallon the me will perform gradation testing according to aashto t num on the submitted aggregate sample .
the me will prepare the specimens for permeability testing according to aashto t num .
the me will compact specimens at num f. the me will determine permeability according to njdot bnum .
at the mes option verification may be done on an annual basis for a mix rather than on a projecttoproject basis provided the properties and proportions of the materials do not change .
if written verification is submitted by the hma supplier that the same source and character of materials are to be used the me may waive the requirement for the design and verification of previously approved mixes .
num sampling and testing perform quality control testing as specified in num.c .
during production the me will take one random acceptance sample from each num tons of production to verify composition .
conduct draindown tests as directed by the me .
if the composition testing results are outside of the production control tolerances specified in table num for an acceptance sample determine if a plant adjustment is needed and immediately run a quality control sample .
if the quality control sample is also outside of the control tolerances specified in table num immediately take num corrective action to bring the mix into compliance .
take additional quality control samples after the corrective action to ensure that the mix is within tolerances .
if num consecutive acceptance samples are outside the tolerances specified in table num immediately stop production .
obtain me approval of a plant correction plan before resuming production .
upon restarting production do not transport mixture to the project before the results of a qc sample from the mixture indicate that the mixture meets jmf tolerances .
the me will reject mixture produced at initial restarting that does not meet tolerances .
the me will perform sampling according to njdot bnum or astm dnum and will perform testing for composition according to aashto t num or njdot bnum .
if directed by the me perform testing for draindown according to aashto t num .
section num concrete num cement use cement listed on the qpl that is either portland cement or blended hydraulic cement and conforms to the following portland cement type i ii and type iii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type is and ip astm c num the contractor may only use type iii portland cement for class v concrete prestressed items or precast items .
for blended hydraulic cement the contractor may use portland cement preblended with a maximum of num percent fly ash by weight or a maximum of num percent silica fume by weight or with a maximum of num percent slag by weight .
if more than num percent slag is used ensure that a scaling test according to astm c num is completed on the mix design and the concrete has a visual rating less than num after num cycles .
when blended hydraulic cement is used do not add additional mineral admixtures at the concrete plant unless approved by the me .
do not mix different brands of cement the same brand of cement from different mills or different types of cement .
provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
the me will reject cement that has become partially set or that contains lumps of caked cement .
ensure that the temperature of the cement at the time of delivery to the mixer does not exceed num f. num concrete admixtures num airentraining admixtures use airentraining admixtures for concrete that are listed on the qpl and conform to aashto m num except that the tests for bleeding and volume change are not required .
the me will test for uniformity through the use of infrared spectrophotometry ph values specific gravity and solids content .
keep all bulk storage tanks inside a heated area with an ambient temperature of not less than num f. do not reuse air entraining admixture that has been allowed to freeze until it has been agitated and retested .
num chemical admixtures use chemical admixtures for concrete that are listed on the qpl and conform to aashto m num .
use chemical admixtures of the following types num .
type a waterreducing admixtures num .
type b retarding admixtures num .
type c accelerating admixtures num .
type d waterreducing and retarding admixtures num num .
type e waterreducing and accelerating admixtures num .
type f waterreducing high range admixtures num .
type g waterreducing high range and retarding admixtures do not use chemical admixtures that contain calcium chlorides or any other chlorides that may initiate or promote corrosion of the reinforcement steel .
locate all bulk storage tanks for chemical admixtures inside a heated area with an ambient temperature of not less than num f. do not use chemical admixtures that have been allowed to freeze until they have been agitated and retested .
the me may require certification from the manufacturer stating that the material is identical to that originally approved and has in no way been changed or altered .
the me will test for uniformity through the use of infrared spectrophotometry ph values specific gravity and solids content .
num mineral admixtures a .
fly ash .
ensure that fly ash for use as a pozzolan in concrete is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm c num class c or class f except that the loss on ignition shall not exceed num percent .
use class f fly ash to control alkali silica reactivity .
the supplier shall determine conformance to the requirements for loss on ignition and fineness for each truck load of fly ash delivered to the mixing site and shall include the test values on the delivery ticket .
submit certificate of compliance as specified in num .
b. slag .
slag for use as a cementitious material is ground granulated blast furnace slag .
use slag that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
the contractor may use grade num with the written permission of the me .
the contractor may use slag as a replacement for cement as specified in num up to a maximum replacement level of num percent by weight of the total cementitious material .
if more than num percent of cement is replaced test the concrete mix design for scaling as specified in astm c num and ensure that it complies with a visual rating less than num .
submit certificate of compliance as specified in num indicating that the slag conforms to the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
c. silica fume admixture .
ensure that silica fume admixture for use in concrete is listed on the qpl and conforms to aashto m num .
use only num brand of silica fume admixture for the entire duration of the contract .
the contractor may supply silica fume admixture either in dry or in slurry form .
if the slurry form is used ensure that it is homogeneous and agitated to prevent separation .
submit certificate of compliance as specified in num .
num viscosity modifying admixture if needed for selfconsolidating concrete use a viscosity modifying admixture that is listed on the qpl and that when evaluated according to the test methods and mix design proportions in aashto m num conforms to the following physical requirements num .
for initial and final set times the allowable deviation of the test concrete from the reference concrete is not more than num hour earlier or num hours later .
num .
for compressive and flexural strengths the minimum allowable strength of the test concrete is num percent of the reference concrete strength at num num and num days .
num .
the maximum allowable length change of the test concrete is num percent of the reference concrete .
however if the length change of the reference concrete is less than num percent the maximum allowable length change of the test concrete is num percentage units more than the reference concrete .
num .
the minimum allowable relative durability factor of the test concrete is num percent .
num num corrosion inhibitor admixture when required use a calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor admixture to reduce the potential of corrosion of embedded steel .
use the following guidelines for calcium nitrite num .
ensure that the calcium nitrite does not contact other admixtures before entering the concrete mix .
use air entraining water reducing and retarding admixtures that are compatible with the calcium nitrite solution .
thoroughly mix the calcium nitrite solution before incorporating it into the concrete mix .
num .
strictly adhere to the manufacturers written recommendations regarding the use of the calcium nitrite admixture including storage transportation and method of mixing .
the manufacturer of the calcium nitrite admixture shall have a representative available to assist the contractor .
num .
the me will test for the presence of the calcium nitrite admixture in the plastic concrete as specified in njdot cnum .
provide the test kit that is required to perform the plastic test to the me .
num .
use admixture that is num num percent calcium nitrite by weight of solution .
include a high range water reducing chemical admixture in the concrete when using a calcium nitrate admixture .
num .
add the calcium nitrite at a rate of num gallons per cubic yard of concrete .
num .
use a calcium nitrite admixture listed on the qpl .
num concrete num composition compose concrete of cement coarse aggregate fine aggregate admixtures and water .
concrete may include fly ash slag or silica fume .
provide materials as specified aggregates num cementnum admixtures airentrainingnum chemical num mineralnum corrosion inhibitornum waternum use chemical admixtures according to the admixture manufacturers recommendation for the mix design and anticipated field conditions including the admixture dosage rate and the location and method for introducing it into the mixture .
if fly ash is added to control alkalisilica reactivity use at least num percent fly ash by weight of the total cementitious material .
if aashto t num testing results in an expansion greater than num percent use at least num percent fly ash .
if slag is used to control alkalisilica reactivity use at least num percent slag by weight of the total cementitious material .
if a low alkali cement is used to control alkalisilica reactivity use cement with equivalent alkali of less than num percent .
use the combined weight of fly ash slag silica fume and cement content to determine compliance with the minimum cement content and watercement ratio requirements specified in table num .
include free water from the aggregates and the water in the admixtures and additives along with the mixing water when calculating the watercement ratio .
num mix design and verification design at least num mix to equal or exceed the required verification strengths specified in table num for each class of concrete included on the project .
a single mix design may satisfy the requirements for more than num class of concrete .
compute and set up the designs according to aci standard num or num as applicable .
at least num days before the start of concrete placement submit each mix design on concrete mix design forms provided by the me .
identify the sources of materials and test data on the forms .
the me will be present at the time of verification batching to confirm that the proportions and ingredients batched are according to the proposed mix designs .
if directed by the me mix at least num cubic yards of concrete in a central mix plant or transit truck for verification .
the me will direct that the verification batch be mixed in the top half of the allowable slump and air content ranges .
test for and report the slump and air content of the trial batch .
the me will reject the verification batch if the slump air content or yield is not acceptable .
prepare at least six num numinch test num cylinders from each acceptable batch and cure according to aashto t num or aashto r num .
between num and num days after molding deliver the cylinders to the me for testing .
the me will test num cylinders at num days and num cylinders at num days to determine the numday and numday compressive strengths respectively .
at the mes option verification may be done on an annual basis for a concrete plant rather than on a projecttoproject basis provided the properties and proportions of the materials do not change .
if the contractor submits written verification that the same source and character of materials are to be used the me may waive the requirement for the design and verification of previously approved mixes .
provide concrete conforming to the approved mix design .
if using a previously approved mix design notify the me at least num day before making the change .
do not change the source type or proportions of materials until approved and the requirements for design and verification have been satisfied .
num mixing for centralplant and transit mixing a .
handling measuring and batching materials .
mix concrete at a concrete plant that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements specified in num .
ensure that the plants location layout equipment and provisions for transporting material will ensure a continuous supply of concrete to the work .
stockpile aggregates as specified in num .
separately weigh the fine aggregate and each size of coarse aggregate into hoppers according to the amounts in the job mix design .
measure cement by weight using separate scales and hoppers with a device to indicate the complete discharge of the batch of cement into the batch box or container .
ensure that the weighing hopper and scale are of adequate size completely encased and have provisions for locking .
operate the weighing hopper discharge gate so as to not affect the scale balance .
suspend the discharge chute boot or other such device from the encasement not from the weighing hopper .
discharge the cement so that it does not lodge in the weighing hopper and there is no loss of cement by air currents .
ensure that the required cement content is added to each batch .
store mineral admixtures unless preblended cement is supplied at the batching plant in a separate storage facility .
batch mineral admixtures to tolerances equivalent to those specified for cement .
when mineral admixtures are weighed cumulatively with the cement add the mineral admixtures last in the batching sequence .
when silica fume and dyes are added demonstrate prior to production that the batching sequence will produce a uniform mix .
if using mineral admixtures packaged in bags empty the bag into the mix .
do not put degradable bags in the mix .
add chemical airentraining and corrosion inhibiting admixtures to the mixing water or sand .
use a water measuring device that automatically registers and stops the flow of the water when the designated quantity has been delivered into the mixing drum .
b. batch tolerances .
for individual batches conform to the following tolerances based on the required scale reading num .
cement and mineral admixtures num percent of the required weight of material or num percent of scale capacity whichever is greater .
num .
aggregates num inches or smaller num percent of the required weight of material or num percent of the scale capacity whichever is greater .
num .
aggregates larger than num inches num percent of the required weight of material or num percent of scale capacity whichever is greater .
num .
water num percent of the required weight of material .
num .
chemical airentraining and corrosion inhibiting admixtures num percent of the required weight of material or num ounce whichever is greater .
c. delivery tickets .
supply a delivery ticket for each load of concrete .
ensure that the delivery ticket contains the following information num .
use tickets that are serially numbered and bear the printed heading of the supplier and the location of the batch plant .
num .
show the name of the project the name of the contractor the quantity and class of concrete the batch time as imprinted on the ticket by an automatic clock the date and the truck number .
num num .
after the truck has been discharged fill in the time when the concrete was completely discharged the amount of mixing water and the amount of tempering water if used and the total number of mixing revolutions for transit mix .
num .
an authorized representative of the supplier shall sign each ticket and give copies to the me and the re .
in addition for each truck or batch provide a batching ticket to the me indicating the amount brand name and type of cementitious material the amount and source of the fine aggregate the amount sizes and sources of the coarse aggregates the amount of mixing water and the amounts brand names and types of admixtures .
d. mixing requirements .
do not allow the elapsed time from batching to the discharge of all the concrete from the mixer to exceed num minutes except that under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or when the temperature of the concrete is above num f the time limit is changed to num minutes .
under very severe conditions the re may further reduce the time limits .
measure batching time from the time cement is introduced to the mixer .
if the concrete can not be entirely discharged within num minutes keep the concrete in the drum plastic and workable by revolving the truck drum at the manufacturers designated speed for agitation for at least num minutes in each num minute period .
use one of the following mixing methods unless mixing on the project as specified in num num .
mixing at a centralmixing plant .
for centralmix concrete proportion and mix concrete at a central plant and transport to the point of use in an agitator approved by the me .
if approved by the me nonagitating vehicles may be used to transport concrete at precastprestressed concrete fabricators .
use centralmixing plant mixers that are of the type and capacity capable of combining the required materials into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass within the specified mixing time and of discharging the mixture with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
operate the plant according to n.j.a.c num et seq .
mix for at least num minute with mixing time measured from the time all cement and aggregates are in the drum .
charge the batch into the mixer so that sufficient water enters in advance of cement and aggregates to prevent caking .
ensure that all water is in the drum by the end of the first quarter of the mixing time .
when the temperature of the mixing water exceeds num f modify the loading sequence by mixing all the water and the aggregates and then the cement .
begin mixing immediately following the complete charging of the drum and continue for not less than num minute .
restrict the volume of mixed concrete in the agitating truck to not exceed the manufacturers rating or num percent of the gross drum volume whichever is less .
before acceptance testing the contractor may add mixing water air entraining agent or chemical admixture incrementally in order to achieve the proper slump or air content range as specified in table num or table num .
num .
transit mixing .
for transit mix concrete proportion materials including water into a truck mixer from a num stop or numstop batching plant and mix in the truck .
a onestop batching plant is a plant where the dry ingredients for each batch of concrete are loaded into the mixer truck while water is being introduced .
a num stop batching plant is a plant where the ingredients for each batch of concrete are loaded into the mixer truck at num separate locations .
when loaded for mixing concrete restrict the volume of concrete to no more than num percent of the gross drum volume of the transit truck mixer .
immediately begin mixing after the complete charging of the drum and continue for not less than num or more than num revolutions of the drum at the mixing speed recommended by the manufacturer of the transit truck mixer .
after completing the minimum number of mixing revolutions at the plant reduce the speed of the drum to the agitation speed recommended by the manufacturer .
when using type f or g admixtures mix the load at the minimum specified number of mixing revolutions as recommended by the manufacturer .
before acceptance testing the contractor may add mixing water air entraining agent or chemical admixture incrementally in order to achieve the proper slump or air content range as specified in table num or table num .
num e. rejection criteria .
the re will reject concrete for any of the following reasons num .
the information for batching and delivery tickets is not complete does not agree with the mix design or is not supplied to the me .
num .
the mixer fails to maintain the manufacturers stated speed of rotation for both mixing and agitation or is not able to properly discharge the concrete .
num .
the re observes improper batching lack of uniform distribution of constituents throughout the load or balling of the cement and aggregates .
num .
water has been added while the truck is en route to the work site .
num .
the concrete is not discharged within the specified time limit or if the revolution counter shows a total of more than the num revolutions .
however if the load has been partially discharged and if the concrete yet to be discharged conforms to the specified ranges for slump and entrained air without further addition of water or admixtures then the re may allow the use of the concrete .
num .
the slump or air content does not comply with requirements specified in num.c .
num .
the concrete has been tempered after the me has performed the final acceptance testing .
num .
water is added after the truck has partially discharged regardless of me testing .
num .
the indicator on the revolution counter shows that the instrument has been turned off or tampered with .
num .
the temperature of the concrete does not comply with requirements .
num .
the watercement ratio of the load is greater than the allowable maximum watercement ratio for the class of concrete .
num mixing on the project a .
mobile mixers .
mix the concrete in a mixing unit that is part of the truck carrying the dry ingredients and conforms to the requirements for a mobile mixer as specified in num .
use a mixing unit that is an auger type incorporated in the trucks discharge chute or other approved mixing mechanism .
produce concrete of uniform consistency and discharge the mix without segregation .
provide a means for storing the additives on the truck and incorporating them into the mix .
include a way to check the rate of flow of the additive into the mix and a meter to register the total volume of additive incorporated into the mix during each mixing operation .
the me will not allow use of trucks not having functional meters on the project .
handle measure and batch materials according to the following num .
stockpile aggregates as specified in num .
num .
proportion measure and batch cement and aggregates by a volumetric weight equivalent method .
mix the materials in the continuousmixingtype truck mixer .
num .
provide delivery tickets to the me for each truckload of ingredients .
on the delivery tickets show the brand name and type of cement the calibrated cement constant of the mixer in terms of the indicator revolution count the source of aggregates and the size of the coarse aggregate .
a responsible officer or employee of the concrete supplier shall sign the delivery tickets .
for each class of concrete and for each separate mixing operation the mixer operator shall enter on the tickets the name of the project the name of the contractor the revolution counter indicator readings indicating the volumetric weight equivalent of cement discharged during that mixing operation the concrete additive meter reading indicating the total volume of additive discharged into the mix during that mixing operation the aggregate dial settings the water and concrete additive flow rates and the class of concrete delivered .
the operator shall sign each completed ticket and provide a copy to the me .
b .
small mixers .
with the res approval use small mixers only for small quantities of concrete that must be mixed on the project .
unless provisions are made for accurately weighing bulk cement use full bags of cement in each batch .
only use preblended mineral admixtures .
proportion aggregates and water by weight unless a calibrated volumetric method has been approved by the re .
use accurate volumetric measuring devices to proportion chemical and airentraining admixtures .
charge the mixer with the aggregates and part of the mixing water and begin mixing .
add cement and admixtures with another portion of the mixing water .
mix until uniform .
temper with the remaining allowable mixing water to obtain the necessary consistency .
do not exceed the quantity of water required by the mix design .
num num control and acceptance testing requirements a .
sampling and testing methods .
use the sampling and testing methods for concrete as specified in table num .
table num sampling and testing methods designation test method aashto t num compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens including the annex providing for use of neoprene caps aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field aashto t num obtaining and testing drilled cores and sawed beams of concrete aashto t num flexural strength of concrete using simple beam with thirdpoint loading aashto t num slump of hydraulic cement concrete aashto t num weight per cubic foot yield and air content gravimetric of concrete aashto t num sampling fresh mixed concrete aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the volumetric method aashto tnum accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkalisilica reaction .
aashto r num making and curing concrete test specimens in the laboratory astm c num unit weight of structural lightweight concrete astm c num sampling and testing fly ash or natural pozzolans for use as a mineral admixture in portland cement concrete .
njdot cnum determination of yield of concrete produced by mobile truck mixers num .
use num numinch diameter height compression test cylinders except use num numinch diameter height test cylinders for concrete mixes containing coarse aggregate sizes exceeding a nominal maximum size of num inch .
num .
cure compression test cylinders for strength acceptance according to the standard cure method in aashto t num .
for determining early strength for form removal early loading of members or opening to traffic cure compression test cylinders according to the field cure method in aashto t num .
num .
obtain and prepare cores for compressive strength testing according to aashto t num except for the provisions for moisture conditioning .
for moisture conditioning soak cores in a lime bath at num num f for at least num hours immediately prior to testing .
after making any necessary corrections to the core results for ratio the me will divide each core result by num before reporting the final compressive strength .
num .
sample according to aashto t num except do not take a composite sample to represent a truck .
take the sample after approximately num cubic yard of concrete has been discharged from the truck to be sampled .
num .
the department may modify the sampling rate for individual and composite samples .
b .
quality control .
the concrete supplier shall have a quality control plan approved annually by the me .
the producer shall ensure that the plan conforms to the requirements for a portland cement concrete plant quality control plan which may be obtained from the me .
during production of concrete for the project the supplier shall perform quality control testing as required in the approved plan .
if a concrete supplier does not have an approved plan or does not follow the approved plan the me will remove the supplier from the qpl .
ensure that the qc technician certified by aci as a concrete field technician grade num is present at the plant or the project limits during production .
during production of concrete for the project perform quality control testing as required in the approved plan and as needed to ensure compliance with the requirements for the concrete .
c. acceptance testing procedures for slump and air entrainment .
the me will perform sampling and testing for slump aashto t num and air entrainment aashto t num or t num except for precast prestressed concrete items for which the contractor shall perform sampling and testing for slump and air entrainment .
for pumped concrete take the sample of concrete at the point of discharge and deliver it to the me .
at a minimum the me will perform slump and airentrainment tests at the rate specified for strength tests in table num and on the same samples of material from which the compressive tests cylinders are molded .
the me will perform additional slump and airentrainment tests as necessary to ensure the quality of the concrete .
while these tests are being performed halt discharge from the truck .
discharge from other trucks not scheduled for testing may proceed unless otherwise directed by the me .
num if the measured value of either slump or air entrainment exceeds the upper limit the me will perform a second test on a different portion of material from the same load .
if the average of the num test results for either slump or air entrainment exceeds the upper limit the me will reject the load .
remove rejected loads from the project limits .
if neither of the measured values of the slump or air entrainment exceeds the upper limit the contractor may temper the concrete once prior to discharge into the work .
temper by addition of water air entraining agent or any chemical admixture included in the mix design as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure that quantities added will result in slump and percent air entrainment within the specified ranges throughout the duration of discharge of the load .
after tempering rotate the drum at the recommended mixing speed for a minimum of num revolutions .
meet the specified maximum watercement ratio and comply with the time and revolution limits specified in num .
report quantities added to the me .
following any allowed tempering the me will disregard the original test results and perform a single test for slump and air entrainment .
if the measured values for slump and aircontent are not within the ranges specified in table num or table num the re will reject the load of concrete .
do not make additions to the load after the acceptance testing has been completed .
for loads not scheduled for acceptance testing make additions as specified in num before discharge into the work .
d. general acceptance testing requirements for strength .
the me will perform sampling and testing for strength except for precast prestressed concrete items for which the contractor shall perform sampling and testing for strength .
for pumped concrete take the sample of concrete at the point of discharge and deliver it to the me .
provide for the sole use of the me a sufficient number of curing facilities for the storage and curing of concrete test cylinders within the project limits for the first num hours according to aashto t num .
ensure that the curing facilities are provided with minimummaximum thermometers and are securable with lock and key .
during the period from may num through october num provide water tanks or tubs of sufficient capacity and rigidity to hold the cylinders in an upright position fully submerged and without contact between cylinders .
during the remaining months of the year or as directed by the re provide securable insulated boxes of similar capacity and rigidity .
during the initial num hours ensure that the test specimens are undisturbed and maintained within the specified temperature range .
if within num days of the res request the facilities are not provided do not place any concrete .
the me will cure concrete test specimens that are to be used for determination of early strengths for removing forms opening to traffic or otherwise placing the concrete into service according to the field curing provisions in aashto t num .
an initial strength test result is defined as the average strength of two num numinch compression test cylinders cured for num days and tested by the me .
the contractor may have cylinders for precast concrete tested at the fabricators plant under the supervision of the me .
the me will sample and test at the rate specified in table num .
if either of the cylinders comprising a test shows definite evidence other than low strength of improper sampling molding handling curing or testing the me will discard it and use the strength of the remaining cylinder as the test result .
if the difference in compressive strength between num cylinders comprising a test equals or exceeds num pounds per square inch the me will disregard the lower value and use the higher value as the test result .
if both cylinders comprising a test are discarded the me will evaluate the lot on the basis of the reduced number of tests .
if the me takes additional unscheduled compression cylinders as specified in num the me will include the results with the regularly scheduled compression cylinder results and will evaluate the lot on the basis of the increased number of tests .
e. acceptance testing for strength for payadjustment items .
the special provisions will identify the concrete items if any that are subject to pay adjustment and their base prices .
the me will test the cylinders in the lot of concrete and compute the pay adjustment in the following steps num .
compute average lot strength als and standard deviation s. if only a single test result is available the standard deviation s is assumed to equal num pounds per square inch .
num n x als i n num als x s num i where summation xi individual test result average strength of a test cylinder pair n number of test results for the lot num .
compute quality index q .
s cds als q where cds class design strength in pounds per square inch from table num for the specified class of concrete .
num .
determine percent defective pd .
using njdot st for the appropriate sample size the me will determine pd associated with q calculated in the previous step .
num .
compute percent pay adjustment ppa .
quality percent pay adjustment equation num pd num ppa num num pd equation num pd num ppa num num pd the amount of payadjustment in dollars is the product of the item base price times the lot quantity times the percent payadjustment expressed as a decimal given by equation num or num .
for lots having percent defective pd levels less than num percent equation num provides positive adjustments to the contract price .
for lots having exactly num percent defective there is no adjustment to the contract price .
for lots having greater than num percent defective equations num or num as appropriate subtract progressively larger amounts from the contract price .
if based on the initial series of tests the lot quality of a payadjustment item is estimated to be pd num or greater the me may reevaluate by coring or other suitable means .
when this provision is applied to precastprestressed concrete the me will evaluate each item in the bed separately .
if the reevaluation is accomplished by a method other than coring the me will use the results only to determine what further action is to be taken .
if all noncore test results equal or exceed the class design strength the me may elect to accept the lot at num percent payment .
if the department elects not to core the contractor may accept the ppa calculated by equation num or num as appropriate or when approved by the department the contractor may take cores as specified in table num .
take the cores within num days from the date of concrete placement .
if electing to core perform the coring as directed by the me and provide the cores to the me for testing .
if cores are taken the department will use the core results to determine the final disposition of the lot .
if based on the core results the lot is determined to be at a quality level of pd num the department will compute the payadjustment by equation num or num as appropriate .
if the lot is confirmed to be at a quality level of pd num the me will reject the lot and the re may do one of the following num .
require the contractor to remove and replace the defective lot .
num .
allow the contractor to leave the defective lot in place and receive a ppa computed by equation num .
num .
allow the contractor to submit a plan to the re for approval for corrective action .
f. acceptance testing for strength for nonpayadjustment items .
nonpayadjustment items are those concrete items not specifically designated as payadjustment items as specified in num.e but may be accepted by pay adjustment under certain circumstances .
such an item is eligible for num percent payment ppa num if each individual test result in a lot meets the retest limit specified in table num .
num if any individual test value average of a cylinder pair falls below the retest limit for nonpayadjustment concrete in table num the me may reevaluate by coring or other suitable means .
when this provision is applied to precastprestressed concrete the me will evaluate each item in the bed separately .
if the reevaluation is accomplished by a method other than coring the me will use the results only to determine what further action is to be taken .
if all noncore test results equal or exceed the class design strength the me may elect to accept the lot at num percent payment .
if the department elects not to core the department may allow the contractor to take cores as specified in table num .
take the cores within num days from the date of concrete placement .
if electing to core perform the coring as directed by the me and provide the cores to the me for testing .
if cores are taken the department will use the core results to determine the final disposition of the lot .
if based on the core results the lot is determined to be at a quality level of pd num the department will compute the pay adjustment as specified in num.e .
if the lot is confirmed to be at a quality level of pd num the me will reject the lot and the re may do one of the following num .
require the contractor to remove and replace the defective lot num .
allow the contractor to leave the defective lot in place and receive a ppa computed by equation num .
num .
allow the contractor to submit a plan for approval for corrective action .
if retesting is not performed by the department or the contractor the department will calculate the ppa as for a payadjustment item as specified in num.e except that the department will use the item bid price instead of an item base price in the computation of the payadjustment .
when computing a payadjustment for any of the items listed in table num which are only partially composed of concrete the me will multiply the amount of payadjustment if any by the estimated percentage of concrete expressed as a decimal as shown in table num .
table num estimated percentage of concrete in items item estimated percentage of concrete inlet type ___ num inlet type ___ using existing casting num manhole ___ diameter num manhole using existing casting num manhole sanitary sewer num manhole sanitary sewer using existing casting num granite curb num reset granite curb num beam guide rail terminals and anchorages num chainlink fence ___ high num chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel ___ high num chainlink fence pvccoated steel ___ high num gate chainlink fence ___ wide num gate chainlink fence aluminumcoated steel ___ wide num gate chainlink fence pvccoated steel ___ wide num temporary chainlink fence ___ high num guide sign type ga breakaway supports num guide sign type ga nonbreakaway supports num the amount of payadjustment for items not listed in table num is the product of the unit bid price times the lot quantity times the percent payadjustment determined according to equation num or num .
num num tables table num requirements for roadway concrete items percent air entrainment for coarse aggregatenum concrete class slumpnum inch no .
num and no .
num no .
num castinplace items surface course base course b num num num num num num inlets manholes headwalls sidewalks driveways islands b num num num num num slope gutters vertical curb sloping curb barrier curb concrete islands b num num num num num num foundations for inlets manholes and electrical items b num num num max num max signs b num num num num num num footings for fence post beam guide rail terminals and anchorages b num num num max num max culverts a num num num num num num monuments a num num num max num max slope protection b num num num num num num pipe bedding thrust blocks pipe plugs encasements saddles b num num num max num max precast items culverts p num num num num num num inlets manholes junction boxes headwalls reinforced concrete end sections b num num num num num num concrete barrier curb b num num num num num num slipform items surface course base course b num num num num num num num .
when using a type f or g admixture change the requirements for slump and air content for the given concrete item as follows num slump num num inches num air content increase both the target value and tolerance percentages by num .
table num requirements for structural concrete items percent air entrainment for coarse aggregatenum concrete class slumpnum inches no .
num no .
num no .
num castinplace items bridge approach a num num num num num num footings piles b num num num max num max abutments wing walls pier shafts retaining walls b num num num num num num drilled shaftsnum a num num num num concrete barrier curb bridge b num num num num num num pier columns and pier caps arch spans culverts a num num num num num num decks sidewalks curbs parapets concrete patch a num num num num seal tremie concrete s num num num max num max prestressed items beams p pnum pnum num num num num num num piles p num num num num num num precast items piles b num num num num num num num table num requirements for structural concrete items percent air entrainment for coarse aggregatenum concrete class slumpnum inches no .
num no .
num no .
num culverts parapet p num num num num num num modular bin units mse wall panels leveling pads p num num num num num num slipform items parapet a num num num num num num num .
when using a type f or g admixture change the requirements for slump and air content for the given concrete item as follows num slump num num inches num air content increase both the target value and tolerance percentages by num .
num .
for drilled shaft concrete use type f or g admixture to achieve the required slump .
if concrete in the drilled shaft is placed under a drilling fluid the required slump is changed to num .
table num mix design requirements class a class b class s class p class pnum class pnum class design strengthnum num days psi num num num num num num verification strengthnum num days psi num num num num num maximum watercement rationum lblb num num num num num num minimum cement content lbcy num num num num num num num .
according to pci mnlnum .
num .
record all concrete test results to the nearest num psi .
num .
when a type f or g waterreducing high range admixture is used as specified in table num and table num reduce the maximum watercement ratio by num for all classes of concrete except for classes p pnum and pnum .
table num lot sizes sampling rates and retest limits class a class b class s class p class pnum class pnum lot sizenum num maximum days production days production of a single steam bed payadjustment items initial sampling ratenum num numlot numlot numlot numlot numlot retest sampling ratenum minimum numlot numlot numunit or load test nonpayadjustment items initial sampling rate num num numlot numlot numlot numlot numlot numlot retest limit psi num num num num num num retest sampling ratenum numlot numlot numlot numlot numlot numlot num .
the lot sizes are maximums .
the me may subdivide a lot into num or more smaller lots .
when a subdivision is made the specified sampling rate applies to each of the smaller lots .
num .
the me will not include more than num class of concrete in a lot .
num .
an initial sample is defined as num cylinders taken from a concrete sample .
num .
the me will sample at the specified sampling rates except that no more than num test per truckload or batch of concrete will be required except for air and slump tests when retempering .
the me may accept nonstructural concrete lots consisting of num cubic yards or less without strength tests .
num .
a retest sample is defined as num core .
num pavement repair mixes class v and e num composition use class v or e concrete for concrete pavement repair and replacement .
ensure that the composition of class v and e concrete complies with num except that class v concrete is required to use an accelerating admixture and a high range waterreducing admixture .
num ensure that the composition of class v or e concrete conform to the composition requirements specified in num except use an accelerating admixture and a high range waterreducing admixture for class v concrete .
num mix design and verification design and verify class v and e concrete as specified in num except for the following num .
design class v and e concrete to conform to the requirements in table num .
num .
include numhour flexural beam testing in the verification testing for class v concrete .
test two num num num inch flexural beams according to aashto t num .
the me will witness the flexural beam testing .
the me will approve the mix design if both beams meet the verification strength .
num .
include numhour compressive strength testing in the verification testing for class e concrete .
table num mix design requirements class v class e class design strength numday compressive strength psi num num numhour flexural strength psi num numhour compressive strength psi num verification strength numday compressive strength psi num num numhour flexural strength psi num numhour compressive strength psi num maximum watercement ratio lblb .num .num minimum cement content lbcy num num num mixing mix class v and e concrete as specified in num or num .
num control and acceptance testing requirements a .
sampling and testing methods .
use the sampling and testing methods specified in num.a .
b .
acceptance testing procedures for slump and air entrainment .
the me will perform acceptance testing for slump and air entrainment as specified in num.c .
c. acceptance testing procedures for strength .
the me will test class v and e concrete to ensure conformance to the requirements specified in num.d and num.f for control and acceptance testing of nonpay adjustment class b concrete for numday compressive strength .
for each days production of class v concrete the me will field cure two num num numinch beams according to aashto t num and will test the beams numhour flexural strength according to aashto t num .
if either beam is below the required strength of num pounds per square inch at num hours the me will perform a retest on num beams at num hours .
if either beam is below the required strength of num pounds per square inch at num hours the me will reject the days production .
for class e concrete the me will field cure cylinders according to aashto t num for use in numhour compressive strength testing .
the me will sample for numhour compressive strength testing at the same rate as for the numday compressive strength .
the me will perform compressive strength testing to ensure that the required numhour compressive strength of num pounds per square inch is in compliance .
each test is comprised of num cylinders .
num num high performance concrete hpc num composition produce hpc conforming to the composition requirements specified in num except for the following num .
when using more than num admixture ensure that they are compatible .
if using admixtures from different manufacturers submit letters from each manufacturer certifying that their admixtures are compatible with all others in the mix design .
num .
pozzalonic material maximum percentage limitations specified in num and num are waived for hpc mix designs .
num .
in the design of hpc in order to achieve the desired resistance to chloride penetration provide an appropriate pozzalonic or other cementitious material such as silica fume fly ash or slag in the mix design .
num .
do not use silica fume as a sole material to achieve the desired resistance to chlorides .
do not use more than num percent of silica fume by weight of the total cementitious material .
if using fly ash in conjunction with silica fume use num to num percent fly ash by weight of the total cementitious materials .
if using slag in conjunction with silica fume use up to num percent slag by weight of the total cementitious materials .
num mix design and verification design an hpc mix that conforms to the requirements in table num .
submit a report documenting these results to the me .
obtain the results of these standard tests from an aashto accredited testing agency that is accredited for the test being performed .
design mixes according to the hpcnum criteria for use in bridge decks parapets and bridge sidewalks .
design mixes meeting the hpcnum criteria for use in pier column protection .
table num design and verification requirements for hpc requirements performance characteristic test method hpcnum hpcnum scaling resistancenum num cycles visual rating of the surface maximum astm c num num abrasion resistance average depth of wear in inches maximum astm c num num freezethaw durability relative dynamic modulus of elasticity after num cycles minimum astm c num proc .
a num num chloride permeabilitynum numdays coulombs maximum aashto t num num num compressive strengthnum numdays pounds per square inch minimum aashto t num num num watercement ratio maximum num num num .
for the scaling resistance testing moist cure specimens for num days and then air cure for num days .
num .
if the chloride permeability requirement has been achieved in num days consider the chloride permeability acceptable .
if the required chloride permeability is not achieved in num days test the hpc sample at num days .
num .
if the compressive strength requirement has been achieved in num days consider the strength acceptable .
if the required compressive strength is not achieved in num days test the hpc samples at num days .
at least num days before the planned start of the concrete placement submit the mix design to the me for approval and verification as specified in num .
include the results of the required performance testing in the submission .
in addition to verifying the compressive strength of the hpc mix the me will verify the chloride permeability testing according to aashto t num .
submit num additional cylindrical samples having a numinch diameter and a length of at least num inches to the me for this verification testing .
the me will average the values of tests on num specimens for each mix design .
num num mixing mix hpc concrete as specified in num .
during production do not change the components of the mix in any way from the approved mix design .
if the components must be changed redesign and reverify the mix .
num control and acceptance testing requirements with the exception that the me may perform compression testing at num days the me will enforce the requirements specified in num for control and acceptance testing of nonpay adjustment class a concrete in the fabrication of the hpc elements .
produce hpc that conforms to the acceptance testing criteria in table num .
table num acceptance requirements for hpc performance characteristic test method requirement percent air entrainmentnum aashto t num num num no .
num aggregate num num no .
num aggregate slump inchesnum num aashto t num num num chloride permeability numdaysnum num coulombs maximum aashto t num num compressive strength numdaysnum pounds per square inch minimum aashto t num num num .
if using a type f or g admixture change the slump and air content values for the hpc as follows num slump num num inches num air content increase both the target value and tolerance percentages by num num .
for slipformed parapet design and produce a mix with a slump of num num inch .
num .
the me will not test for the chloride permeability requirements for hpc used for items other than bridge decks .
num .
for chloride permeability testing the me will mold num additional cylinders taking num cylinders each from num randomly selected delivery trucks for testing at numday and numday intervals .
num .
for compressive strength testing the initial rate for the hpc is num per lot .
the retest limit is num pounds per square inch .
the me will test num specimens for chloride permeability and will average the results of the num specimens to determine the test result .
the me will perform num tests on each lot from samples taken from num randomly selected delivery trucks .
the lot is eligible for num percent payment provided that the test results are equal to or below num coulombs .
whenever num or more individual test results exceed num coulombs at num days the me will reevaluate the lot at the same testing rate at num days .
if upon testing at num days num or more individual test results exceed num coulombs the re may num .
require that the contractor remove and replace the defective lot or num .
allow the contractor to submit a corrective action plan for approval .
num selfconsolidating concrete scc num scc for drilled shafts a .
composition .
produce scc conforming to the composition requirements specified in num except use a type f admixture and a viscosity modifying admixture vma .
use type f and vma admixtures as specified in num and num at a dosage to produce a flowable concrete that does not require vibration for consolidation .
proportion the aggregates so that the fine aggregate is less than num percent by weight of the total aggregate .
b .
mix design and verification .
design the mix as specified in num to conform to the strength requirements watercement ratio and cement content for a class a concrete and the requirements specified in table num .
num table num requirements for scc for drilled shafts property test method requirement air content coarse aggregate no .
num num num percent coarse aggregate no .
num num num percent coarse aggregate no .
num aashto t num num num percent slump flow njdot cnum num num inches visual stability index plastic concrete njdot cnum num maximum hardened concrete njdot cnum num maximum perform mix design verification as specified in num .
for the verification batch ensure that the air content is in the top half of the allowable range and the slump flow is between num and num inches .
perform air content slump flow and visual stability index plastic concrete testing on the verification batch .
make concrete cylinders for compression testing as specified in num and make num additional num numinch cylinders for evaluation of the visual stability index of the hardened concrete .
saw the additional cylinders lengthwise according to njdot cnum .
the me will perform the compressive strength testing and the visual evaluation to assign a visual stability index in order to approve the mix .
c. verification of pumpability .
verify pumpability at least num days before pouring the scc concrete in the drilled shaft .
demonstrate the pumpability of the scc to the me by pumping a trial batch through the pump proposed for placing the scc into the drilled shaft .
use the proposed methods for mixing the concrete including any anticipated time delays .
the me will test the scc before and after pumping to verify that the scc meets the requirements of table num after pumping .
d. mixing .
mix scc as specified in num .
e. control and acceptance testing .
perform quality control testing as specified in num .
the me will perform acceptance testing as specified in num for a nonpay adjustment class a concrete except that the provisions for slump testing are replaced with requirements for slump flow testing and visual stability index on the plastic concrete .
the me will perform the slump flow testing and the visual stability index according to njdot cnum at the sampling rate specified for slump testing of class a concrete .
the me will perform visual stability index on the hardened concrete according to njdot cnum at a rate of at least num per day .
if the visual stability index on the hardened concrete does not conform to the criteria in table num the me will require redesign of the mix .
in the performance of quality control or acceptance testing fill cylinder molds slump flow cones and air buckets in one lift .
do not vibrate rod or tap to consolidate the scc .
num scc for precast concrete a .
composition .
produce scc conforming to the composition requirements specified in num except use a type f admixture or a combination of a type f and a viscosity modifying admixture vma .
use type f and vma admixtures as specified in num and num at a dosage to produce a flowable concrete that does not require vibration for consolidation .
proportion the aggregates so that the fine aggregate is less than num percent by weight of the total aggregate .
b .
mix design and verification .
design the mix as specified in num or num to conform to the strength watercement ratio cement content and air content requirements for the specified class of concrete for the item that is being cast .
in addition ensure that the scc conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
num table num requirements for scc for precast concrete property test method requirement slump flow njdot cnum num to num inches visual stability index plastic concrete njdot cnum num maximum hardened concrete njdot cnum num maximum perform mix design verification as specified in num or num .
for the verification batch ensure that the air content is in the top half of the allowable range and the slump flow is between num and num inches .
perform air content slump flow and visual stability index plastic concrete testing on the verification batch .
make concrete cylinders for compression testing as specified in num or num and make num additional num num inch cylinders for visual stability index on the hardened concrete .
saw the additional cylinders lengthwise according to njdot cnum .
the me will perform the compressive strength testing and the visual evaluation to assign a visual stability index in order to approve the mix .
c. mixing .
mix scc as specified in num .
d. control and acceptance testing .
perform quality control testing as specified in num .
the me will perform acceptance testing as specified in num for specified class of concrete for the item except that the provisions for slump testing are replaced with requirements for slump flow testing and visual stability index on the plastic concrete .
the me will perform the slump flow testing and the visual stability index according to njdot cnum at the sampling rate specified for slump testing for the specified class of concrete .
the me will perform visual stability index on the hardened concrete according to njdot cnum at a rate of at least one per day .
if the visual stability index on the hardened concrete does not conform to the criteria specified in table num the me will require redesign of the mix .
in the performance of quality control or acceptance testing without remixing the sample fill cylinder molds slump flow cones and air buckets in one lift .
do not vibrate rod or tap to consolidate the scc .
num quicksetting patch materials use quicksetting patch material that is listed on the qpl and is ready for mixing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
follow the manufacturers recommendations regarding the required water demand for the patching material .
use patching material that is concrete gray in color and contains no calcium chloride or other ingredients that cause corrosion to steel reinforcement .
if adding coarse aggregate to patching material use broken stone conforming to num .
ensure that the material is quicksetting for use in concrete patching where fast setting rapid strength gain nonshrink and high bond strength characteristics are needed .
the me will add products to the qpl only after testing and evaluation in the field after service for num year .
the classifications for quicksetting patch materials are as follows num .
type num .
suitable for use above water .
type num products are used neat or with up to num pounds of coarse aggregate size no .
num added to a numpound bag of material .
the me will test the patch material neat .
at the work site the contractor may add up to num pounds of coarse aggregate size no .
num to a numpound bag of the patch material to increase yield provided that the product properties are not adversely affected .
num .
type numa .
suitable for use above water .
type numa products have manufacturer specified mix proportions with aggregates that would preclude it from being classified as a type num .
the me will approve the mix proportions before adding the material to the qpl .
the manufacturer shall provide mixing proportions including the required type and size of aggregate and the proportion of patching material aggregatesand and water .
at least num days before the start of placement propose aggregates for verification trial batching based on the manufacturers preapproved proportions .
the me will verify that the proposed quick setting patch mixture meets the required physical properties .
num .
type numb .
suitable for use above water .
type numb products are those products that have course aggregate sand or both prepackaged with the cementitious material .
the me will test this material including a field trial prior to adding it to the qpl .
the manufacturer shall designate the amount of aggregate and shall maintain the total aggregate within num percent of this stated amount .
the me will randomly test the num aggregate to ensure that the overall percentage of aggregate is within num percent of the total and that the gradation on individual sieves does not vary more than num percent from the gradation of the originally approved sample .
the manufacturer shall use an aggregate supplier that is listed on the qpl .
the me will disapprove quicksetting patch material that fails to comply with the aggregate consistency requirements .
if the manufacturer makes any changes to the formulation the me will require that the material be resubmitted for approval .
do not add additional aggregate in the field .
num .
type num .
suitable for vertical and overhead repairs that are not formed and poured .
the me will test the patch material neat .
if liquid activator other additives adhesive or bonding agents are integral to the performance of the patch material the manufacturer shall provide the material so that num package of additive activator adhesive or bonding agent is required for num package of patch material .
mix patch material as specified in num .
use quick setting patch material that meets the requirements in table num when tested according to njdot cnum .
mix quicksetting patch according to the manufacturers recommendations .
table num requirements for quick setting patch material type num numa numb type num bond strength numday minimum num psi num psi numday minimum num psi num psi expansionshrinkage cured in water maximum num num cured in air maximum num num difference maximum num num durability retained strength at num cycles minimum num num visual condition rating at num cycles maximum num num permeability maximum chloride content at num inches num lbsydnum num lbsydnum compressive strength numhour minimum num psi numday minimum num psi num psi numday minimum num psi num psi numday minimum num psi num psi time of set in minutes minimum num num num mortar and grout num mortar to produce mortar mix num part cement to num parts fine aggregate .
add water to form the proper consistency .
do not temper or use mortar after it has begun to set .
provide materials as specified fine aggregatenum cement num waternum num grout a. nonshrink grout .
use nonshrink grout of a plastic consistency that is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm c num with the following amendments num .
ensure that the grout has a working time of at least num minutes from the time the water is added .
num .
match the color of the hardened grout where visible to the color of the adjacent hardened concrete .
num num .
include numday strength tests as part of the performance requirements of astm c num .
num .
ensure that the grout contains no more than num percent chlorides or num percent sulfates by weight .
b. epoxy grout .
use epoxy grout that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements of astm c num type num grade num class b or c. num grout for undersealing of concrete pavement a. pozzolan grout .
provide materials as specified cement type i ii iii num chemical admixturesnum fly ash num.a waternum ensure that the mix for grout conforms to the following proportions by volume num .
num part cement num .
num parts fly ash num .
water to achieve required fluidity num .
admixtures as needed to obtain required grout characteristics submit materials proposed for use to the re for approval .
include in the submittal the mill certification for cement physical and chemical analysis of fly ash and tests of the pozzolan grout by an aashto accredited testing laboratory .
ensure that the laboratory report includes the numday numday and numday compressive strengths flow cone time shrinkageexpansion and time of initial set .
ensure that the grout conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for pozzolan grout property test method requirements compressive strength numday psi aashto t num num minimum flow cone time s astm c num num num b. highdensity polyurethane grout .
submit to the re for approval all materials proposed for use .
include in the submittal a certification of physical and chemical analysis by an aashto accredited testing laboratory .
provide certification that the materials will not shrink or deteriorate for a period of num years from the date of injection .
ensure that the highdensity polyurethane conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for highdensity polyurethane grout property test method requirements density pcf astm d num num to num compressive strength psinum astm d num num to num tensile core psi astm d num num to num shear strength psi astm c num num to num closed cell content astm d num num to num percent volume change humid num days num f num humidity num to num freeze num days num f dry astm d num num to num num .
ensure highdensity polyurethane grout reaches num percent of the full compressive strength within num minutes of injection .
num controlled low strength material clsm provide materials as specified fine aggregatenum cementnum num cheswmical admixturesnum waternum use clsm that consists of a mixture of cement water fine aggregate and admixtures .
proportion the clsm mixture to provide a backfill material that is selfcompacting and capable of being excavated with hand tools at a later date .
proportion the clsm to produce a numday compressive strength of num to num pounds per square inch .
if fastsetting clsm is required use an accelerating admixture to produce a fast setting flowable mixture .
ensure that the clsm for backfilling of conduit and piping has a permeability of num num num num centimeters per second when tested according to astm d num .
at least num days before the start of any clsm placement prepare trial batches of clsm of the same materials and proportions proposed for use in the contract .
submit each mix design on concrete mix design forms provided by the department naming the sources of materials and test data .
the me will be present at the time of verification batching to confirm that the proportions and materials batched conform to the proposed mix designs .
prepare at least six num numinch compression test cylinders for each batch to be tested according to astm d num for numday strengths except for fast setting mixes .
test fastsetting clsm at the specified cure time .
if fly ash is used in the clsm the me will take an additional set of cylinders to ensure that the strength of the clsm does not exceed num pounds per square inch in num days .
for acceptance testing the me will take num sample per day but may waive the testing if less than num cubic yards is placed in a day .
if strength does not comply the me may require a new mix design for the cslm .
num curing materials num burlap cloth use burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf conforming to aashto m num class num .
the me may sample num square yard of burlap cloth from each source for testing .
if requested by the re submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num liquid membraneforming compound use liquid membraneforming compounds conforming to aashto m num type numd clear or translucent with fugitive dye .
the me may sample num quart of liquid membraneforming compound from each lot for testing .
if requested by the re submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num white polyethylene sheeting use white polyethylene sheeting conforming to aashto m num for white opaque polyethylene film .
the me may sample a numfoot strip cut across full width from each source for testing .
if requested by the re submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
section num precast and prestressed concrete num nonstructural precast concrete num component materials provide materials as specified concrete num selfconsolidating concrete sccnum mortar num curing materialsnum reinforcement steel num welded steel wire fabric used for reinforcement need not be galvanized .
num num fabrication fabricate precast concrete at a plant as specified in num .
num .
placing reinforcement steel .
before placing the concrete place reinforcement steel in position as shown on the approved working drawings and as specified in num .
firmly tie the reinforcement to prevent displacement during placing of the concrete .
num .
placing concrete .
place concrete as specified in num.d and num.e .
before placing concrete ensure that reinforcement steel and any other embedded materials are free of loose rust frost dirt oil or contaminants that may prevent a bond with the concrete .
consolidate concrete with internal vibrators .
the fabricator may use external vibration to supplement internal vibration .
if using scc minimize or eliminate the use of vibrators is to prevent segregation .
num curing cure according to the pci mnlnum except for steam curing .
do not strip forms until the piece has attained a stripping strength of num pounds per square inch .
if steam curing delay the application of steam within the enclosure for num hours or until the concrete has attained an initial set as determined according to astm c num .
maintain an ambient temperature between num f and num f during the delay .
ensure that the maximum rate of temperature increase in the enclosure is num f per hour .
monitor the temperature in the enclosure using recording thermometers placed at a minimum of num locations .
ensure that the enclosure temperature is maintained between num f and num f until num concrete test cylinders field cured according to aashto t num have attained the stripping strength .
num removing forms and finishing ensure that items remain in forms for the duration of the curing operation .
remove forms when concrete has attained the stripping strength .
if handling devices are used remove and fill the holes with concrete or mortar .
provide a class num finish as specified in num.h.num .
complete surface finishing operations before placing the piece in storage .
num shipping and handling store stack and transport the pieces using methods that do not cause the development of cracks or other damage .
do not ship pieces until the class design strength as specified in table num has been attained .
num quality control and acceptance requirements notify the me before start of production .
for quality control keep applicable records according to pci division num quality control or npca requirements and supply copies of these records to the me as requested .
ensure that the quality control technician performing all tests is certified as an aci field testing technician grade num .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
if the concrete piece is spalled honeycombed chipped or otherwise defective the me or re will reject the piece .
num precast concrete retaining walls num component materials provide materials as specified concrete num selfconsolidating concrete sccnum mortar num curing materials num reinforcement steel num welded steel wire fabric used for reinforcement need not be galvanized .
num num fabrication use a system listed on the qpl to fabricate prefabricated modular walls or mechanically stabilized earth walls .
fabricate precast concrete at a plant as specified in num .
num .
placing reinforcement steel .
place reinforcement steel as specified in num .
before placing the concrete place reinforcement in position as shown on the approved working drawings and firmly tie the reinforcement to prevent displacement during placing of the concrete .
num .
forms .
cast the units in steel forms to ensure the production of uniform units .
place the forms on a flat surface with the front face of the form down .
num .
placing concrete .
place concrete as specified in num.d and num.e .
before placing concrete ensure that reinforcement steel and other embedded materials are free of loose rust frost dirt oil or contaminants that may prevent a bond with the concrete .
consolidate concrete with internal vibrators .
the fabricator may use external vibration to supplement internal vibration .
if using scc minimize the use of vibrators to prevent segregation .
num .
fabrication requirements .
fabricate posts and panels free of honeycombing or voids and true to the size and dimensions specified in table num .
clearly mark the name of manufacturer name of contract date of manufacture mark numbers and type of unit as shown on the approved working drawings in the inside or back face of each unit .
table num dimensional tolerances for mse walls all panel dimensions num inch deviation from vertical num inch per num feet for modular walls length and height of face num inch deviation from square for units num feet widenum num inch maximum deviation from square for units num feet widenum num inch maximum num .
measure deviation from square on the diagonal .
num curing cure as specified in num except that the required stripping strength is num pounds per square inch .
num form removal and finishing remove forms and finish concrete as specified in num .
num shipping and handling handle and ship as specified in num .
num quality control and acceptance requirements notify the me in writing at least num days before start of production .
for quality control keep applicable records according to pci division num quality control or npca requirements and supply copies of these records to the me as requested .
ensure that the quality control technician performing all tests is certified as an aci field testing technician grade num .
during production the me will inspect the quality of materials and the process of manufacture .
the me will accept the concrete as specified in num and will inspect the finished pieces before shipping for dimensional tolerances and damage .
the me will reject units for any of the following num .
variations in the exposed face that substantially deviate in appearance .
num .
dimensions not conforming to the tolerances in specified in table num .
num .
honeycombed or open texture not properly repaired .
num num .
defects that would affect the structural integrity of the unit .
num .
stained front face due to excess form oil or other reasons .
num .
broken or cracked corners .
num structural precast concrete num component materials provide materials as specified concretenum selfconsolidating concrete sccnum mortar num curing materials num reinforcement steelnum bolts and bolting materials num epoxy waterproofingnum num fabrication fabricate precast concrete at a plant as specified in num .
provide an office for the me as specified in num .
num .
placing reinforcement steel .
before placing the concrete place all reinforcement steel in position as shown on the approved working drawings and as specified in num .
firmly tie the reinforcement steel to avoid displacement during placing of the concrete .
for longitudinal distribution reinforcement steel the fabricator may use welded wire fabric or deformed billet steel bars .
ensure that welded wire fabric is shipped in mats .
in precast concrete box culverts the me will allow lifting devices in each precast unit for the purpose of handling and erection .
if using lifting hooks or lugs galvanize the devices according to astm a num .
num .
placing concrete .
place concrete as specified in num.d and num.e .
before placing concrete ensure that reinforcement and any other embedded material are free of loose rust frost dirt oil or contaminants that may prevent a bond with the concrete .
consolidate concrete with internal vibrators .
the fabricator may use external vibration to supplement internal vibration .
if using scc minimize the use of vibrators to prevent segregation .
num .
fabrication requirements .
identify each precast concrete unit with a permanent marking .
manufacture the precast concrete units in steel forms .
for precast culverts ensure that units conform to the requirements specified in table num .
provide num rows of threaded inserts or bar extensions in the last precast culvert section for the castinplace end section and the wingwall attachment and for the headwall attachment if necessary .
table num fabrication requirements for culverts wall thickness num inches minimum top and bottom slab thickness num inches minimum concrete cover for walls and bottom slab num inches minimum concrete cover for top slab num inches minimum num for precast concrete arch structures ensure that units comply with table num .
table num fabrication requirements for precast concrete arch structures concrete cover outside face num inches minimum concrete cover inside face num inches minimum internal dimension tolerance num or num inches whichever is less wall thickness tolerancenum num or num inch whichever is more difference in side lengthsnum num inch num .
the me will not reject structures having thicknesses that exceed that shown in the approved working drawing .
num .
requirement waived for skewed ends for laying curves .
num curing cure as specified in num except that the required stripping strength is num pounds per square inch .
num removing forms and finishing ensure that units remain in their steel forms for the duration of the curing operation .
upon removal of the forms provide a class num finish as specified in num.h.num to the entire precast concrete culvert unit including exterior interior and lap surfaces .
for culverts after approval of the class num finish apply num coat of an epoxy waterproofing on the exterior of the roof slab .
apply this coating in the precasters plant not earlier than num hours after fabrication and after the concrete compressive strength has reached num pounds per square inch .
ensure that the concrete surfaces of the precast units are dry during application of the epoxy waterproofing .
apply the epoxy waterproofing according to the product manufacturers recommendations .
num shipping and handling handle and ship as specified in num .
num quality control and acceptance requirements notify the me in writing at least num days before start of production .
for quality control keep applicable records according to pci division num quality control or npca requirements and supply copies of these records to the me as requested .
ensure that the quality control technician performing all tests is certified as an aci field testing technician grade num .
during production the me will inspect the quality of materials and the process of manufacture .
the me will accept the concrete as specified in num and will inspect the finished pieces prior to shipping for dimensional tolerances and damage .
if the concrete piece is spalled honeycombed chipped or otherwise defective the me may reject the piece or approve repairs .
num prestressed concrete num component materials provide materials as specified concrete num mortar num curing materialsnum reinforcement steelnum prestressing reinforcementnum bolts and bolting materialsnum epoxy waterproofingnum epoxy bonding compoundnum num in the construction of prestressed concrete ibeams or prestressed concrete slab and box beams when the use of galvanized reinforcement steel is planned for the deck construction galvanize all reinforcement steel that will provide composite action .
for prestressed concrete piles in a marine environment use grit impregnated epoxycoated prestressing steel strands as specified in num .
when storing cover the strands with an opaque polyethylene sheeting or other suitable protective material to protect the reinforcement from exposure to sunlight salt spray and weather .
for stacked bundles drape the protective covering around the perimeter of the stack .
adequately secure the covering however allow air circulation to prevent condensation under the covering .
do not store epoxycoated prestressing steel within num feet of ocean or tidal water for more than num months .
num fabrication fabricate prestressed concrete at a plant as specified in num .
provide an office for the me as specified in num .
num .
placing reinforcement and prestressing steel .
store reinforcement above ground and cover strand packs when not in use .
place reinforcement steel as specified in num and as shown in the working drawings .
position or loosely tie reinforcement steel until prestressing strands have been positioned .
after prestressing firmly tie the reinforcement prior to placing concrete .
if using an antibonding agent on the forms to facilitate their removal protect the prestressing strands against contamination by the antibonding agent .
use supports spaced a maximum of num feet apart to support bottom strands and side reinforcement steel .
if necessary provide horizontal and vertical spacers to hold the wires in place in the enclosures .
num .
prestressing .
provide protection for the me inspecting the prestressing operation adequate to stop a flying strand .
use shields placed at both ends of the bed made of steel reinforced concrete heavy timbers or other material to provide protection acceptable to the me .
apply stress to each cable as shown on the working drawings using either the single strand or the multistrand jacking method .
if performing prestressing by the multistrand jacking method bring the individual strands to a uniform initial tension before applying the full pretensioning .
measure the initial tension of each strand using a dynamometer a gauge or other such means .
after the initial tensioning stress the strands until the specified elongation and jacking pressure are attained .
if performing prestressing by the single strand jacking method do not construct more than num splice per strand .
when multistrand jacking is used either splice all strands or splice no more than num percent of the strands .
ensure that spliced strands are similar in physical properties are from the same source and have the same twist or lay .
position splices outside of the prestressed members .
do not torch cut the ends of the strand lengths to be spliced .
for prestressing draped strands apply stress by either partially jacking at the end of the bed followed by raising or lowering the strands to their final position or entirely by the jacking operation .
regardless of the method of prestressing use lowfriction devices at all points of slope change in the strand trajectory .
if the strands are tensioned in their draped position support the strands using lubricated rollers with bronze bushings or roller bearings at all holdup points and lowfriction freeturning rollers at all holddown points .
when strands are deflected after partial tensioning simultaneously raise or depress the strands at all points or in an approved specified sequence .
replace broken strands if the allowable number of wire breaks specified in table num is exceeded .
locate and tie wire breaks directly to the strand to prevent raveling during the vibration of the concrete .
num table num maximum allowable wire breaks number of strands maximum allowable wire breaks less than num strands num num to num strands num num to num strandsnum num num and more strandsnum num num .
replace the strand if more than num break occurs in an individual strand .
if concrete is not placed within num hours of prestressing the me may require the bed to be checked for proper stresses before placement of concrete .
after final stressing position strands and uniformly distribute the stress in the strands throughout the bed length .
num .
placing concrete .
before placing concrete ensure that the prestressing is acceptable to the me and that reinforcement and any other embedded materials are free of loose rust frost dirt oil or contaminants that may prevent a bond with the concrete .
place concrete as specified in num.d and num.e .
consolidate concrete with internal vibrators .
the fabricator may use external vibration to supplement internal vibration .
only place concrete in the presence of or as directed by the me .
for prestressed concrete box beams place voids in the forms after the me has inspected the concrete poured to encase the strands in the bottom portion of the beam .
num .
fabrication requirements .
fabricate the prestressed concrete members to plan dimensions within the tolerances specified in applicable sections of pci mnlnum .
the me will reject members having dimensions outside the tolerance limits unless the contractor performs corrective measures .
obtain approval from the department before taking any corrective measures .
adhere to beam camber tolerances so that preformed transverse tie holes for prestressed box and slab beams line up correctly during erection facilitating the placement of transverse ties .
cast a permanent unique identification mark and the date of the casting in the top of members .
upon removal of the forms mark the ends of members with the same identification marking .
num .
detensioning .
do not detension the bridge members until the strength tests indicate that the concrete has reached a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch for class p num pounds per square inch for class pnum and num pounds per square inch for class pnum concrete .
before detensioning submit to the me a plan for the pattern and schedule for releasing the strands .
strip or loosen forms that may tend to restrict the horizontal or vertical movement of the member .
for detensioning use either the multiple strand release method or the single strand release method .
if the multiple strand method of release is used gradually and simultaneously release all of the strands or a symmetrical group of strands .
transfer the load on the strands from the anchorage to the jacking system .
gradually release the jack or jacks until the strands are relaxed .
for the single strand release method detension the strands in the sequence of the pattern and schedule of release by slowheat cutting .
use a lowoxygen flame applied along the strand for a minimum of num inches until the metal gradually loses its strength .
apply the heat at a rate to induce failure of the first wire in the strand at least num seconds after the heat is applied .
the me will reject pieces if the fabricator fails to follow the detensioning procedure .
num curing cure as specified in num except that the required stripping strength is num pounds per square inch for class p num pounds per square inch for class pnum and num pounds per square inch for class pnum concrete .
in addition when the ambient air temperature is above num f initiate a water cure or other approved method as soon as the concrete is able to receive the water without physical damage to its surface .
the fabricator may discontinue this cure upon introduction of steam provided that a relative humidity of num percent is maintained .
num num removing forms and finishing do not remove side forms until the strength of num cylinders similarly cured as the member achieves at least num pounds per square inch .
do not move the member from the bottom forms before detensioning .
upon the removal of forms the me may reject any member that has num prestressing strand exposed for a length in excess of num diameters or num or more strands visually exposed .
in addition the me may reject any unit that is honeycombed to such an extent that chipping away from honeycombed concrete results in the conditions described for exposed strands .
if the me determines that the defective areas can be repaired submit a repair procedure to the me for approval .
perform approved patching before detensioning .
provide a class num finish as specified in num.h.num on formed surfaces of the concrete members .
for surfaces of concrete exposed to view in the finished structure perform additional finishing by rubbing mortar on the surface using burlap .
ensure that the rubbing produces a smooth surface of uniform color and texture .
transversely score the top surface of members using a stiff wire brush .
after the removal of holddown devices from the bottom of the beams coat the resulting holes with an epoxy bonding compound and plug the holes with mortar while the epoxy bonding compound is still tacky .
if the epoxy bonding compound dries out before the placement of the mortar sandblast the area and reapply the bonding compound .
patch vent holes for box beams upon removal from forms after the internal void drains are opened .
treat portions of prestressed concrete beams as shown on the plans with an epoxy waterproofing .
do not apply the epoxy waterproofing to the top surface of a beam .
use an epoxy waterproofing that closely matches the color of the concrete .
do not apply the epoxy waterproofing sooner than num hours after detensioning .
ensure that the concrete surface is dry and clean of oil grease and dirt before applying the coating .
apply the epoxy waterproofing by brush only unless otherwise approved by the me .
ensure that the epoxy waterproofing is applied uniformly and provides adequate coverage .
num shipping and handling the fabricator may handle members immediately after completion of detensioning .
before placing members in storage ensure that surface finishing operations are completed and the member is approved by the me .
do not remove a girder from the bed unless the differential between girder and air temperature is less than num f. before box and slab beams are moved to storage inspect nonmetallic draining devices and open to provide for passage of water .
notify the me at least num days before shipping .
do not ship until the class design strength as specified in table num has been attained and a minimum of num hours have elapsed following detensioning .
determine shipping strength by testing a complete set of cylinders that represent the lot of concrete and were cured with the item .
transport girders in an upright position .
ensure that the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the girder are approximately the same during transportation and storage as in its final erection position .
request the departments approval for transportation or storage of girders in any other position .
num quality control quality assurance and acceptance requirements notify the me in writing at least num days before start of production .
for quality control keep applicable records in conformance with pci division num quality control or npca requirements and supply copies of these records to the me as requested .
ensure that the quality control technician performing all tests is certified as an aci field testing technician grade num .
during production the me will inspect the quality of materials and the process of manufacture .
the me will accept the concrete as specified in num and will inspect the finished pieces prior to shipping for dimensional tolerances and damage .
if concrete is placed on the same bed at different times in the day the me will split the days production into separate lots .
if the concrete member is spalled honeycombed chipped or otherwise defective the me may reject the piece or approve repairs .
num section num reinforcement metals num reinforcement steel for uncoated reinforcement steel submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
attach copies of the mill certifications for each heat of reinforcement steel .
the me will randomly sample and test heats of uncoated reinforcement steel for quality assurance .
the me will inspect galvanized and epoxy coated reinforcement steel before and after fabrication .
for coated steel reinforcement bars the me will inspect the coating and take four numfoot samples from each production heat for testing .
for coated welded wire reinforcement the me will inspect the coating and take one numsquare foot sample from each production heat for testing .
provide the me with mill certifications for each heat of reinforcement steel .
num reinforcement bars use deformed bars according to astm a num grade num .
fabricate using the detailing dimensions for hooks bends and tolerances according to the crsi manual of standard practice .
bend bars using the cold method with positive powered machines in the shop or field .
compute the weight of reinforcement steel according to astm a num .
if specified galvanize according to astm a num class i. fabricate bends and details before galvanizing .
if specified apply epoxy coating according to astm a num .
num spiral reinforcement use spiral reinforcement that is plain round hotrolled steel bars according to astm a num grade num .
compute the weight of reinforcement steel according to astm a num .
num welded wire reinforcement use plain steel welded wire reinforcement according to astm a num or deformed steel welded wire reinforcement according to astm a num .
when used for concrete pavement use welded wire reinforcement mats at least num feet in width .
when approved as an alternate to galvanized reinforcement bars use galvanized welded wire reinforcement according to astm a num class c. when approved as an alternate to epoxy coated reinforcement bars use epoxy coated welded wire reinforcement according to astm a num class a .
num structural shapes plates and bars ensure that structural shapes plates and bars used for reinforcement or other miscellaneous embedded metal work conform to the requirements for structural steel specified in num .
galvanize according to astm a num .
num dowels use numinch diameter plain reinforcement bars according to astm a num grade num .
galvanize according to astm a num .
num prestressing and posttensioning reinforcement the me will sample and test each heat of steel reinforcement prior to use for acceptance .
for prestressing strand the me will test two numfoot cables with flame cut ends and one numfoot piece with sawcut ends from each heat .
for high strength alloy bars the me will test one numfoot bar from each heat .
for posttensioning the me will test one numfoot cable between fittings from each reel or one numfoot bar between threads from each lot .
provide a certification of compliance as specified in num .
attach the mill certification for each heat used with the certification of compliance .
num hightensilestrength numwire prestressing strand use hightensilestrength lowrelaxation numwire strand for prestressing reinforcement according to astm a num grade num .
when specified use grit impregnated epoxycoated steel strands according to astm a num .
num num hightensile strength alloy bars use hightensile strength alloy bars for prestressing or posttensioning according to astm a num .
num posttensioning reinforcement a .
bars .
for transverse ties for prestressed concrete voided slab and box beams use steel bars according to astm a num numinch diameter .
commercial blast clean bars sspcsp num and coat with coal tar epoxy paint as specified in num .
the fabricator may epoxy coat bars according to astm a num .
ensure that end anchorages nuts washers and anchor plates used with hightensile strength steel rod bars are shown on the working drawings .
use end anchorages compatible with the tie rod system .
galvanize according to astm a num .
b. strands .
use hightensilestrength lowrelaxation numwire strand for prestressing reinforcement according to astm a num grade num .
ensure that anchorages and end fittings for numinch diameter strands and the corrosion protection method for the end fittings are shown on the working drawings .
num reinforcement for concrete pavement num tie bars and joint ties for tie bars and joint ties in longitudinal joints for concrete pavement use epoxy coated deformed reinforcement steel bar as specified in num .
provide certifications of compliance as specified in num .
attach a mill certification for each heat used to the certification of compliance .
num tie bolts for tie bolts in longitudinal joints for concrete pavement use epoxy coated plain reinforcement steel bar that meets the requirements as specified in num .
perform all required bending of tie bolts in a fabrication shop .
do not field bend tie bolts .
use rebar coupling devices as specified in num .
provide certifications of compliance as specified in num .
attach a mill certification for each heat used to the certification of compliance .
num dowel bars for dowel bars in transverse joints use epoxycoated grade num plain reinforcement steel according to astm a num .
if shown on the plans use dowel bars fitted with end caps .
ensure that the end caps are nonmetallic and designed to prevent the entrance of grout or mortar into the expansion void .
provide end caps that have a maximum length of num inches and allow a minimum of num inch of movement .
provide certifications of compliance as specified in num .
attach a mill certification for each heat used to the certification of compliance .
num rebar coupling devices to splice reinforcement steel use a rebar coupling device that is listed on the qpl .
ensure that the mechanical coupling device develops a minimum of num percent of the specified yield strength of the reinforcement steel .
if the reinforcement steel has either galvanizing or epoxy coating use a mechanical coupling device with a matching coating system .
provide certifications of compliance as specified in num .
num section num structural steel num structural steel materials provide structural steel materials conforming to the requirements in table num and as shown on the plans .
table num structural steel materials requirements product test method typegradeclass structural steel platenum astm a num grade num num numw or hpsnumwnum tie rods plate washers tie backs turnbuckles plates shapes and shims astm a num grade num steel tube and pipe for sign structures num num astm a num type s grade b or type e grade b steel piles steel hpiles astm a num grade num steel sheet piles astm a num grade num steel pipe piles astm a num grade num casings for drilled shaftsnum astm a num grade num flooring grid flooring astm a num grade num formed steel flooring astm a num grade num steel forgings astm a num class c shear connector studsnum astm a num grades gnum num or num stayinplace sip formsnum astm a num grades num num num num or num num .
for steel used in tension zones ensure that the steel conforms to zone num impact testing requirements .
num .
for the manufacture of grade hpsnumw the department will allow the use of the thermomechanical controlled process .
num .
for sizes less than or equal to num inches in diameter only use electric resistance welded single seam pipe .
num .
for pipe with wall thickness greater than num inch the fabricator may substitute api specification numl grade b .
num .
for casings use smooth noncorrugated steel pipe .
num .
for shear connector studs use colddrawn bars that are killed or semikilled .
num .
for sip use a galvanized coating designation gnum or znum .
before using submit to the me a representative sample of each size for material testing and approval .
provide a mill certification that indicates the chemical and physical properties for each heat of material .
for sip forms steel forgings and shear connector studs submit certifications of compliance as specified in num with the mill certifications attached .
num steel piles use materials as specified in num .
when used in a marine environment coat piles with coal tar epoxy paint as specified in num .
ensure that the closure plate for steel pipe piles is equal to the pile outside diameter and has a minimum thickness of num inch .
weld around the entire circumference .
for hpile tips use steel castings that conform to aashto m num grade num or num or highstrength steel castings that conform to astm a num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num with mill certifications attached .
num steel casings for drilled shafts use materials as specified in num .
ensure that the casing is capable of withstanding handling and driving stresses and the pressures of the concrete and surrounding earth .
use a casing with an inside diameter that is at least as large as the indicated shaft size .
the contractor may increase the size of the casing to facilitate construction operations .
num for permanent casings clean and coat the exterior surfaces with prime coat of an inorganic zinc coating system as specified in num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num with mill certifications attached .
num structural steel fabrication num aisc certification ensure that the structural steel fabricating plant is certified under the aisc quality certification program in the following categories by the type of work performed num .
simple steel bridge structures sbr .
includes highway sign support structures parts for bridges such as cross frames unspliced rolled steel bridges steel bridge bearings and hlmr bearing assemblies .
num .
major steel bridges mbr .
includes all bridge structures other than unspliced rolled beam bridges .
num .
fracture critical members endorsement f. able to perform procedures required to produce critical members according to a fracture control plan as defined by aashto or american railway engineering and maintenance of way association .
structural steel fabricators that are certified by aisc for major steel bridges are automatically certified for simple steel bridges .
num fabrication before fabrication submit a copy of the proposed welding procedures to the me for approval .
follow the approved welding procedures and ensure that welders are qualified according to ansiaws dnum .
use structural steel materials as specified in num and bolting materials as specified in section num .
fabricate according to aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications and as shown on the working drawings .
construct welds according to the requirements of ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code as modified by the following num .
do not use electroslag welds on main structural members .
num .
remove all steel weld backing on the outside faces of fascia girders .
grind or finish the joints smooth .
induce camber in structural steel girders at the mill or fabricate structural steel girders in the shop in a manner that provides a true curve without abrupt changes .
in the shop completely preassemble stringers involving field splices and builtup girders with field splices .
submit to the department for approval all changes in the number or location of shop or field splices .
without the departments approval do not weld to members or parts of members subject to tension or reversal of stress .
if necessary to weld in these areas ensure that the actual stress range fsr at the point of attachment does not exceed the value for category f according to the aashto lrfd bridge design specification .
obtain the mes approval for all shop fabrication and assembly before blast cleaning and coating .
num cleaning and coating a. weathering steel grade numw or hpsnumw .
as soon after fabrication as practical blastclean all structural steel components including diaphragms cross frames and welded connections according to sspcspnum .
ensure that the steel is kept free and clean of all foreign materials such as grease oil concrete spatter chalk marks crayon marks dirt and any foreign matter that may affect the natural oxidation of the steel .
if foreign matter gets on the steel after it has been blast cleaned remove as soon as possible with solvent according to sspcsp num .
clean and paint weathering steel as specified in num in the following areas num .
cap girders .
clean and paint the exterior surfaces of the top and the sides including the brackets .
num num .
structural steel adjacent to deck joints .
with the exception of steel designated to be galvanized clean and paint all structural steel from the ends of the girder to a distance of num times the depth of the girder .
for steel designated to be galvanized galvanize as specified in num .
num .
integral abutment construction .
on structures that include integral abutment construction clean and paint the ends of the girder for a distance that extends num foot beyond the concrete diaphragm .
b. nonweathering steel .
if coating is specified or shown on the plans clean and paint as specified in num or galvanize as specified in num .
num shipping and handling notify the me at least num days before shipping to the project so that a final quality inspection can be performed .
the me will seal all materials approved for shipping and provide written approval to the fabricator .
ensure that members are loaded hauled and unloaded so that they are not deformed damaged or subjected to stresses in excess of those provided for in the design .
when hauling and storing steel members to the extent possible place the members in a position similar to their final erected position .
ensure that all steel girders are shipped and stored with their webs vertical unless their size precludes vertical shipment .
place points of bearing within num percent of the length of the girder from the ends and secure with chain tie downs .
if not provided for in the design brace long members during shipment with temporary vertical stiffeners extending the full height of the web on both sides of the member .
place the temporary stiffeners at the bearing points midspan and at additional locations to ensure that the maximum interval between bracing does not exceed num feet .
ensure that temporary stiffeners are in full contact with the web and both flanges .
pad the temporary stiffeners with a material that will minimize damage to the painted surface .
for girders requiring shipment with their web horizontal or for girders that will extend over num percent of the length beyond points of bearing submit working drawings for approval .
include the following information num .
drawings or sketches fully describing the shipping and handling procedures .
num .
calculations showing the dead load plus impact stresses induced by the loading and transportation procedure .
ensure that impact stresses do not exceed num percent of the dead load stress .
num .
location of all support points .
num .
type and locations of tiedowns .
include a sufficient number of tie downs for redundancy to ensure that if any one tiedown fails the member will remain stable .
num .
temporary stiffeners if used .
num .
details of a numway articulating bolster for each truck transporter to ensure that truck movements will not produce unnecessary stresses in the structural steel .
num quality control and acceptance notify the me in writing at least num days before beginning work at the fabrication shop .
the me may reject any work done in his absence if proper notification was not received .
perform at least the minimum specified number of quality control inspections according to the applicable ansiaashtoaws specification and any other tests and inspections necessary to control the quality of the work .
the me will perform nondestructive testing quality assurance inspections following the nondestructive testing quality control qc inspection performed by the fabricator .
ensure that all quality control inspectors are aws certified welding inspectors qualified according to the provisions of aws qcnum .
inspect and test structural steel bridge members according to ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code as modified by the following num .
assembly and fabrication may not continue until completed work has been inspected and accepted by the me .
num .
grind flush butt welds scheduled for ultrasonic testing .
num .
for acceptance the me will test num percent of complete joint penetration groove and butt welds including butt welds in longitudinal stiffeners .
num num sign structures fabrication num fabrication ensure that the fabricating plant is certified under the aisc quality certification program as specified in num .
before fabrication submit a copy of the proposed welding procedures to the me for approval .
follow the approved welding procedures and ensure that welders are qualified according to ansiaws dnum or ansiaws dnum as appropriate .
to fabricate sign structures use structural steel materials as specified in num bolting materials as specified in section num and aluminum materials conforming to astm b num alloy numtnum .
weld and fabricate according to aws dnum structural welding code .
for aluminum members weld and fabricate according to ansiaws dnum structural welding code aluminum .
do not flame cut aluminum alloy materials .
for cantilever sign support structures ensure that the splice plates and truss chords do not warp during fabrication .
after fabrication and welding hotdip galvanize the steel assemblies as specified in num .
after galvanizing but before shipment to the project return the truss and posts to the fabricator for final shop assembly to verify camber alignment and contact of splice mating surfaces .
num shipping and handling notify the me at least num days before shipping to the project or galvanizer so that a final quality inspection can be performed .
the me will seal all materials approved for shipping and provide written approval to the fabricator .
ensure that members are loaded hauled and unloaded so that they are not deformed damaged or subjected to stresses in excess of those provided for in the design .
num quality control and acceptance notify the me in writing num days in advance of beginning work at the fabrication shop so that arrangements for inspection may be made .
perform at least the minimum specified number of quality control inspections according to the applicable ansiaashtoaws specification and any other tests and inspections necessary to control the quality of the work .
the me will perform nondestructive testing quality assurance inspections following the nondestructive testing quality control qc inspection performed by the fabricator .
ensure that all quality control inspectors are aws certified welding inspectors qualified according to the provisions of aws qcnum .
inspect and test according to ansiaashtoaws dnum welding code and the following num .
perform magnetic particle testing at a frequency of num percent of the number of welds per unit .
for cantilever sign support structures perform magnetic particle testing at a frequency of num percent on all chord splice assembly welds and post base welds .
num .
before shipping assemble the completed and accepted truss units in the shop and check the truss span for dimensions straightness alignment and camber .
measure the camber with the truss units on their sides .
num cleaning and painting of structural steel in the shop num painting materials use an inorganic zinc coating system ieu of an inorganic zincrich primer epoxy intermediate coat and a urethane finish coat .
ensure that the coating system is as specified in num .
in the fabrication of steel box girders apply the ieu coating system to all exterior surfaces .
coat the interior of the box girders with only a prime coat of an organic zinc primer selected from an organic zinc coating system oeu listed on the qpl and as specified in num .
unless approved by the me use an organic zinc primer from the same manufacturer as the ieu system for the exterior of the girder .
num num surface preparation before blasting remove any oil and grease according to sspcsp num using no .
num solvent .
reclean after blasting if contamination remains .
blastclean all surfaces to a nearwhite condition as defined in sspcsp num .
ensure that the surface area of steel being blast cleaned is not greater than the surface area of steel that can be prime coated in the same day .
if shot blast is used use a nace no .
num visual standard t.m.num or maryland pictorial standard to define the nearwhite blast condition .
if sand or grit is used use sspc pictorial standard visnum grade num to define the nearwhite condition .
blast clean to an anchor profile from num mils to num mils deep .
grind any flame cut edges that do not attain the required anchor profile .
determine the profile depth using the elcometer surface profile gauge or testex replica tape .
ensure that the ph of the abrasive is within the range of num to num .
remove fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges that are present or that appear during the blasting operations by grinding and ensure that the reblasted area provides the required anchor profile .
before blast cleaning steel ensure that all reaming and drilling of holes in the steel has been completed and the steel is free of burrs or other imperfections such as torn or ragged edges .
remove all abrasive residue and dust from steel surfaces and keep the surfaces clean until the prime coat is applied .
protect freshly coated surfaces from subsequent blast cleaning operations .
repair blast damaged primed surfaces using a wire brush or if visible rust occurs reblast the surface to a nearwhite condition reclean and reprime the repaired area .
num conditions for painting perform shop painting in an enclosure that is maintained at the required atmospheric conditions and that prevents exposure to inclement weather before the paint has completely cured .
perform painting according to the conditions specified in sspcpa num and the following num .
apply paint to clean dry surfaces .
do not apply paint for the prime and final coats when the temperature of the air paint or steel is below num f or when the temperature is expected to fall below num f before the paint is dried .
ensure that the temperature is at least num f when applying the intermediate coat .
do not apply coatings when the relative humidity is greater than num percent or when a combination of temperature and humidity conditions could cause moisture to condense on the surface being coated .
during the drying time of the inorganic type primers ensure that the relative humidity is at least num percent .
num .
do not apply paint when the steel surface temperature is less than num f above the dew point .
determine the dew point using a psychrometer .
num .
remove all contaminants before applying subsequent coats of paint .
clean the primed surfaces with a high pressure water washing num pounds per square inch minimum .
num paint application mix paint according to the manufacturers recommendations .
apply paint as specified in sspcpa num and the following num .
apply the prime coat after the me inspects and accepts the blast cleaned surface .
before the application of the full prime coat apply a prime coating striping to all edges of plates and rolled shapes corners crevices welds rivet heads and exposed parts of bolts .
before applying the full prime coat allow the striping to set to touch .
apply the primer within num hours after cleaning the metal .
if any blast cleaned metal remains unpainted after num hours blast clean the metal again before priming .
do not apply succeeding coats until the previous coat is approved by the me .
follow the manufacturers recommendation for minimum and maximum drying time between coats .
allow additional time before applying succeeding coats in cooler temperatures .
if the maximum time interval between coats is exceeded submit to the me the manufacturers written recommendation for corrective action .
remove all dry spray by sanding if necessary before applying the succeeding coat .
num .
ensure that paint is applied to at least the minimum specified thickness and ensure that the final appearance is uniform and smooth .
if the coating is too thin in areas follow the manufacturers recommendations for recoating .
repair areas that run bubble sag or mud crack by removing the coating back to soundly bonded coating and recoating to the required thickness and appearance .
num .
apply only a prime coat of paint to surfaces of steel that will be embedded in or in contact with concrete .
apply only a prime coat to contact surfaces at field bolted connections .
mask these surfaces during subsequent coating operations .
do not paint surfaces within num inches of field welds except for stud shear num connectors .
apply a light coat of rustinhibitive coating to these surfaces and mask these surfaces during subsequent coating operations .
num .
remove all bolted shop connections before blasting and coating girders .
separately blast and prime the parts then reassemble the parts and fully tension the bolts .
do not paint the inside of bolt holes .
num number of coats and film thickness apply all num coats in the shop .
ensure that the dry film thickness meets the minimum requirement as specified in table num but does not exceed the manufacturers recommendation for maximum thickness .
determine dry film thickness according to sspcpa num .
table num dry film thickness requirements coat minimum thickness mils for the prime coat num mil more than the measured anchor profile for the intermediate coat num for the finish coat num for the numcoat system num ensure that the dry film thickness of the prime coat at the contact surfaces of bolted friction splices on main members and the top of top flanges where stud shear connectors are to be welded is within the range of num to num mils .
num stenciling after the final coat has dried stencil the following information in numinch high c series letters and numerals on the outside web of both fascia beams on both ends of the structure num .
the numdigit structure number .
num .
the month and year of completion .
num .
the paint system code number .
stencil using a black paint that is the same type of paint as the finish coat .
locate the information at least num inches above the lower flange and within num feet from the abutment .
num additional handling requirements for painted members allow the paint to dry before loading and shipping the steel .
protect the coated steel from the binding chains using softeners .
use padded hooks and slings to hoist steel .
space diaphragms and similar pieces to prevent damage to the coating during shipment .
before shipping submit to the re for approval all shipping and work site storage details .
num quality control and acceptance notify the me in writing at least num days in advance of beginning work at the fabrication shop so that arrangements for inspection may be made .
the me will reject the coating system if rusting occurs the paint lifts blisters wrinkles or has excessive runs or sags workmanship is poor or unapproved paint is used .
in addition the me will reject the total coating system if it is determined by measurement with a tooke gauge that the dry film thickness of the prime intermediate or finish coat is less than the minimum specified or if the total dry film thickness is less than the nummil minimum for the numcoat system .
num numbar open steel parapet for numbar open steel parapet provide anchor studs washers and exposed bolts according to astm f num class num and all other bolts and nuts according to astm f num class num .
also provide rail bars according to astm a num or a num rail post according to astm a num grade num and all other shapes and plates according to astm a num grade num .
fabricate numbar steel parapet according to num and paint according to num .
num section num bearing assemblies num structural bearing assemblies num general requirements provide highload multirotational hlmr or seismic isolation bearing assemblies conforming to the loads shown on the plans .
provide the design from the manufacturer for each hlmr or seismic isolation bearing assembly .
ensure that the materials and fabrication of bridge bearing assemblies conform to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specification .
ensure that the fabricating plant is certified under the aisc quality certification for simple steel bridge structures .
consider steel bridge bearings and hlmr bearing assemblies to be main load carrying members .
perform welding and ensure that welders are qualified according to the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
unless otherwise specified provide hotdipped galvanized steel bearing components as specified in num .
when painting of steel surfaces is required paint as specified in num .
num types a. highload multirotational hlmr bearing assemblies .
hlmr bearings consist of a rotational element of the pot type disc type or spherical type when used as a fixed bearing and that may in addition have sliding surfaces to accommodate translation when used as an expansion bearing .
the contractor may use guide bars to constrain translation to a specified direction .
fabricate hlmr bearing assemblies according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
b. seismic isolation bearing assemblies .
num .
assembly requirements .
use seismic isolation bearing assemblies consisting of seismic isolation bearings isolators sole plates masonry plates mounting plates lead core steel shims bolts washers and anchor bolts .
fabricate seismic isolation assemblies according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
use one of the following types of isolation bearing assemblies a. elastomeric type .
the isolator consists of alternate layers of natural rubber and steel plates with a preformed hole at the center of the unit filled tight with a pure lead plug core .
for the isolator use elastomer type nr grade num according to astm dnum .
use lead for the core that is a minimum of num percent pure .
b .
sliding type .
the isolator consists of polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe stainless steel surfaces that are to be used in conjunction with an optional springdamping assembly .
use polyether urethane for the elastomer of the sliding bearing .
num .
testing requirements .
provide the me with the required test load for each isolator type .
determine the test load for each isolator type from the maximum design dead load plus the live load that is to be applied to that particular isolator type .
identify all isolator test results by the supplier identification number .
during the compression and combined compressionshear tests on completed isolators closely inspect each isolator for indications of a lack of rubber to steel bond laminate placements faults or for the appearance of num or more separate surface cracks that are wider or deeper than num inch .
do not use isolators showing such indications .
evaluate the results of each isolator test for the following performance requirements num .
the effective stiffness keff falling within a range of num percent of the predicted value .
num .
the slope of the loading curve k being greater than or equal to num percent of the predicted value .
num .
the average value of energy dissipated per cycle being greater than or equal to num percent of the predicted value .
num .
certification .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for the isolators .
submit the following data for acceptance of the isolators num .
test results as defined in the aashto guide specifications for seismic isolation design .
num num .
copy of the manufacturing specifications .
num .
the name of the firm manufacturing the system .
num .
shake table test results demonstrating viability of the complete system .
num .
analytical results showing maximum seismic forces and displacements at all locations according to the aashto guide specifications for seismic isolation design .
num .
conformance to the design and construction requirements specified in section num of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num marking packaging shipping and handling mark each structural bearing in indelible ink on num sides with the department project number the structure number location orientation order number lot number bearing identification number and elastomer type and grade .
for seismic isolation bearings make a permanent mark on num of the num sides of each isolator consisting of an isolator number specified by the supplier the date of fabrication month and year the isolator type and the supplier name and address .
ensure that the bearings are packaged to be protected against damage from handling shipping and storage .
securely bolt strap or otherwise fasten to prevent all relative movement .
wrap the bearings in moisture resistant and dust resistant material to protect them from weather .
when providing seismic isolation bearing assemblies assemble the isolators and their mounting plates at the shop .
provide temporary assembly ties so that the entire assembly is shipped in protective packaging as a unit .
provide the re with elastomeric bearing test results for both compression stiffness and combined compression and shear according to section num of the aashto guide specifications for seismic isolation design .
enclose a copy of the materials fabrication and testing compliance certifications with each shipment .
supply a separate sheet showing the materials critical dimensions and clearances for each bearing .
num quality control and acceptance notify the me in writing num days before the start of fabrication so that arrangements for inspection may be made .
ensure that quality control inspectors are aws certified welding inspectors qualified according to the provisions of aws qcnum .
test and inspect structural bearing assemblies according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
provide test results to the me at the time of inspection .
provide to the me certifications of compliance as specified in num for all nonferrous metals ptfe adhesives dowel bars and bolts .
include with the certifications mill test reports for all steels used and material test reports for all elastomeric components .
num reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies provide reinforced elastomeric bearings conforming to the requirements shown on the plans .
reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies consist of circular or rectangular reinforced elastomeric bearings that are grade num with a durometer hardness of num .
fabricate reinforced elastomeric bearing assemblies according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
ensure that the materials and fabrication of bridge bearing assemblies conform to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specification .
enclose a copy of the materials fabrication and testing compliance certifications with each shipment .
supply a separate sheet showing the materials critical dimensions and clearances for each bearing .
provide to the me certifications of compliance as specified in num .
include material test reports .
num bearing pads provide elastomeric pads conforming to the requirements shown on the plans .
provide elastomeric bearing pads that are a grade num with a durometer hardness of num according to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num ensure that the materials and fabrication of bridge bearing pads conform to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
provide to the me certifications of compliance as specified in num .
include material test reports .
section num bolts and bolting material num steel bolting materials before using submit a sample of each size of bolt anchor washer and nut to the me for testing and approval .
provide a mill certification for each heat .
num bolts use steel bolts conforming to astm a num .
if galvanizing is specified use the hotdipped method according to astm a num .
num nuts and washers use nuts and washers according to astm a num or astm a num .
ensure that plain nuts are grade numh dh dhnum num c d or cnum .
ensure that galvanized nuts are grade numh dh or dhnum .
use washers with highstrength steel bolts conforming to astm f num .
if galvanizing is specified use the hotdipped method according to astm a num .
num anchor bolts for anchor bolts intended for anchoring structural supports to concrete foundations including piers columns column supports for sign support structures lighting fixtures traffic signals steel bearing plates and similar applications use astm a num grade c or astm f num grade num num or num anchor bolts as shown on the plans .
if galvanizing is specified use the hotdipped method according to astm a num .
num adhesive anchor bolt systems use anchor bolts conforming to astm a num grade c. if galvanizing is specified use the hotdipped method according to astm a num .
ensure that the adhesive anchor bolt system conforms to the following proof loading requirements after concrete has achieved a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch perform proof loading on num percent of the installed adhesive anchors at each location where the anchors have been placed .
provide calibration certificates for the test equipment before testing .
perform all testing in the presence of the re .
tension test the anchor bolt system according to astm e num to num percent of the yield strength of the anchor bolts .
if the location of the anchor bolts precludes the proof loading of anchor bolts according to astm e num propose an alternate testing method to the re for approval .
repair all spalls or cracks caused by the testing .
based on satisfactory performance in proof loading the re will approve the adhesive anchor bolt installation .
the re will reject the anchor bolt installation for failure to conform to the proof loading requirements .
with the approval of the re replace the adhesive anchor bolt installation by using larger size anchors increasing the embedment depth or using another anchor bolt system .
num highstrength steel bolting materials num material requirements for structural steel erection and for steel to steel chord splices of sign structures use highstrength steel bolts including nuts and plain hardened washers according to astm a num or astm a num .
num when galvanizing is specified use the hotdipped method according to astm a num .
treat galvanized bolts washers and nuts as an assembly .
store and ship the assembly in plastic bags placed inside wood or metal containers .
use astm a num type num highstrength steel bolts for bolting unpainted corrosion resistant weathering steel .
num sampling and testing requirements for bolt assemblies a .
sampling and certification .
before use submit a sample for each manufacturers lot size of bolt anchor washer and nut to the me for testing and approval .
provide a mill certification for each heat .
b. tensile proof load hardness and coating thickness tests .
for each lot the manufacturer shall perform tensile proof load and hardness tests and shall measure galvanized coating according to astm a num .
proof load test bolts according to astm f num method num .
perform wedge tension testing of full size bolts according to astm f num .
if bolts are to be galvanized test after galvanizing .
proof load test nuts according to astm f num if galvanized test after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
if galvanized washers are supplied perform hardness testing after galvanizing however remove galvanized coating before taking hardness measurements .
report the results of all tests and submit with certifications .
also report the location and date of testing .
c. rotationalcapacity test .
perform the rotationalcapacity test on each lot of bolt nut and washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor before shipping and by the contractor within the project limits before installation .
test highstrength steel bolt assemblies for the rotational capacity requirements according to njdot snum or njdot snum and the following num .
test a minimum of num assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
num .
test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
where washers are not required by the installation procedures they need not be included in the lot identification .
num .
assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
num .
assemble the bolt nut and washer assembly in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device for testing as specified in njdot snum .
num .
for bolts that are too short to be assembled in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator use a steel joint and test according to njdot snum .
after testing according to njdot snum or njdot snum loosen and remove the nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
if for either assembly tested there are any signs in the nut or bolt of thread shear failure stripping or torsional failure the lot fails and is to be replaced .
num test reports and certification record the results of all tests .
also report the date and location of testing .
num .
mill certifications .
provide mill certifications for each heat of steel used in the manufacture of the bolts nuts or washers .
indicate the place where the material was melted and manufactured .
num .
manufacturer certified test reports .
provide manufacturer certified test reports from the manufacturer of the bolts nuts and washers .
include the following num .
the lot number of each of the items tested .
num .
the rotationalcapacity lot number and test results as specified in num.c if performed by the manufacturer .
num .
the results of all tests required in num.b .
num .
the date and location of testing .
num .
the location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
num .
distributor certified test reports .
if the rotationalcapacity test is performed by a distributor instead of a manufacturer provide the test results on the distributor certified test reports .
report the rotational capacity lot number and test results as specified in num.c and attach the manufacturer certified test reports .
num num shipping and handling ship bolts nuts and washers from each rotationalcapacity lot in the same container .
if there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer the manufacturer or distributor may ship the nuts and washers in separate containers .
permanently mark each container with the rotationalcapacity lot number to allow identification at any stage before installation .
treat galvanized bolts and nuts as an assembly and ship together .
supply mill certifications manufacturer certified test reports and distributor certified test reports for each rotational capacity lot to the re and me .
num direct tension indicators dti use direct tension indicators conforming to astm f num .
if galvanizing of the bolt assembly is required mechanically galvanize dtis according to astm b num class num .
if dtis are used with astm a num type num bolts coat the dtis with a black epoxy .
test dtis according to astm f num and verify according to njdot snum .
provide manufacturers certification and attach test results .
num stainless steel bolting materials use stainless steel bolts screws studs anchor bolts nuts and washers that conform to astm a num class num grade bnum .
prior to use submit a sample of each size of bolts anchors washers and nuts to the me for testing and approval .
provide a mill test report for each heat .
num aluminum alloy bolting materials use bolts nuts set screws and pins that conform to astm b num alloy numtnum with no .
num alumilite finish .
ensure that bolt heads and nuts are american national standard regular series hexagonal semifinished conforming to ansi bnum to bnum and that threads are american national standard coarse series class num fit conforming to ansi bnumm .
finish bolts with an anodic coating thickness of not less than num inches and chromate seal .
use washers conforming to astm b num alloy numtnum .
before using submit a sample of each size of bolts set screws pins washers and nuts to the me for testing and approval .
provide a mill test report for each heat .
section num drainage num pipe bedding num class a bedding use concrete as specified in num .
num class b bedding use sand or sandy soil with num percent passing the numinch sieve and no more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num num class c bedding use a granular soil conforming to the gradation requirements in table num .
table num gradation for class c bedding sieve size percent passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num num class d bedding use coarse aggregate no .
num as specified in num .
num pipe num reinforced concrete pipe in the manufacture of reinforced concrete pipe use concrete that is composed of cement coarse aggregate fine aggregate and water .
concrete may include admixtures fly ash or slag .
provide materials as specified aggregates num admixtures airentrainingnum chemical num fly ashastm c num class c or f slag num.b cementnum waternum if fly ash is used to control alkalisilica reactivity use class f fly ash .
manufacture reinforced concrete culvert pipe storm drain and sewer pipe to conform to aashto m num class iii wall b unless otherwise designated .
for jacked pipe use reinforced concrete culvert pipe conforming to aashto m num class v wall b .
manufacture reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe to conform to aashto m num class heiii unless otherwise designated .
if required for watertight flexible joints use preformed flexible joint sealants conforming to aashto m num .
notify the me at least num days before shipping pipe to the project .
the me will inspect and approve pipe in the suppliers yard after manufacture .
for approval of the concrete pipe perform numpoint loading in the suppliers yard at a frequency directed by the me .
num hdpe pipe use corrugated hdpe drainage pipe that conforms to aashto m num and is type s smooth interior with annular corrugations with gasketed silttight joints .
use hdpe pipe from a manufacturer who is an eastern states consortium esc qualified manufacturer of hdpe .
for a list of qualified manufacturers see the esc website at www.nh.govdotespc .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for hdpe pipe .
num plastic drainage pipe use corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe according to aashto m num or use pvc drainage pipe according to astm d num .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for plastic drainage pipe .
num num corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe and pipe arches use corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe and pipe arches conforming to astm b num types i or ii and the following num .
type i. fabricate corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe using numinchthick sheet metal unless other thicknesses are designated .
use only helical corrugations unless annular corrugations are designated .
join the pipe in the field with locking bands conforming to astm b num except that coupling bands with projections dimples are not allowed .
num .
type ii .
fabricate corrugated aluminum alloy pipe arches using numinchthick sheet metal unless other thicknesses are designated .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches .
num corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe use corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe conforming to astm b num type iii .
fabricate the pipe using num inchthick sheet metal .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe .
num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches use corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches conforming to astm a num types i and ii .
use special sections such as elbows and flared end sections that conform to astm a num and are of the same thickness as the conduit to which they are joined .
ensure that corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches and special sections also comply with the following num .
type i. fabricate corrugated steel pipe from numinchthick sheet metal unless other thicknesses are designated .
use only helical corrugations unless annular corrugations are designated .
field join the pipe with locking bands conforming to astm a num except that coupling bands with projections dimples are not allowed .
ensure that corrugated steel pipe and coupling bands elbows and flared end sections have a polymeric coating conforming to aashto m num grade num interior num inches and exterior num inches .
num .
type ii .
fabricate corrugated steel pipe arches from numinchthick sheet metal unless other thicknesses are designated .
ensure that corrugated steel pipe coupling bands elbows and flared end sections have a polymeric coating conforming to aashto m num grade num interior num inches and exterior num inches .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches .
num steel alloy pipe for bridge storm drains fabricate steel alloy pipe and fittings from alloy steel conforming to the chemical analysis of astm a num grade b or astm a num .
the contractor may use ductile iron pipe conforming to astm a num ansiawwa cnumanum as an alternate .
ensure that the pipe and fittings are zinccoated galvanized according to astm a num .
weld steel pipe and fittings together before galvanizing .
if ductile iron pipe is used ensure that ductile iron pipe fittings conform to astm a num class num .
bend pipe using the long radius type of bend .
form pipe joints using groovetype couplings consisting of a housing clamp keyed into a groove cut around the full pipe circumference .
provide a gasket of molded or extruded butyl rubber or ethylene propylene diene monomer to create a sealed joint .
use tracktype bolts conforming to astm a num with oval necks and heavy hexagonal standard nuts .
galvanize the assembly according to astm a num .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for steel alloy pipe .
num num ductile iron water pipe use ductile iron water pipe conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum .
use threaded flanges conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum and fittings conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum or cnumanum .
do not field weld ductile iron pipe .
perform required welding of a ductile iron pipe assembly in a fabrication shop .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for ductile iron water pipe .
num castings and components for drainage structures ensure that castings grates extension rings extension frames and covers for inlets and manholes are capable of withstanding hsnum loading when tested as a complete assembled unit and conform to the following num .
gray iron castings .
use gray iron castings conforming to aashto m num except that the manufacturer may use gray cast iron conforming to aashto m num class numb or class numb .
ensure that castings are true to pattern in form and dimensions and are free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blowholes and other defects in composition affecting their strength or integrity .
to present a smooth clean and uniform surface sandblast or clean the castings to remove sand and scale .
num .
carbon steel extension frames and rings .
use carbon steel extension frames and rings for inlets and manholes .
when specified galvanize the extension frames and rings according to aashto m num .
perform welding of fabricated steel shapes and structures according to aws dnum .
do not punch drill ream weld or cut extension frames and rings in the field .
repair any damage to the galvanized coating .
num .
scuppers and other bridge drainage .
use structural steel shapes and carbon steel castings conforming to aashto m num grades num or num and carbon steel forgings conforming to aashto m num class d. num .
ductile iron castings .
use ductile iron castings conforming to astm a num grade num or grade num num .
num .
epoxy bedding compound .
use an epoxy bedding compound that is listed on the qpl and is a numpart non sag gel rapidsetting epoxy adhesive conforming to the requirements of astm c num type num grade num class b or c and is listed on the qpl .
use the epoxy in an ambient temperature range of num to num f. num .
ladder rungs .
for ladder rungs use steel reinforced copolymer polypropylene .
use a numinch diameter reinforcement steel bar conforming to astm a num grade num and a polypropylene coating conforming to classification ppnumbnumznum according to astm d num .
for gray iron castings notify the me at least num days before shipping to the project .
the me will inspect and approve castings in the suppliers yard after fabrication .
for approval of the gray iron casting perform proof load or test bar testing according to aashto m num in the suppliers yard at a frequency directed by the me .
for items other than gray iron castings submit certifications of compliance as specified in num .
section num masonry units num clay or shale brick use clay or shale brick conforming to aashto m num grade mw with the dimensions as specified in table num .
table num dimensions of clay or shale brick length num num inches width num num inches depth num num inches submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num num concrete block for inlets and manholes in the manufacture of concrete block use cement as specified in num and aggregates conforming to the requirements for concrete aggregates as specified in num .
manufacture concrete block according to astm c num .
the manufacturer shall sample and test concrete block according to astm c num .
manufacture blocks to be either rectangular in shape or curved with the inside and outside surfaces curved to the required radii whichever is appropriate for the shape of the structure .
ensure that the length is between num and num inches the height is between num and num inches and the width is at least num inches .
for the reduction of crosssectional area of the cones or tops of manholes the contractor may use blocks of special shapes and heights .
the contractor may also use blocks of special shapes and heights in the top courses of all structures so that the head castings is set at the required elevation on a mortar bed not more than num inch thick without cutting the blocks .
ensure that all blocks have an interlockingtype joint at the ends and are sound and free from cracks or other defects .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num concrete brick in the manufacture of concrete brick use cement as specified in num and aggregates conforming to the requirements for concrete aggregates as specified in num .
manufacture concrete brick to conform to astm c num and to the dimensions specified in table num .
the manufacturer shall sample and test concrete brick according to astm c num .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num stone curb use stone curbs that are of a lithology color and texture as specified in the special provisions .
fabricate stone curb from a commercially available material with an established history of satisfactory durability and resistance to weathering .
use curb stones from a single quarry with the same color and texture .
the department may allow reasonable variations in color and texture if the variations do not affect the architectural qualities or the structural properties of the stone .
num .
quarrysplit stone .
ensure that the top face of quarrysplit stone for curbs is machinefinished or dressed to an even surface without depressions or projections of more than num inch below or above the plane of the face .
ensure that the edges are straight and even and the ends are cut square for the entire depth of the exposed curb face .
dress curb stones so that joints are not more than num inch wide from top to gutter line and not more than num inch wide below the gutter line .
num .
dressed stone .
ensure that dressed stone for curbs is dressed to an even smooth finish on the top face on the front face for the entire depth of the exposed curb face on the back face to a depth of num inches and on the ends to a depth of num inch .
ensure that projections and depressions on the various faces do not exceed the allowances in table num .
extend the roughdressed part of end faces to num inch below the gutter line .
ensure that the back edge of the top is parallel to the front face the top and front faces are sloped and the front edge is rounded .
fabricate the stones to have the width specified at the top and to have a bottom width of not less than num and not more than num inches different from the top width .
provide stones in lengths of between num and num feet .
num table num maximum allowable deviations for dressed stone depression inches projection inches top num num front dressed part num num front undressed part num num back dressed part num num back undressed part num num ends dressed part num num ends roughdressed part num num ends undressed part num num the contractor may use straightcut stone for curved curb having a radius of more than num feet but shall dress the curb to true radius after it is set in place .
for curved curb having radii smaller than num feet cut the stone to the required radius and cut the ends so that the joints are less than num inch wide for the full depth .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num stone facing for pier shafts use stone facing for pier shafts that is of a lithology color and texture as specified in the special provisions .
ensure that the stone is sound durable and free from flaws discoloration and structural defects .
granite and stone of similar lithologies normally exhibit a relatively uniform color and texture .
the department may allow a reasonable variation in color and texture and an occasional irregular distribution of the component minerals of the granite termed waves or knots if the variations do not impair the architectural qualities or affect the structural properties of the stone .
quarry the stone from quarries that have ample production capacity both as to quantity and quality .
submit num numfoot duplicate samples to the department to indicate the range of color texture and surface finish of the stone to be provided .
after approval of the samples the department will return num set of samples for guidance .
ensure that all stone used in the project matches the samples .
ensure that the stone provided is capable of withstanding a crushing stress of num pounds per square inch on num inch diameter cores tested airdry .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
include with the certification a performance history indicating that the stone proposed for use has satisfactorily withstood prolonged exposure in environments similar to that of the project .
num stone paving block for stone paving block use new or used stone block of good quality .
ensure that the color texture and uniformity conform to the requirements specified in the special provisions .
ensure that reclaimed blocks are free of bituminous and cement grout coatings and other foreign matter .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num section num signs sign supports and delineators num signs num materials a .
aluminum components .
use aluminum materials conforming to the requirements in table num .
table num aluminum sign components aluminum items test method alloy and temper flat sign sheetsnum num num num thicknesses astm b num numhnum or numtnum extruded sign panelsnum astm b num numtnum demountable letters numerals symbols num thickness astm b num numhnum or numtnum bars and rods astm b num numtnum washers alclad astm b num numtnum flange splicing material astm b num numtnum shims astm b num numo posts truss chords truss bracing members astm b num numtnum post and chord caps astm b num numtnum post clips astm b num numtnum structural shapes zbar reinforcement astm b num numtnum nuts num inch and larger astm b num numtnum tamperproof nuts num inch and under astm b num numtnum rivets size and length recommended by the manufacturer astm b num num bolts finished bolts with at least num chromated sealed anodic coating astm b num numtnum num .
for flat sign sheets and extruded sign panels ensure that aluminum is chromate conversion coated according to astm b num class num .
num .
for extruded panels use lightweight panels .
b. retroreflective sheeting .
use retroreflective sheeting that is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm d num .
use sheeting types as specified in table num .
if overlay film is used ensure that the combination of the overlay film with the background retroreflective sheeting conforms to the requirements of astm d num for the required type of sheeting as specified in table num .
ensure that the color combination of the retroreflective sheeting with the overlay film meets the required color for the sign background .
use retroreflective sheeting and overlay film from the same manufacturer .
table num allowable sign sheeting types sign type test method type regulatory and warning signs astm d num type iii guide signs mounted on steel u posts astm d num type iii guide signs mounted on overhead sign structures breakaway sign supports or nonbreakaway sign supports astm d num type viii or type ix c. color processing ink .
if a screening process is used for nonretroreflective legends and borders use only inks recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer .
num fabrication a .
sign panels .
use flat sign panels or extruded panels to fabricate signs .
ensure that cut edges are true and smooth and free from excessive burrs or ragged breaks .
do not flame cut aluminum .
fabricate flat sheet signs from a single piece of sheet aluminum without joints using the thicknesses specified in table num .
drill or punch numinch diameter holes in the sign blank for attachment to sign supports .
num locate holes according to the mutcd manual of standard highway signs .
if the panel is larger than num feet in any dimension reinforce the panel with zbars .
table num requirements for sheet aluminum thickness for flat panel signs sign type thickness inches signs measuring less than num square feet except oneway signs num signs measuring num square feet or greater num one way signs num for multiple panel signs use numfoot wide extruded sections bolted together .
join sign panel sections together at the flanges with numinch bolts .
attach the sign panels to vertical supports ensuring that the span between vertical supports is a maximum of num feet .
do not use extruded sign panels with steel u post sign supports .
use the same material and color for trim molding that is used for the sign face .
b .
applying retroreflective sheeting .
apply sheeting according to the manufacturers recommendations .
if necessary use num or more pieces of retroreflective sheeting to cover the sign face .
match color at the time of sign fabrication to provide uniform appearance .
if using overlay film use retroreflective sheeting that is the color of the proposed lettering or border .
buttsplice the sheeting and ensure that the gap between sheets does not exceed num inch .
cut sheeting flush with the edges of the panel .
c. legends and borders .
the legend for each sign consists of letters numerals shields and other symbols .
use series e modified num lettering that conforms to the mutcd manual of standard highway signs .
ensure that the lettering is aligned spaced and sized according to mutcd manual of standard highway signs and the working drawings .
apply the legend and borders using the following methods num .
demountable .
use sheeting type to match the required retroreflective sheeting for the sign .
apply the sheeting to cutout aluminum for demountable sign legend or border .
mount legend and border to the sign face .
num .
direct applied retroreflective sheeting .
using sheeting type to match the required retroreflective sheeting for the sign cutout legend or border from the sheeting .
apply the legend or border according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
overlay film .
if using overlay film to color background retroreflective sheeting computer generate legend cutouts in the overlay film .
apply the overlay film according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
nonretroreflective legend and border .
the fabricator may apply nonretroreflective legend or border using ink and application technique according to the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
num packaging storing and shipping package ship and store panels on edge and according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that all signs are packaged so that they are protected from moisture and damage during shipment and storage .
num acceptance inspection notify the me at least num days before shipping to the project so that arrangements for inspection can be made .
the me will reject signs not fabricated according to the mutcd manual of standard highway signs and the plans .
the me will ensure that finished signs are clear and legible without smudging blisters delamination loose edges or other blemishes .
the me will also ensure that the colors have a consistent chromaticity across all signs of the same color .
at the time of the inspection provide copies of mill certifications for the aluminum components and copies of certification of compliance as specified in num for the sign sheeting .
num num sign supports num steel u post sign supports use steel u post sign supports conforming to astm a num grade num or num with the length of post and minimum pounds per foot as shown on the plans .
provide num stainless steel num num unc hexagonal headed bolts and nuts conforming to astm a num grade bnum class num for securing the signs to the steel u post .
provide sign mounting bolts that are sized to extend beyond the end of each nut by no more than num inches when fully tightened .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for u posts .
num breakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs fabricate and construct breakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs as shown on the plans using materials conforming to the requirements in table num .
table num materials for breakaway sign supports item test method type or grade aluminum materials num spring pinsnum astm a num type num or num breakaway coupling assembly hex studsnum astm a num grade lnum breakaway coupling assembly nutsnum astm a num grade numh load concentrating washers astm a num type num condition h num washer retainers astm a num grade num galvanized steel anchor bolts num galvanized steel leveling platesnum astm a num grade num breakaway shock absorber cable stainless steel wire ropenum milwnum cutting pins astm a num type num condition h num num .
ensure that spring pins have a minimum strength in double shear of num pounds .
num .
provide hex studs and nuts with a zinc electrodeposited coating according to astm b num scnum type iii .
num .
galvanize leveling plates according to astm a num .
num .
ensure that the wire rope has a diameter of num inch a minimum breaking strength of num pounds and is num num construction .
use num piece of seamless aluminum tubing for posts .
for aluminum members weld according to ansiaws dnum structural welding code aluminum .
tirewrap posts during shipment and handling to protect the finish .
submit mill certifications for the component materials .
num nonbreakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs fabricate and construct nonbreakaway sign supports for ground mounted signs as shown on the plans using materials as listed in table num .
table num materials for nonbreakaway sign supports item reference aluminum materials num stainless steel hardware num galvanized steel anchor bolts num galvanized steel leveling platesnum astm a num grade num num .
galvanize leveling plates according to astm a num .
use num piece of seamless aluminum tubing for posts used to mount signs .
for aluminum members weld according to ansiaws dnum structural welding code aluminum .
tirewrap posts during shipment and handling to protect the finish .
submit mill certifications for the component materials .
num num timber sign supports use timber posts conforming to the requirements for sawn timber posts as specified in num .
num mounting materials for overhead bridgemounted and cantilever signs provide brackets for mounting signs including future signs to the structure .
ensure that the brackets are adjustable to allow mounting of the sign faces at any angle between a truly vertical position and num degrees from vertical .
obtain this angle by rotating the front lower edge of the sign forward of the top edge .
fabricate brackets to lengths equal to the height of the signs being supported .
submit mill certifications for the brackets .
num flexible delineators ensure that flexible delineator units are made of a fiberglass reinforced thermosetting highdensity polymer resin or an extruded polycarbonite resin which are resistant to ultraviolet and infrared radiation and which meet the following minimum physical and performance requirements num .
delineator dimensions .
a .
ground mounted .
ensure that the unit for ground mounted flexible delineators has a minimum width of num inches and a minimum thickness of num inch .
use delineators that have a length to allow the top of the reflective area to be positioned num feet above the near roadway edge .
b .
guide rail mounted .
ensure that the unit for beam guide rail mounted flexible delineators has a minimum width of num inches and a minimum thickness of num inch .
use units of a height that will ensure that the top of the reflective area is num num inches num num inches for deceleration and acceleration lanes above the near roadway edge .
design the base of the unit to mount over the ibeam spacer or to the top of a wood or synthetic spacer of the beam guide rail .
c. barrier curb mounted .
for barrier curb mounted flexible delineators use a delineator that is num num inches with a minimum thickness of num inch and that has a base that forms a t shape with the panel for mounting on the barrier curb .
use units of a height that will ensure that the top of the reflective area is num num inches num num inches for deceleration and acceleration lanes above the near roadway edge .
num .
delineator color .
use flexible delineators that are white in color .
num .
impact resistance for ground mounted delineators .
use flexible delineator units that are selferecting to within num degrees of original upright position within num minutes after num vehicle impacts traveling at num miles per hour .
ensure that the reerected unit retains the original crosssection shows no evidence of shredding or splintering and retains num percent of its original retroreflective sheeting when tested for both bumper impacts and wheel impacts and in both cold and hot weather .
num .
retroreflective sheeting .
use retroreflective sheeting that is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm d num type vii or viii .
affix yellow or white retroreflective sheeting to the trafficfacing side of the delineator according to the manufacturers recommendations .
a .
ground mounted .
ensure that sheeting is a maximum of num inches from the top of the delineator and is at least num num inches .
b .
guide rail mounted .
ensure that the sheeting is a minimum of num inches square and is mounted on the upper portion of the delineator .
for acceleration and deceleration lanes use sheeting that is a minimum of num inches wide and num inches long .
c. barrier curb mounted .
ensure that the sheeting is num num inches .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for delineators .
num section num paints coatings traffic stripes and traffic markings num paints and stains num structural steel paint use paint systems for coating structural steel that are northeast protective coating committee nepcoat approved and listed on the qpl .
use the appropriate paint type for the application as follows num .
use an inorganic zinc epoxy urethane ieu paint system for coating new structural steel .
num .
use an organic zinc epoxy urethane oeu paint system for recoating existing structural steel .
num .
use an epoxy mastic urethane eu paint system for overcoating existing structural steel .
ensure that the primer is tinted to contrast with the base metal .
use white or an approved color that contrasts with the prime and finish coats for the intermediate coat .
use the finish color coat noted on the plans .
when the colors lake blue foliage green brown or black are specified match the color chips of fedstdnumb as specified in table num .
table num finish coat colors for structural steel color chip number lake blue num foliage green num brown num black num before using paint submit each lot to the me for quality assurance testing and approval .
the me will verify that the pigment content total solids and infrared curve match that of the initial qualifying material .
do not use paint until the me has approved the paint lot .
num aluminum paint use aluminum paint conforming to aashto m num type ii .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num .
num coal tar epoxy paint use coal tar epoxypolyamide paint that conforms to sspcpaint no .
num and is black or dark red in color .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num .
num concrete stain to stain concrete use a penetrating stain that is a single component waterbased thermoplastic acrylic emulsion that carries its color and water repellent protection into the concrete .
ensure that the stain conforms to the requirements in table num .
table num requirements for concrete stain property test method requirement solids by weight astm d num num num percent gloss astm g num flat viscosity astm d num num num krebs units submit certifications of compliance as specified in num .
num coatings num galvanizing zinc coating apply hotdip galvanized coating to iron and steel plates pipe tube and structural shapes according to astm a num .
num apply hotdip galvanized coating to iron and steel hardware according to astm a num .
repair hot dipped galvanized coating on iron and steel plates pipe tube structural shapes and hardware according to astm a num .
num epoxy waterproofing for concrete waterproofing use epoxyresin that conforms to astm c num type num grade num num or num class d e or f and is listed on the qpl .
ensure that the color is gray to match the color of the adjacent concrete .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num .
num asphalt waterproofing for use below ground level use an asphalt waterproofing conforming to astm d num type i .
for use above ground level use an asphalt waterproofing conforming to astm d num type ii or iii .
use a primer conforming to astm d num .
num coating for nonvegetative surface formulate a color coating with a pure acrylic vehicle that is durable weather resistant and suitable for use on bituminous surfaces .
use lusterless brown tint matching federal chip no .
num .
num permanent traffic stripes and markings num epoxy traffic stripes a. epoxy resin .
for longlife pavement striping use an epoxy resin that is a num component num percent solids formulation conforming to the following requirements num .
color .
ensure that the material conforms to the initial color requirements in astm d num .
num .
yellowness index .
when tested according to astm e num with glass beads ensure that the white epoxy resin exhibits a maximum num yellowness index after num hours of quv exposure .
num .
directional reflectance .
ensure that the epoxy resin compound without glass beads has a minimum directional reflectance relative to a magnesium oxide standard of num percent for white and num percent for yellow when tested according to astm e num .
num .
drying time .
ensure that the epoxy resin compounds when tested according to astm d num exhibit no pickup after a num minute drying time .
num .
abrasion resistance .
when the epoxy resin material is tested according to astm c num with a csnum wheel under a load of num grams for num cycles ensure that the abrasive wear index is no greater than num .
the abrasive wear index is the weight in milligrams that is abraded from the sample under the specified test conditions .
num .
hardness .
after the epoxy resin material has cured between num and num hours at num f ensure that the shore d hardness is between num and num when tested according to astm d num .
num num .
composition .
ensure that the epoxy resin meets the composition requirements in table num .
table num composition of epoxy resin percent by weight pigment composition minimum maximum white titanium dioxidenum astm d num type ii or iii num num epoxy resin num num yellow organic nonlead yellow num num epoxy resin num num titanium dioxide astm d num type ii or iii num num num .
use titanium dioxide for the entire pigment composition for white epoxy .
num .
packaging and shipping .
ensure that the epoxy resin material is shipped in appropriate containers and plainly marked with the following information num .
manufacturers name and address .
num .
name of product .
num .
lotbatch number .
num .
color .
num .
net weight and volume of contents .
num .
date of manufacture .
num .
date of expiration .
num .
mixing proportions and instructions .
num .
safety information .
num .
sampling and certified analysis .
test each batch of material for composition and ir mapping .
do not use material that deviates from the master ir curve .
at least num days before use submit to the me the manufacturers certified test results for each batch of epoxy resin material to be used on the project .
in addition the me will randomly sample epoxy resin for testing .
b .
glass beads .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for each lot of glass beads used on the contract .
num .
small glass beads .
use small beads conforming to aashto m num type num with a moisture resistant coating .
num .
large glass beads .
ensure that the large beads conform to aashto m num except as follows num .
provide beads with a silane adherence coating .
num .
ensure that the gradation is as specified in table num .
table num gradation requirements for large glass beads sieve size percent passing by weightnum no.num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num .
according to astm d num num num thermoplastic traffic markings for longlife traffic markings use either preformed or hot extruded thermoplastic conforming to aashto m num except that for preformed thermoplastic the minimum thickness requirement is num mils .
use beads conforming to aashto m num type num with a moisture resistant coating .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for each batch of materials used on the contract .
num raised pavement markers rpm use raised pavement markers rpms made of ductile iron castings with a numway snowplowable replaceable prismatic reflector conforming to the following requirements num .
castings .
provide a ductile iron casting conforming to astm a num hardened to between num and num rockwell c. ensure that the castings provided are between num and num inches long num and num inches wide and num and num inches high and weigh approximately num pounds .
ensure that each casting is permanently marked with the manufacturers name and model number .
num .
epoxy resin adhesive .
set castings in the pavement surfaces using an epoxy resin adhesive conforming to aashto mnum type iv .
num .
lenses .
provide a lens conforming to astm d num and table num .
table num requirements for lenses property requirement nominal dimensions num num num inch slope of reflecting surface num to num degrees area of each reflecting surface num to num square inches ensure that the lens has a thin untempered glass bonded to the front surface of the prismatic retroreflective lens face .
num .
lens to casting adhesive .
attach the reflector to the casting with an adhesive according to the reflector manufacturers recommendations .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num temporary traffic stripes and markings num latex paint for temporary traffic stripes use latex traffic paint that is a fastdrying white or nonlead yellow readymixed pigmented binder emulsified in water and capable of anchoring reflective glass beads that are separately applied .
ensure that the color matches fedstdnumb color chip no .
num for yellow and no .
num for white .
ensure that the paint has a maximum notrack time of num seconds when applied in a wet film thickness of num num mil at num f and with num pounds per gallon of glass beads .
in addition ensure that the finished product meets the following num .
volume of solids is a minimum num percent .
num .
total solids are a minimum of num percent total nonvolatiles by weight when tested according to astm d num .
num .
weight per gallon is a minimum num num pounds per gallon for each color .
num .
hegman grind is a minimum of num hegman when tested according to astm d num .
num .
viscosity is between num and num krebs units at num f when tested according to astm d num .
use glass beads conforming to aashto mnum type num with a moisture resistance coating .
if requested by the re provide a certification of compliance as specified in num for latex or glass beads .
num removable pavement marking tape a .
temporary pavement tape .
use removable pavement marking tape consisting of polymeric backing materials with a retroreflective surface .
ensure that the underside of the tape is precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive num to bond the tape to the roadway surface and is capable of withstanding traffic immediately after installation and for the duration of the intended service .
use a primer only if recommended by the manufacturer .
provide tape that has a minimum skid resistance of num british petroleum number bpn when tested according to astm e num .
do not use lead based pigment in traffic tape .
provide tape that conforms to the requirements specified in table num .
table num requirements for temporary pavement tape property white yellow minimum specific luminance mcdsq footfootcandles astm d num num num minimum tensile stress psinum astm d num num num fedstdnumb color chip no .
num num num .
use an entrance angle of num and an observation angle of num .
num .
perform tensile stress testing with a testing speed of num inches per minute .
use removable tape that is capable of being removed manually intact or in large pieces without the use of solvents burning grinding or blasting and without damage to the underlying surface .
if requested by the re provide a certification of compliance as specified in num for temporary pavement tape .
b. removable black line masking tape .
use black line masking tape that is black in color nonretroreflective and a pliant polymer material .
ensure that the color conforms to fedstdnumb color chip no .
num .
provide tape that does not produce a sheen under day night or wet conditions .
ensure that the tape is capable of masking the underlying stripes so that they do not reflect through .
provide tape that has a minimum skid resistance of num bpn when tested according to astm e num .
ensure that the underside of the tape is precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive to bond the tape to the roadway surface and is capable of withstanding traffic immediately after installation and for the duration of the intended service .
ensure that the removable tape is capable of being removed manually intact or in large pieces at temperatures above num f without the use of solvents burning grinding or blasting and without damage to the underlying surface .
if requested by the re provide a certification of compliance as specified in num for removable black masking tape .
num temporary pavement markers provide temporary pavement markers that have a maximum width of num inches perpendicular to traffic and a maximum height of num inch .
mold marker castings using acrylonitrile butadiene styrene acrylic polycarbonate or high impact polystyrene of the same color as the retroreflective lens .
use either monodirectional white or bidirectional yellow retroreflective lenses as shown on the plans .
ensure that the lenses used for the retroreflective material are molded of methylmethacrylate conforming to astm d num pmmanumvnum or pmmanumvnum and meet the retroreflectance values specified in table num table num retroreflectance requirements for temporary pavement markers observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees white mcdfootcandles yellow mcdfootcandles num num num num num num num num ensure that the underside of the marker is precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive to bond the marker to the roadway surface and is capable of withstanding traffic immediately after installation and for the duration of the intended service .
ensure that markers are capable of being removed without damage to the underlying surface .
if requested by the re provide a certification of compliance as specified in num for temporary pavement markers .
num section num guide rail fence and railing num beam guide rail num rail element fabricate rail element according to aashto m num class a type i in table num .
ensure that the weight of the zinc coating conforms to aashto m num type i in table num .
notify the me at least num days before shipment to the project for inspection at the suppliers yard .
provide mill certifications to the me at the time of inspection .
num end treatments use nongating guide rail end treatments that are nchrp num tested test level num tlnum approved and are listed on the qpl .
ensure that the components of the end treatment comply with the nchrp num approved end treatment details .
notify the me at least num days before shipment to the project for inspection at the suppliers yard .
provide mill certifications to the me at the time of inspection .
num posts and blockouts for steel posts and blockouts use structural steel conforming to astm a num grade num that is galvanized according to astm a num .
use wood timber blockouts and posts as specified in num .
use synthetic routed blockouts that are nchrp num tested test level num tlnum approved and are listed on the qpl .
ensure that the name of the manufacturer and model number are stamped on each blockout and that the blockouts are of the same material and dimensions as the spacers that were nchrp tested .
notify the me at least num days before shipment to the project for inspection at the suppliers yard .
provide mill certifications for steel components to the me at the time of inspection .
provide certifications of compliance as specified in num for wood and synthetic components .
num rub rail for rub rail use steel channels or bent plate of structural steel conforming to astm a num and galvanized according to astm a num .
notify the me at least num days before shipment to the project for inspection at the suppliers yard .
provide mill certifications to the me at the time of inspection .
num miscellaneous hardware ensure that connections or splices nuts bolts washers and plates conform to aashto m num except as follows num .
if highstrength bolts are shown on the plans for bridge guide rail use highstrength bolts nuts and washers conforming to astm a num type i and galvanized according to astm a num .
num .
for base plate assemblies on bridge guide rail use an adhesive anchor system with galvanized bolts as specified in num or galvanized anchor bolts nuts and washers as specified in num .
num .
use plates for guide rail on bridges conforming to astm a num and galvanized according to astm a num .
notify the me at least num days before shipment to the project for inspection at the suppliers yard .
provide mill certifications to the me at the time of inspection .
num fence num chainlink fence ensure that the materials for chainlink fence conform to aashto m num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for fence materials .
attach mill certification to the certification of compliance .
num num caution fence ensure that the materials for caution fence conform to the following num .
fabric .
fabricate the fabric for plastic caution fence from hdpe with a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num .
use fabric that is blaze orange in color that matches fedstdnumb color chip no .
num and is ultraviolet stabilized .
num .
posts .
use posts made of high carbon steel with a flanged leg channel section or flanged leg ubar section having a uniform thickness of metal of not less than num inch .
ensure that the posts weigh at least num pounds per linear foot exclusive of ground plate and are designed to be easily driven into the ground .
equip each post with at least num riveted lugs .
do not equip posts with punched or welded lugs .
galvanize posts .
num snow fence ensure that the materials for snow fence conform to the following num .
wires .
use wires of a galvanized staycable type with a diameter of not less than num gauge .
num .
wooden pickets .
use unpainted wooden pickets made from cedar spruce maple or other satisfactory species of wood .
ensure that the pickets are free from knots with a diameter greater than onehalf of the width of the picket .
num .
posts .
use posts as specified in num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for fence materials .
num bridge railing num steel railing fabricate steel railing from structural steel as specified in num .
construct welds according to the requirements of aws dnum structural welding code .
use bolts and bolting materials as specified in num .
when specified paint as specified in num or galvanize as specified in num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num and copies of mill certifications .
num aluminum railing fabricate aluminum railing from aluminum components as specified in table num .
construct welds according to the requirements of ansiaws dnum structural welding code aluminum .
use bolts and bolting materials as specified in num .
when specified paint as specified in num .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num and copies of mill certifications .
table num aluminum alloys for railings component test method alloy and temper castings sand astm b num numf or numtnum die castings permanent mold astm b num numtnum extruded bars rods shapes and pipe astm b num numtnum pipe astm b num numtnum plates and sheets astm b num numtnum rolled shapes rods and bars astm b num numtnum num section num joint materials num preformed joint filler use preformed joint fillers conforming to aashto m num or aashto m num .
for concrete pavement applications punch holes in preformed joint filler to admit the dowels .
provide the filler for each joint in a single piece for the full depth and width required for the joint .
if the re approves the use of more than num piece for a joint fasten the abutting ends securely and hold to shape by stapling or other means of means of positive fastening .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for joint filler .
num joint sealer for sealing joints and cracks in hma and concrete pavements use a hotpoured joint sealer that is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm d num .
use the following types in the listed applications num .
for sealing cracks in hma use type ii sealer .
num .
for sealing cracks and joints in concrete pavement and hma saw and seal applications use type iv sealer .
num .
in structural applications use type ii sealer .
for concrete pavements use coldpoured joint sealer that is listed on the qpl and conforms to astm d num type sl except that ultimate elongation is required to be a minimum of num percent .
in vertical applications use coldpoured joint sealers that are listed on the qpl and conform to astm d num type ns with a minimum ultimate elongation of num percent .
if recommended by the manufacturer apply primer before applying the sealer .
use backer rod in conjunction with coldpoured joint sealer that conforms to astm d num type num .
use backer rod with a width that is at least num percent greater than the width of the pavement joint or crack .
ensure that the backer rod is clean and dry at the time of installation .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for joint sealers and backer rods .
attach test results to the certification .
the me will randomly sample joint sealers at the source of manufacture or at the work site .
num polymerized joint adhesive for longitudinal cold joints in hma paving use polymerized joint adhesive that is a hotapplied asphaltic joint adhesive listed on the qpl and conforms to the requirements in table num table num requirements for polymerized joint adhesive property test method requirement cone penetration num c astm d num num flow num c astm d num num mm maximum resilience num c astm d num num minimum ductility num c astm d num num cm minimum tensile adhesion num c astm d num num minimum softening point astm d num num c minimum asphalt compatibility astm d num pass ensure that the polymerized joint adhesive has a viscosity at the recommended pour temperature to allow for proper application of the material .
obtain documentation of recommended pour temperature and safe heating temperature for the material from the manufacturer .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for polymerized joint adhesive .
attach test results to the certification .
the me will randomly sample joint adhesive at the source of manufacture or at the work site .
num num joint assemblies num preformed elastomeric compression type a .
metal components .
fabricate the structural steel components of the joint assembly as specified in num and as shown on the plans and the approved working drawings .
ensure that the fabricator is aisc certified .
the me will inspect joint assemblies either at the fabrication shop or at the work site .
insert the elastomeric joint sealer according to the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
joint sealer .
use preformed elastomeric joint sealers that are manufactured from vulcanized elastomeric compound using polychloroprene neoprene as the base polymer .
manufacture the joint sealer to conform to astm d num with a minimum range of motion of at least num percent of the nominal size of the sealer .
ensure that the width to height ratio of the joint sealer is at least num percent .
in new construction do not field splice sealers .
for reconstruction projects the re may allow field splices .
if field splicing is allowed splice using vulcanization or shop splicing methods .
if shop splicing of sealer is unavoidable splice using either factory vulcanization or coldcured factory bonding using a highstrength rapidbonding adhesive .
if splicing of a sealer is allowed ensure that the sealer at the splice point has no significant misalignment at its sides or top and that misalignment at the bottom does not to exceed half of the bottom wall thickness .
ensure that the manufacturers name or trademark and lot number are marked on the joint sealer to identify each shipment .
submit certifications of compliance as specified in num for joint sealers .
attach a copy of the test results with the certification .
submit a sample of each size joint sealer to be used on the project to the me for quality assurance testing .
ensure that the sample is at least the minimum length specified in table num .
table num minimum lengths of samples for testing sealer size width w in inches minimum length inches w num num num w num num num w num num w num num num strip seal expansion glandular type a .
metal components .
use num parallel steel rail sections conforming to aashto m num grade num or grade num .
use steel plates and concrete anchors consisting of studs steel plates or reinforcement steel welded to the steel rail sections .
ensure that the steel for plates shapes and other structural steel used in the deck joint system conforms to aashto m num grade num or grade num .
for steel anchors use deformed bars conforming to astm a num grade num .
weld structural steel as specified in num and as shown on the plans and the approved working drawings .
after fabrication hotdip galvanize the entire joint system according to astm a num .
b. neoprene strip seal gland .
for the strip seal gland use an extruded synthetic rubber consisting of polychloroprene neoprene as the base polymer .
manufacture the strip seal gland to have locking lugs that mechanically interlock in the cavities of the num steel rail sections .
ensure that the material conforms to the requirement in table num .
table num tests for neoprene strip seal gland property test method requirement tensile strength minimum psi astm d num num elongation at break minimum astm d num num hardness type a durometer astm d num num num oven aging num hours at num f tensile strength loss maximum num elongation loss maximum num hardness type a durometer points change astm d num num to num num table num tests for neoprene strip seal gland property test method requirement ozone resistance num strain num ppm in air num hours at num f astm d num no cracks oil swell astm oil no .
num num hours at num f weight change maximum astm d num num c. adhesive .
for installing and bonding the neoprene strip seal gland in the cavity of the parallel steel rail sections use an adhesive that is a onepart moisturecuring polyurethane and hydrocarbon solvent and conforms to physical properties specified in table num table num requirements for strip seal adhesive property requirement average weight per gallon num num pounds solids content by weight num percent minimum temperature range at which material is in fluid from num to num f film strength astm d num num pounds per square inch minimum elongation num percent minimum d. certification .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for the strip seal joint assembly .
with the certification submit test results for the neoprene strip seal gland and mill certifications for the structural steel components .
num modular a .
manufacturer .
use a manufacturer who is aisc certified for major steel bridges has at least num years experience in structural steel fabrication and has completed fatigue testing of the designed structural elements .
b .
materials .
use materials that conform to the following requirements num .
use structural steel conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum aashto mnum grade num or aashto mnum .
do not use aluminum components .
num .
use stainless steel conforming to astm anum type num .
num .
use ptfe that is num percent virgin material woven ptfe fabric or dimpled ptfe conforming to the material requirements in section num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num .
use neoprene strip seals conforming to the requirements in table num and that have a maximum movement range of num inches .
do not use box seals or seals utilizing double webs .
table num tests for neoprene strip seals property test method requirement tensile strength minimum psi astm d num num elongation at break minimum astm d num num hardness type a durometer astm d num num to num compression set at num hr at num f maximum astm d num num num .
use bolts and other hardware conforming to the requirements of aashto m num and galvanized according to aashto m num .
num .
fabricate slide bearings and precompressed springs as steel reinforced elastomeric pads with a ptfe sliding surface .
do not manufacture components from polyurethane compounds .
c. fabrication .
fabricate the structural steel components of the modular joint assembly as specified in num and as shown on the plans and approved working drawings .
hotdip galvanize the assembly according to astm a num .
perform field splices according to the details and procedures included in the approved working drawings .
num d. shipping handling and certification .
the re will reject joint systems damaged during shipping or handling .
the contractor may repair minor damage to the galvanizing according to astm a num .
store the expansion joint system according to the manufacturers recommendations .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num for the modular joint assembly .
with the certification submit test results for the neoprene strip seal and mill certifications for the structural steel components .
section num timber and timber treatment num sawn timber posts timber spacers and routed timber spacers manufacture sawn timber posts timber spacers and routed timber spacers from southern pine or douglas fir with extreme fiber stress in bending in excess of num pounds per square inch as assigned according to southern pine inspection bureau or west coast lumber inspection bureau grading rules .
the manufacturer may rough saw or dress timber posts timber spacers and routed timber .
treat timber as specified in num .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
num round timber piling in the manufacture of round timber piling use southern pine or douglas fir conforming to aashto m num and astm d num except that untreated piles having smooth tight bark need not be peeled .
treat piling as specified in num .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
num dimension lumber for sheet piling manufacture sheet piling using southern pine or douglas fir no .
num or better dressed on num sides .
manufacture sheet piling to be tongue and grooved or grooved for splines .
treat sheet piling as specified in num .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
num dimension lumber timber and decking for structures use dimension lumber timber gluedlaminated timber and decking for structures that conform to aashto m num with the following modifications num .
manufacture dimension lumber and timber from southern pine or douglas fir of structural grade that conforms to the grading rules of the southern pine inspection bureau or the western lumber inspection bureau .
ensure that the grading is performed by an agency approved by the board of review of the american lumber standards committee .
use southern pine that is designated and graded as no .
num if num to num inches thick and as no .
num if num inches or thicker .
use douglas fir that is designated and graded as dense no .
num .
num .
for decking subjected to vehicular traffic use timber that is graded as dense commercial if southern pine and commercial dex if douglas fir .
dress timber for bridge decking square edged snums .
num .
for decking used exclusively by pedestrians use commercial grade timber that is dressed square edged snums .
num .
treat timber as specified in num except do not preserve timber railing systems and decking used by pedestrians with creosote .
in addition do not preserve timber decking to be covered with an hma overlay with creosote .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
num timber treatment treat wood species according to aashto m num and awpa standards cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum and cnum as summarized in table num table num and table num .
num num treatment for timber posts type of wood locationenvironment allowable treatments awpa standard reference for minimum retention level southern pine soil or fresh water cca or pentachlorophenol cnum douglas fir soil or fresh water acza cnum num treatment for round timber piles type of wood locationenvironment allowable treatments awpa standard reference for minimum retention level southern pine soil or fresh water cca cnum southern pine marine cca cnum douglas fir soil or fresh water acza cnum douglas fir marine acza cnum num treatment for timber sheet piling and timber for structures type of wood locationenvironment allowable treatments awpa standard reference for minimum retention level southern pine soil or fresh water cca or pentachlorophenol cnum southern pine marine cca cnum douglas fir soil or fresh water acza cnum douglas fir marine acza cnum notify the me at least num days before treating timber .
if directed by the me perform an assay to determine the retention of preservative according to aashto m num .
submit certification of compliance as specified in num .
attach the assay report to the certification .
num timber connectors and hardware use timber connectors and hardware that conform to section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
galvanize timber connectors and hardware as specified in num .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
section num fiberglass composite materials num fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber provide fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber frpl that is listed on the qpl and conforms to the following material properties num .
plastic .
use plastic for frpl that is a mixture of one or more of the following recycled post consumer or post industrial thermoplastics hdpe mediumdensity polyethylene or lowdensity polyethylene .
mix the plastic with appropriate colorants ultraviolet inhibitors and antioxidants so that the resulting product meets the material property requirements specified in table num .
manufacture the frpl so that it does not absorb moisture corrode rot warp splinter or crack .
ensure that the outer skin is smooth and black in color .
use hindered amine light stabilizers to provide sufficient resistance to ultraviolet light degradation so as to meet the requirements in table num .
num table num plastic material properties property test method component requirement density astm d num skin num lbsftnum density astm e num core num lbsftnum water absorption astm d num skin num hrs num wt .
increase num hrs num wt .
increase brittleness astm d num skin no break at num f impact resistance astm d num skin greater than num ftlbsinch hardness astm d num skin num shore d abrasion cycles num wheel csnum load num lbs astm d num skin weight loss num g wear index num to num chemical resistance sea water gasoline no .
num diesel astm d num skincore num weight increase num weight increase num weight increase tensile properties astm d num skincore minimum num psi at break compressive modulus astm d num skincore minimum num ksi coefficient of friction astm f num skin maximum num wet or dry nail pullout astm d num skincore minimum num lbs num .
reinforcement .
reinforce frpl using fiberglass reinforcement rods spaced inside the num corners of the member .
reinforce num numinch and num numinch frpl with a minimum of four numinch diameter reinforcement rods placed in the corners of the section .
ensure that the reinforcement rods are continuous and have a minimum flexural strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num and a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num .
do not use steel reinforcement rods .
for frpl used for constructing platforms blocking and wales use at least num percent by weight of chopped glass reinforcement added to the polyethylene .
fiberglass rebar is not required for the smaller dimensional frpl .
num .
manufacturing .
manufacture frpl as one continuous piece with no joints or splices to the dimensions and tolerances specified in table num and consisting of a dense outer skin surrounding a less dense core .
ensure that interior voids do not exceed num inch in diameter and that the frpl is free of twist and curvature .
table num dimensions and tolerances plastic timber dimension tolerance length per order num in width as shown on plans num in height as shown on plans num in corner radius num inches num in outer skin thickness num inches num in distance from outer surface to rebar elements num inches num in straightness gap bend or bulge inside lying on a flat surface num in per num ft length num .
structural properties .
manufacture num numinch and num numinch frpl to conform to the minimum structural properties specified in table num .
manufacture smaller dimensional frpl for platforms and blocking to meet the minimum structural properties specified in table num .
num table num structural properties of num and numinch frpl property num numinch num numinch modulus of elasticity minimumnum num ksi num ksi stiffness e.i .
minimumnum numenum lbinnum numenum lbinnum yield stress in bending minimumnum num ksi num ksi weight num lbsft num lbsft num .
determine the modulus of elasticity stiffness and yield stress according astm d num and the following a .
use a deflection rate of num inches per minute .
b .
use a minimum span length of num feet to perform testing on a full size frpp specimen .
c. use the following equations for calculations num strain num depth of crosssection deflection span lengthnum num calculate the modulus at a strain of num inches per inch as follows modulus of elasticity load span lengthnum num deflection moment of inertia num calculate the yield stress from the maximum load reached prior to failure .
table num structural properties of frpl smaller than num inches property test method requirement modulus of elasticity minimum astm d num num psi flexural strength astm d num no fracture at num psi compressive strength minimum astm d num num psi compressive strength parallel to grain minimum astm d num num psi compressive strength perpendicular to grain minimum astm d num num psi screw withdrawal minimum astm d num num lbs submit a certification of compliance as specified in num with the test results for the plastic material properties attached .
num fiberglass reinforced plastic piles provide fiberglass reinforced plastic piles frpp that are listed on the qpl and conform to the following material properties num .
plastic .
use plastic for frpp that is a mixture of one or more of the following recycled postconsumer or postindustrial thermoplastics hdpe mediumdensity polyethylene or lowdensity polyethylene .
mix the plastic with appropriate colorants ultraviolet inhibitors and antioxidants so that the resulting product conforms to the material property requirements specified in table num .
manufacture the frpp so that it does not absorb moisture corrode rot warp splinter or crack .
ensure that the outer skin is smooth and black in color .
use hindered amine light stabilizers to provide sufficient resistance to ultraviolet light degradation so as to meet the requirements in table num .
num table num plastic material properties property test method component requirement density astm d num skin numlbsftnum density astm e num core numlbsftnum water absorption astm dnum skin num hrs num wt .
increase num hrs num wt .
increase brittleness astm d num skin no break at num f impact resistance astm d num skin greater than num ftlbsinch hardness astm d num skin num shore d abrasionnum astm d num skin weight loss numg wear index num to num chemical resistance in sea water in gasoline in no .
num diesel astm d num skincore num weight increase num weight increase num weight increase tensile properties astm d num skincore minimum num psi at break compressive modulus astm d num skincore minimum num ksi coefficient of friction astm f num skin maximum num wet or dry nail pullout astm d num skincore minimum num lbs num .
the duration of the abrasion test will be num cycles using a csnum wheel with a load of num pounds .
num .
reinforcement .
reinforce frpp using fiberglass reinforcement rods spaced evenly around the inside perimeter of the pile .
reinforce numinch outside diameter od frpp with a minimum of six numinch diameter fiberglass reinforcement rods .
reinforce numinch od frpp with a minimum of twelve numinch diameter fiberglass reinforcement rods .
reinforce numinch od frpp with a minimum of sixteen numinch diameter fiberglass reinforcement rods .
ensure that reinforcement rods are continuous and have a minimum flexural strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num and a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num .
do not use steel reinforcement rods .
for frpp use at least num percent by weight of chopped glass reinforcement added to the polyethylene .
num .
manufacturing .
manufacture frpp as one continuous piece with no joints or splices to the dimensions and tolerances specified in table num and consisting of a dense outer skin surrounding a less dense core .
ensure that interior voids do not exceed num inch in diameter and that the frpp is free of twist and curvature .
table num dimensions and tolerances frpp dimension tolerance length per order num ft max num in num in outside diameter num in num in num in num in outer skin thickness num in num in num in num in distance from outer surface to rebar elements frpp num in num in num in num in straightness gap bend or inside lying on a flat surface num in per num feet num .
structural properties .
manufacture numinch od numinch od and numinch od frpp to conform to the minimum structural properties specified in table num .
conduct tests for structural properties on a fullscale product of the specified size .
calculate the properties specified in table num using standard elastic beam flexure formulas as found in references such as machinerys handbook and formulas for stress and strain by roark and young .
report the stiffness ei as the average of the stiffness at all measurement locations between zero load and half the load corresponding to the specification yield stress .
if the frpp fails before reaching the specified minimum yield stress in bending do not use the frpp .
calculate the stress at the load point on the tension side of the frpp .
num the manufacturer may extend results of these tests through engineering calculations to a product of another size only if the other size has the same or smaller crosssection than the tested product .
do not use smaller crosssections to predict the performance of larger crosssections .
table num structural properties member size numinch od numinch od numinch od modulus of elasticitynum minimum num ksi num ksi num ksi stiffness ei minimum numenum lbinnum numenum lbinnum numenum lbinnum yield stress in bending minimum num ksi num ksi num ksi bending moment at yield minimum num inkips num inkips num inkips weight num lbsft num lbsft num lbsft num .
determine the modulus of elasticity stiffness and yield stress according astm d num and the following a .
use a deflection rate of num inches per minute .
b .
use a minimum span length of num feet to perform testing on a full size frpp specimen .
c. use the following equations for calculations num strain num depth of crosssection deflection span lengthnum num calculate the modulus at a strain of num inches per inch as follows modulus of elasticity load span lengthnum num deflection moment of inertia num calculate the yield stress from the maximum load reached prior to failure .
num .
recoverable deflection .
manufacture frpp to exhibit recoverable deflection properties .
ensure that frpp does not exhibit more than a num percent reduction in bending stiffness ei when cyclically load tested .
for a minimum of num load cycles use a numpoint load condition with a minimum numfoot clear span and a minimum numfoot shear span .
ensure that the applied load produces a minimum of num percent of the frpps bending moment at yield .
calculate the bending moment at yield as follows c f i m where m bending moment at yield inlbs .
f yield stress in bending lbinnum .
i moment of inertia of crosssection innum .
c distance from neutral axis to point where stress is desired inches .
num .
wrapping .
provide numinch diameter steel cable numinch od covering polypropylene impregnated wire rope for wrapping frpp that are to be placed in clusters .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num with the test results for the plastic material properties of the frpp attached .
num fiberglassconcrete composite piles provide fiberglassconcrete composite piles fccp consisting of a hollow composite tube a concrete core and a durable coating .
ensure that the fccp is listed on the qpl and conforms to the following material properties num .
composite tubes .
produce composite tubes of composite frp fiber reinforced polymer materials that have been formed by means of pultrusion filament winding or resin infusion molding processes .
in the shell incorporate eglass or other continuous fiber reinforcement that is impregnated with vinyl ester polyester or epoxy resin .
ensure that the wall is num to num percent glass with a minimum of num percent resin by weight .
ensure that the tubes to be used in the fccp provide sufficient crosssection and strength to withstand stresses incurred during fabrication handling and driving of the piles to the required resistance .
manufacture the composite tubes according to the tolerances specified in table num .
num table num tolerances for composite tubes property tolerance minimum length num foot num inches maximum sweepnum num of total length ends out of square num of diameter num .
sweep is the deviation from straightness measured at several points around the pile circumference while the pile is not subjected to bending stresses .
in the manufacture of composite tubes use fiberglass products specified in table num and conforming astm d num or astm d num .
include an ultraviolet inhibitor in the fiberglass resin .
table num requirements for fiberglass composite tubes class rtrp reinforced thermosetting resin pipe type type i filament wound grade grade num glass fiber reinforced epoxy resin pipe grade num glass fiber reinforced polyester resin pipe or vinylester resin manufacture fiberglass tubes to conform to the physical properties specified in table num .
table num physical properties of composite tube nominal tube diameter stress direction test method numinch numinch numinch axialtensile astm d num num num num axialcompressive astm d num num num num elastic moduli ksi hooptensile astm d num num num num axialtensile astm d num num num num axialcompressive astm d num num num num strength ksi hooptensile astm d num num num num wall thickness num num num num .
modify astm d num as follows num test specimen dimensions diameter is equal to full diameter of tube being tested and height is equal to num inch .
num do not use the compression tool described in astm d num .
center the specimen in the compression testing machine and place a steel plate on top of the specimen to distribute the load from the test machine .
num .
coating .
apply an ultraviolet resistant film coating of a minimum nummil thickness to portions of piles remaining exposed after installation .
use a coating that has a permanent color of gray or black .
num .
allowable degradation .
ensure that the total ultraviolet resistance provided by resin inhibitors and color film is sufficient to limit the loss of properties as specified in table num .
conduct exposure testing according to one of the following astm methods g num g num g num or b num .
table num allowable degradation of coated composite tubenum property test method maximum allowable loss axial tensile strength loss astm d num num axial compressive strength loss astm d num num hoop tensile strength loss astm d num num color film adhesion loss astm d num num num .
after exposure to light and salt spray for a duration of num hours num .
modify astm d num as follows num test specimen dimensions diameter is equal to full diameter of tube being tested and height is equal to num inch .
num do not use the compression tool described in astm d num .
center the specimen in the compression testing machine and place a steel plate on top of the specimen to distribute the load from the test machine .
num num .
dimensional and physical stability .
ensure that the dimensional and physical stability of materials used in the manufacture of composite piles conforms to the evaluation criteria of astm d num .
num .
concrete .
for infill of fccp use class a concrete as specified in num .
in addition use a composite tube with a textured inside surface a chemical bonding agent or shrinkage compensating concrete to establish a positive connection between the composite tube and concrete core to ensure composite action .
num .
ultimate flexural strength .
ensure that the ultimate flexural strength value for a numinch nominal dimension fccp is at least num inchkips .
for design of cyclically loaded bridge pier protection applications assume an ultimate flexural strength value for the fccp of num inchkips .
num .
wrapping .
provide numinch diameter steel cable numinch outside diameter covering polypropylene impregnated wire rope for wrapping fccp that are to be placed in clusters .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num with the test results for the fiberglass composite material properties and the concrete infill compressive strengths of the fccp attached .
section num landscaping materials num topsoil provide topsoil containing no stones lumps roots or similar objects larger than num inches in any dimension .
ensure that topsoil meets the following quality standards num .
unacceptable topsoil sources .
do not obtain topsoil from the following sources num .
areas containing chemically contaminated soils .
num .
areas from which the original surface has been stripped or covered over such as borrow pits open mines demolition sites dumps and landfills .
num .
wet excavation .
num .
acid producing soils .
num. ph .
provide topsoil that conforms to the ph requirements specified in table num when tested according to astm d num .
table num requirements for ph of topsoil ph range acceptabilityremediation ph num topsoil is unacceptable .
num ph num add pulverized lime to increase the ph to num before use .
num ph num topsoil is acceptable .
no remediation needed .
num ph num decrease ph to at least num before use.num ph num topsoil is unacceptable.num num .
obtain departmental approval of remediation method to lower ph .
num .
the department may approve the use of existing topsoil stripped from the project limits with a ph greater than num .
num .
organic content .
ensure that topsoil has a minimum organic content of num percent by weight .
if the organic content is less than num percent increase the organic content by adding soil additives as specified in num at a rate necessary to attain the minimum organic content .
the department will determine the organic content of soils according to aashto t num except that the sample is to be taken from ovendried soil passing a no .
num sieve .
num .
gradationparticle size .
provide topsoil conforming to the particle size requirements in table num and that has no more than num percent retained on a no .
num sieve when mechanically graded .
the department will determine the particle size distribution for the portion of the topsoil passing the no .
num sieve using hydrometer analysis according to aashto t num .
num table num particle size distribution for topsoil particle size percent sand num mm to num mm num num silt num mm to num mm num num clay num mm and smaller num num num .
if more than num percent of the sand portion is larger than num millimeters the allowable range for clay is num to num percent .
the department will sample topsoil at a rate of at least num sample per source to ensure conformance to the requirements .
num soil additives num composted sewerage sludge use composted sewerage sludge consisting of a stabilized screened mixture of wood chips and sewerage sludge processed according to njdep .
obtain composted sewerage sludge from facilities operating in compliance with a new jersey pollutant discharge elimination system permit or under an approved njdep memorandum of agreement .
ensure that the compost product is registered with the new jersey department of agriculture according to the new jersey commercial fertilizer and soil conditioner act of num .
use composted sewerage sludge that has a minimum organic content of num percent by weight and a ph of num or greater .
if the average water content of the stabilized composted sludge exceeds num percent by weight correct for the excess water content .
for shipments of composted sewerage sludge provide delivery tickets with the certified weight and the name of the producer or supplier .
the department may take samples to verify the organic content ph and water content .
num compost use compost that is a stable humuslike organic material produced by the biological and biochemical decomposition of sourceseparated compostable materials .
materials used in producing compost may include leaves yard trimmings food scraps food processing residuals manure other agricultural residuals forest residues bark and paper .
do not add non organic materials such as sand soil or glass to the compost .
ensure that the compost contains no heavy metals or substances toxic to plants and has no objectionable odor .
ensure that the raw materials have decomposed sufficiently to be unrecognizable and that the compost meets the requirements of table num .
table num requirements for compost property test method requirement organic content minimum astm d num num moisture content astm d num num num particle size percent passing the num sieve aashto t num num ph tmecc num num num maturity solvita maturity test num or higher soluble salt maximum determined using num part compost to num part distilled water num mmhoscm num .
electrometric ph determination according to the test methods for the examination of composting and compost tmecc by the us composting council provide compost that is either commercially packaged or in bulk form .
obtain compost material from njdep regulated permitted or approved facilities .
for shipments of compost provide delivery tickets with the certified weight and the name of the producer or supplier .
the department may take samples to verify the organic content ph and water content .
num fertilizer use fertilizer for establishing turf that has a commercial designation of num or use any num ratio fertilizer containing a minimum of num percent nitrogen num percent available phosphoric acid and num percent soluble potash .
num if the fertilizer is to be applied with mechanical spreader in dry form ensure that a minimum of num percent passes a no .
num sieve a minimum of num percent is retained on a no .
num sieve and the maximum free moisture content is num percent .
use fertilizer for establishing sod that is any num ratio fertilizer containing a minimum of num percent nitrogen num percent available phosphoric acid and num percent soluble potash .
with each delivery of fertilizer provide a delivery ticket showing the weight and a certified chemical analysis of the composition of the fertilizer from the manufacturer .
num pulverized limestone use pulverized limestone composed of more than num percent calcium and magnesium carbonates equivalent to more than num percent calcium and magnesium oxides .
with each delivery of pulverized limestone provide a delivery ticket indicating its weight and a certified analysis of the chemical composition and gradation including calcium and magnesium oxide equivalents .
num seed mixtures num grass seed mixtures provide grass seed mixtures that are not older than the sell by date and that conform to the requirements specified in table num through table num .
table num type a grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent percent of total weight of mixture kentucky bluegrass num num num red fescues creeping or chewings num num num kentucky num num num num redtop num num num perennial ryegrass num num num white clover num num num table num type anum grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent percent of total weight of mixture tall fescue num num num kentucky bluegrass num num num chewing or hard fescue num num num perennial ryegrass num num num table num type anum grass seed mixture kind of seed percent of total weight of mixture spreading fescue num chewing or hard fescue num kentucky bluegrass num perennial rye num num table num type b grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent percent of total weight of mixture redtop num num num red fescues creeping or chewings num num num blackwells switchgrass num num num weeping love grass num num num perennial ryegrass num num num kentucky num num num num table num type d grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent percent of total weight of mixture kentucky bluegrass num num num red fescues creeping or chewings num num num redtop num num num perennial ryegrass num num num table num type f grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent perennial ryegrass num num table num type w wetland grass seed mixture kind of seed minimum purity percent minimum germination percent percent of total weight of mixture blackwell switchgrass panicum virgatum num num num virginia wildrye elymus virginicus num num num red top agrostis alba num num num annual rye lolium multiflorum num num num num wildflower seed mixture provide wildflower seeds that conform to the requirements in table num .
table num wildflower seed mixture kind of seed by weight per acre coreopsis lanceolata num oz .
rudbeckia hirta num oz .
echinacea purpurea num oz .
festuca ovina num oz .
total num oz .
num shipment and certification with each shipment of seed mixture provide a certified weigh ticket and an analysis of the composition purity germination germination test date and sell by date of the seed mixture certified by the seed house .
the department may sample and test seed according to the new jersey state seed law and with the rules and regulations for testing seeds adopted by the association of official seed analysts .
num num mulch num straw use straw that is derived from threshed unrotted stalks of oat wheat rye or barley and that is relatively free from seeds noxious weeds and other foreign material .
num wood cellulose fiber use wood cellulose fiber containing no growth or germination inhibiting materials .
with each shipment provide a manufacturers certification indicating composition and weight .
num shredded wood and wood chip use shredded wood mulch produced by a shredding machine that produces a wood particle varying in size from num to num inches or use wood chip mulch produced by a wood chipping machine that produces a wood particle varying in size from num to num inches .
ensure that the shredded wood mulch and wood chip mulch are clean hard and not decomposed and contain no leaves twigs wood shavings dirt stones toxic material or other foreign material .
do not use wood pallets chemically treated wood or materials from building demolition to produce mulch .
ensure that the ph is above num .
submit samples of shredded or wood chip mulch before delivery to the project .
the department will visually inspect each shipment of shredded or wood chip mulch .
obtain the departments approval before using wood mulch that is produced within the project limits .
with each shipment provide a delivery ticket and a certification that the material was not derived from wood pallets chemically treated wood or material from building demolition .
num shredded hardwood bark use shredded hardwood bark mulch derived from the bark of hardwood trees .
ensure that it contains no leaves twigs wood shavings dirt stones weed seeds toxic material or other foreign material .
with each shipment provide a delivery ticket indicating source and weight of the shredded hardwood bark .
num stone for stone mulch use coarse aggregate no .
num as specified in num .
before use submit a sample for the departments approval of size and color .
with each shipment provide a delivery ticket indicating source and weight of the stone mulch .
num gravel for gravel mulch use an uncrushed washed gravel no .
num as specified in num .
before use submit a sample for the departments approval of size and color .
with each shipment provide a delivery ticket indicating source and weight of the gravel mulch .
num tackifiers provide num of the following tackifiers for straw mulch num .
fiber mulch .
use fiber mulch made from wood or plant fibers containing no growth or germination inhibiting materials .
num .
synthetic plastic emulsion .
use synthetic plastic emulsion that is miscible with all normally available water when diluted to any proportions is not soluble or dispersible in water after drying and remains tacky until the grass seed has germinated .
ensure that the plastic binder is physiologically harmless and does not have phytotoxic or cropdamaging properties .
num .
vegetable based gels .
vegetable based gels are naturally occurring powderbased hydrophilic additives formulated to produce gels and form membrane networks of water insoluble polymers after curing .
ensure that the vegetable gel is physiologically harmless and does not have phytotoxic or cropdamaging properties .
num num topsoil stabilization matting num type num mat provide type num mats conforming to the following num .
excelsior mat .
provide wood excelsior num num inch in width and weighing num pounds per square yard num percent that is covered on both sides with a biodegradable netting to facilitate handling and to increase strength .
num .
jute mat .
provide a cloth of a uniform plain weave of undyed and unbleached single jute yarn num num inch in width and weighing an average of num pounds per linear yard of cloth with a tolerance of num percent with approximately num warp ends per width of cloth and num weft ends per linear yard of cloth .
ensure that the yarn is of a loosely twisted construction having an average twist of not less than num turns per inch and does not vary in thickness by more than onehalf its normal diameter .
num type num mat erosion control mulch blanket provide a machineproduced mat of organic biodegradable mulch material such as straw coconut fiber or other approved materials that is covered on both sides with a num numinch photodegradable polypropylene mesh netting .
ensure that the mesh contains an accelerant that will cause breakdown of the mesh within num months .
ensure that the type num mat conforms to the property values specified in table num .
table num requirements for type num mat property test method minimum requirement mass per unit area of blanket astm d num num lbydnum performance shear stress of num lbftnum astm d num acceptable breaking force astm d num num lbft num type num mat turf reinforcement mat trm provide a machineproduced numdimensional matrix of uv stabilized pre or postconsumer nondegradable synthetic fibers filaments nettings andor wire mesh designed for permanent and critical hydraulic applications where design discharge velocities and shear stresses exceed the limits of mature natural vegetation .
ensure that the trm provides sufficient thickness strength and void space to allow soil filling or retention and the development of vegetation within the matrix .
ensure that the trm conforms to the property values specified in table num .
table num requirements for trm property test method minimum requirement thickness astm d num num in .
performance shear stress of num lbftnum astm d num acceptable breaking force astm d num num lbft uv stability num hours astm d num num num type num mat mechanically bonded fiber matrix mbfm provide a hydraulically applied flexible erosion control blanket composed of long strand thermally processed wood fibers crimped interlocking fibers and performance enhancing additives .
ensure that the mbfm requires no curing period and upon application forms an intimate bond with the soil surface creating a continuous porous absorbent erosion resistant blanket that allows for rapid germination and accelerated plant growth .
ensure that the mbfm conforms to the property values specified in table num .
num table num requirements for mbfm property test method minimum requirement physical mass per unit area astm d num num ozydnum thickness astm d num num in percent light penetration astm d num num water holding capacity astm wknum num color fugitive dye observed green endurance functional longevity observed num yr performance cover factor num inhr event ectc test method no .
num num percent effectiveness ectc test method no .
num num shear stress ectc test method no .
num num lbftnum num sod machine cut sod at a uniform soil thickness of num num inch at the time of cutting .
exclude top growth and thatch when measuring for thickness .
ensure that individual strips of sod are of a uniform width .
the department may reject broken strips and torn or uneven strips .
if using strip sod ensure that the strips of sod are strong enough to support their own weight and retain their size and shape when suspended vertically from the upper num percent of the strip .
if using rolled sod ensure that the sod is strong enough to be mechanically laid and adjusted without tearing .
use sod that is kentucky bluegrass blend or kentucky bluegrassfescue blend inspected and certified by the new jersey department of agriculture .
fasten sod on slopes using pegs of wood lath or similar pieces of wood that are at least num inches long .
submit certification at the time of delivery that lists the blend of grass seed used .
num plant materials a. nomenclature .
plant materials are trees shrubs vines seedlings ground covers perennials bulbs corms tubers ornamental grasses and other plants conforming to the american standard for nursery stock ansi znum sponsored by the american nursery and landscape association .
hortus iii is the authority for all plant names .
ensure that all plants are legibly labeled with their botanical names including english name genus species variety and cultivar .
b .
quality requirements .
ensure that the plant materials are healthy vigorous and true to species variety and cultivar with welldeveloped branch and root systems typical of the genus species variety and cultivar .
use plant materials that are free from disfiguring knots gall sun scald injuries bark abrasions fresh or healed mechanical wounds or other objectionable disfigurements .
ensure that the average plant size falls within the middle of the allowable size range .
the department will reject plant materials that are weak or thin or that have been cut back from larger grades .
ensure that containergrown plants are well established in the container and have a root mass that will retain its shape and hold together when removed from the container but that does not exhibit circling or kinked roots .
do not use collected or salvaged plant material except as specified .
provide certifications to the re that the plant materials were inspected for diseases and infestation according to the applicable federal state and local laws rules and regulations .
num .
trees .
ensure that the following quality standards are met num .
tree crowns are well balanced symmetrical and typical for the genus species and cultivar .
num .
trees have a single relatively straight central leader and tapered trunks and are free of co dominant stems and vigorous upright branches that compete with the central leader .
ensure that if the original leader has been headed a new leader at least num the diameter of the original leader is present .
num .
main branches exhibit uniform scaffolding both radially around and vertically along the trunk are well spaced with diameters no greater than num the diameter of the trunk measured num inch above the branch and are free of included bark .
num num .
trunk diameters and tapers are sufficient so that the trees will remain vertical without the support of a nursery stake .
num .
root collars root crowns and large roots are free of circling or kinked roots .
num .
shrubs .
ensure that the following quality standards are met num .
shrubs have the correct number of canes for the genus species cultivar and size and are not several individual plants combined to appear as one plant .
num .
branches and canes are strong enough to support themselves .
num .
roots are well developed and free of circling or kinks .
num .
container grown plants are transplanted and grown in the same container for a sufficient period of time so that new fibrous roots have developed and the root mass will retain its shape and hold together when removed from the container .
num .
perennial plants .
ensure that the following quality standards are met num .
provide bulbs corms and tubers that are firm free of rot and disease and were not previously frozen .
num .
for hemerocallis provide plants that are established and have num to num fan divisions with a heavy root system .
ensure that container grown plants were transplanted and grown in the same container for a sufficient period of time so that new fibrous roots have developed and the root mass will retain its shape and hold together when removed from the container .
num .
for narcissus provide bulbs that are at a minimum large size grade designated as dnii or rdii .
num .
for other perennials flowers and ornamental grasses provide plants according to the suppliers recommendations for each individual cultivar .
ensure that plants are established plants and are a single species plant grown or transplanted and grown in the same container for a sufficient period of time so that fibrous roots have developed and so that the root mass will retain its shape and hold together when removed from the container .
c. substitutions .
to request substitutions provide written verification to the department that an attempt was made to locate the contract item at a minimum of num different nursery sources that would normally supply the item but that the item was found to be unavailable for planting before the completion .
upon receipt of the documentation the department may allow alternates for unavailable plant materials .
do not make substitutions without the departments approval .
d. ball sizes for nursery grown trees and shrubs .
ensure that the ball sizes of nursery grown trees and shrubs conform to the requirements specified in table num through table num .
table num required ball sizes of shade trees and deciduous shrubs shade trees deciduous shrubs caliper inches minimum diameter inches height feet minimum diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num required ball sizes of small trees height feet minimum diameter inches caliper inches minimum diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num required ball sizes of columnar conifers regular growing type rapid growing type height feet minimum diameter inches height feet minimum diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num required ball sizes of conifers and broadleaf evergreens spreading semispreading and globe or dwarf type conical and broad upright type height feet minimum diameter inches height feet minimum diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num container sizes container minimum diameter inches minimum depth inches num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num e. ball sizes for collected trees and shrubs .
ensure that the ball sizes of collected trees and shrubs are greater than or equal to that specified for the next larger size for nursery grown trees and shrubs .
consider trees grown in plantations reforestation plantations or without the benefit of root pruning as collected material and ball and burlap the trees as specified for collected trees .
f. ball depths .
ensure that balls are of sufficient depth to encompass the fibrous and feeding root system necessary for the full recovery of the plant and conform to the requirements specified in table num .
table num required ball depths diameter of ballnum inches up to num over num to num over num to num minimum depth of ballnum percentage of diameter num num num num .
dimensions may vary according to site and type of plant material as provided in the american standard for nursery stock .
g. plant support materials .
provide the following materials as necessary to support plants during the establishment period num .
posts .
use white cedar posts that have a diameter of not less than num or more than num inches at the thinner end or use wooden posts that have a nominal size of num num inches of solid reasonably knotfree lumber .
ensure that the length of either post is onehalf the height of the plant to be supported plus a minimum of num feet for setting in the ground except the maximum overall length of any post is num feet .
num .
wood guy stakes .
use wood guy stakes with a nominal size num numinch lumber with a minimum length of num feet of solid and reasonably knotfree wood or use numinch diameter white cedar with a minimum length num of num feet .
measure the diameter of the cedar stakes at the thinner end .
ensure that the stakes are pointed on the thinner end .
notch guy stakes num inches from the top for fastening the guy wires .
num .
guy wire .
use num gauge steel wire for guy wire .
num .
hose .
use numinch od black cordedrubber hose .
num .
tree protectors .
use num of the following tree protectors num .
plastic wraparoundthetrunk type dark brown dark gray or dark green in color .
num .
wire mesh num numinch mesh forming a numinch diameter cylinder around the trunk with the abutting edges fastened together with wire .
h. inspection .
inspect and seal all plants in the nursery before they are shipped .
provide the seal numbers to the department .
if requested by the department make the following available for inspection num .
containerized plants before shipping and inground plants before digging .
num .
delivered plants .
num .
plants during installation .
the department may inspect plant materials before delivery to the project limits and upon delivery to the project limits before installation .
the department may seal the inspected plant materials .
for plant material originating from nurseries further than num miles from the project limits stock plant material at a contractorprovided holding yard that is acceptable to the department .
the department may inspect plant material originating from nurseries within num miles of the project limits at the nursery .
ensure that all plant material is untied and located so that trunk or stem and branch structure can be easily inspected .
provide sufficient notice to allow department inspection at the nursery or holding yard and to allow time for contractor reordering of rejected material .
notify the re at least num hours in advance of delivery to the project limits for installation .
the department will reject materials arriving with broken or missing seals broken or loose balls broken or pruned leaders insufficient protection or that have been damaged in transit .
the department may randomly inspect the root system of the plant material by breaking open the earth balls .
provide necessary assistance during department inspections .
i .
shipment .
ensure that deciduous materials are completely dormant when they are dug .
to prevent injury to fibrous roots carefully dig plant materials immediately before shipment .
ball and burlap plant material marked bb on the plans .
ensure that the following plant materials are drum laced or machine dug with wire baskets num .
shade trees num inch caliper and larger .
num .
small trees num inch caliper and larger .
num .
columnar conifers num feet and taller .
num .
spreading semispreading and globe or dwarf type conifers num inches in diameter and larger .
num .
conical and broad upright type conifers num feet and taller .
num .
spreading semispreading and globe or dwarf type broadleaf evergreens num inches spread and larger .
num .
conical and broad upright type broadleaf evergreens num inches and taller .
use biodegradable materials for burlapping and tying .
do not use nonbiodegradable materials such as plastic or nylon .
protect material that is shipped in open vehicles to prevent desiccation from exposure to the wind and sun .
adequately ventilate material shipped in enclosed vans or boxcars .
at time of delivery provide a delivery ticket indicating the date and origin of shipment and the botanical names sizes grades and the quantities of plants .
provide a nursery certification that the plants are true to specified genus species and variety and are of the specified size and quality .
for hemerocallis narcissus bulbs corms tubers roots rhizomes and other perennials provide suppliers certification of botanical name including genus species variety and cultivar .
the department will verify the variety and cultivar before use on location .
num num miscellaneous landscape materials num disinfectant use methyl alcohol at num percent denatured wood alcohol diluted appropriately with water or commercial bleach .
num antidesiccant use a polyvinyl antidesiccant .
num herbicides use a glyphosate based herbicide .
apply herbicides according to n.j.a.c num et seq .
section num electrical materials num conduit and fittings ensure that exposed conduit and fittings on sign structures are aluminum conforming to ul standards for rigid metallic conduit .
use fittings and accessories for aluminum conduit that are made of aluminum or stainless steel .
ensure that conduit and fittings used as a raceway for the installation of wires and cables conform to the following num .
rigid nonmetallic conduit .
for rigid nonmetallic conduit use pvc conduit made from virgin polyvinyl resins conforming to astm d num class numb .
ensure that the conduit exceeds all the property requirements including impact strength chemical resistance and flammability as listed in ul num and nema tc num .
use rigid nonmetallic conduit that is type ii schedule num suitable for direct burial under ground in grass andor berm areas and schedule num under roadways .
use fittings that are made from highimpact pvc are the socket type and are joined to the conduit using pvc solvent cement .
ensure that fittings including couplings conform to nema tc num .
use solvent cement to join pvc conduit that is a heavybodied cement complying with astm d num and apply with a natural bristle or nylon brush .
num .
rigid metallic conduit .
for rigid metallic conduit and fittings use steel that conforms to ul num ul numb and ansi cnum .
manufacture steel conduit from milled steel tubing with a wall thickness equivalent to schedule num pipe .
hot dip galvanize the conduit for the entire length including the threads .
ensure that the minimum weight of galvanized coating is num ounce per square foot .
supply electrogalvanized couplings .
manufacture rigid metallic conduit sweep elbows to conform to ul num .
fabricate aluminum conduit and fittings from a copperfree corrosionresistant aluminum alloy conforming to astm b num alloy numtnum .
num .
flexible metallic conduit .
use flexible metal conduit that consists of spirally wound steel core covered with a pvc jacket manufactured according to federal specification aanum for liquidtight flexible metal conduit .
ensure that associated fittings are of like material and provide positive grounding and a liquidtight seal .
ensure that flexible metal conduit for use on sign structures has an aluminum core with a neoprene jacket .
num .
flexible nonmetallic conduit .
use flexible hdpe conduit made from a virgin hdpe resin according to the minimum standard of penumx according to astm d num .
ensure resin properties meet or exceed the values listed for hdpe .
ensure hdpe is according to astm d num astm f num and nema tcnum .
ensure the inner wall is ribbed and lubricated with the manufacturers recommended lubricant .
ensure that the conduit is extruded coilable tubing and is integrally colored orange .
a .
direct burial .
use conduit material with a wall rating of sdrnum and is listed for its intended purpose .
b. innerduct .
use conduit that has a schedule num wall rating and is manufactured in accordance with ul specifications .
num submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num cable and wire the manufacturer shall provide to the re and the contractor all splicing and terminating information necessary for proper installation of the cables and wires .
ensure that conductors are made of stranded copper and conform to the standard rules of the american institute of electrical engineers and of the national board of fire underwriters .
do not use conductors that are smaller than no .
num awg or brown and sharp gage .
ensure that conductors are soft annealed copper wire according to astm b num class b for tincoated conductors or are bare copper conductors according to astm b num class b .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num loop detector lead use only one type of loop detector lead on the project .
num loop wire ensure that the loop wire is thermoplastic single conductor wire with a numinch pvc tube or numinch hdpe tube extruded over the loop detector wire is manufactured in conformance with icea publication no .
snumnema publication no .
wcnum and conforms to the following num .
for the conductor use no .
num awg softdrawn copper wire with numwire class c stranding or numwire class b stranding conforming to astm b num and astm b num .
num .
use insulation that conforms to ul type thhnthwn and is rated for num volts .
num .
use extruded pvc tubing that is ul listed frnum rated at num f with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
ensure that the tubing is chemical resistant and oil resistant with a moisture absorption of less than num percent .
use hdpe tubing that is ul listed with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
num multiple lighting and service wire use wire conforming to current iceanema standards publication for crosslinkedthermosettingpolyethylene insulated wire and cable for the transmission and distribution of electrical energy icea publication no .
snum numnema publication no .
wc num and ul type rhwuse .
ensure that the insulation is a heatresistant moistureresistant submarine compound conforming to icea publication no .
snumnema publication no .
wc num except for the thickness of insulation .
for all conductors use insulation that is required for numvolt rated circuit voltage according to table num for crosslinkedthermosettingpolyethylene insulated power cables column a of icea publication no .
snumnema publication no .
wc num .
num traffic signal cable use only one type of traffic signal cable on the project .
num bonding and grounding materials for rigid metallic conduit with a diameter of num inch or more use bushings that are hotdip galvanized or electro galvanized malleable iron with a bakelite nylon or some other type of heatresistant plastic molded and locked into the bushing .
use an aluminum bronze copper or other corrosionresistant metal lug .
ensure that the set screws lug mounting and binding screws are stainless steel .
the contractor may use threadless bushings at specific locations where the conduit is not threaded .
fabricate insulating bushings for rigid metallic conduit with a diameter of less than num inch of molded highimpact thermoset plastic with a high dielectric and mechanical strength .
bond the conduit with bonding lock nuts .
do not use bushings made of materials that support combustion .
use ground wire that is bare or insulated with a conductor that is numstrand softdrawn copper conforming to astm b num class b .
ensure that bare conductors are tinned .
for insulated conductors cover the conductor with an insulation that meets or exceeds the requirements of ul type thw .
num use ground rods that are num inch in diameter and num feet long composed of a steel core with copper covering .
thoroughly weld the num metals so that an interlocking crystalline union is secured between the num metals .
ensure that the minimum thickness of the copper on the cylindrical portion of the rod averages at least num inch .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num cable connectors use cable connectors that are fused for on line wires and nonfused on neutral wires .
ensure that the connectors are a waterproof inline type connector and are composed of a line side and a load side housing each made of waterresistant synthetic rubber .
in each housing include a section to form a watertight seal around the cable an interior arrangement to receive and retain the copper fuse contacts and a watertight seal section at the point of disconnection .
use contacts that are spring loaded designed for a maximum current of num amperes at num volts and have a num percent minimum conductivity .
ensure that the contacts are suitable for gripping a cartridgetype midget fuse .
ensure that the fuse is num inch in diameter and num inches in length and is rated at num amperes and that the contacts are fully annealed and compressed onto the cable .
determine the size of each housing based on the cable diameter .
permanently mark each side of the housing as either load side or line side .
submit manufacturers certification for all materials components and assemblies as specified in num .
num resin splicing kits a .
traffic signals .
ensure that resin splicing kits are of a type having a soft plastic sealing packet and meet or exceed the conductors insulation voltage rating .
b .
highway lighting and its .
ensure that resin splicing kits are of a type having a rigid molded plastic casing that is capable of being split laterally to allow insertion of the conductors .
ensure that the resin splicing kits meet or exceed the conductors insulation voltage rating and are suitable for use with the insulation material .
num electrical tape a .
friction tape .
use friction tape that is the selfsticking rubberimpregnated woven cotton fabric type .
b. insulating tape .
use insulating tape that is selfbonding and designed for use with crosslinked polyethylene or rubberinsulated wire and cable and that provides a permanent electrical and watertight seal .
c. jacket tape .
use jacket tape that is a conformable vinyl plastic electrical tape is flame retardant water resistant and cold weather pliable .
ensure that the tape is heavyduty with a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per inch a minimum adhesion of num ounces per inch and a minimum thickness of num mils .
num cable racks use cable racks that are molded polycarbonate and have a dielectric strength of less than num microamps at num volts .
ensure that the polycarbonate used in the construction of the rack is fire retardant with an senum rating .
use a cable rack that is num inches wide and num feet long in groundinstalled junction boxes or that is num inches wide and num foot long in structures .
ensure that the cable rack contains num saddle arms with a capacity of num inches .
as an alternative the contractor may use steel cable racks that consist of a steel channel welded steel supports a clip and porcelain insulators for each support .
hotdip galvanize all steel components .
use a cable rack that is approximately num feet long with num supports in ground installed boxes and num inches long with num support in junction boxes located on structures .
space support holes on the channel approximately num inches on center .
ensure that the cable supports are designed with an interlocking feature at the rear of the support to prevent tilting and that the installed cable supports extend approximately num inches from the rack .
construct the porcelain insulator required on each support with a hook bottom groove to prevent slipping .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num cast boxes and fittings use cast boxes with suitable covers of like material held in place with stainless steel fasteners and sealed with a weatherproof neoprene gasket .
num provide mounting lugs with cast boxes .
ensure that all mounting hardware is stainless steel .
for cast iron boxes conform to the requirements specified in num .
hotdip galvanize cast iron boxes and covers .
use aluminum boxes and covers that are either sand cast conforming to astm b num alloy numf or numtnum or die cast conforming to astm b num alloy numtnum .
use junction boxes for underdeck lighting that are cast iron of approved design suited and adapted to the specific location and the number of conduit nipples and other required details .
use flushtype boxes for installation in a structure and surfacemountedtype boxes in all surface applications .
ensure that the cover has a neoprene gasket and is secured with stainless steel screws .
if required equip the box with busses to provide at least num full threads or a ul approved watertight rigid conduit hub at each entry point of the conduit .
use cast aluminum for pull boxes and pull fittings exposed on sign structures .
use boxes that are of approved design suited and adapted to the specific location and the number and arrangement of conduit and other details for the installation .
ensure that boxes have external lugs for mounting and internal mounting buttons for mounting equipment .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num cabinets for cabinets use aluminum alloy conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum .
label the door of all meter and control equipment cabinets other than traffic signal cabinets with a permanent reflective metallic sign indicating the voltage and the word danger .
apply the sign on a numinch minimum thickness aluminum alloy sheet .
use lettering that is approximately num inches high and is red on a white background .
install the sign with num stainless steel vandal proof screws .
seal a print of the system field wiring in plastic and attach it to the inside of the door of each meter cabinet control equipment and controller cabinet .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num panel boards and circuit breakers a .
traffic signals .
use panel boards that are singlephase numwire numvolt with numampere mainrated busses conforming to federal specification wpnumc type num class num .
use circuit breakers that are ul listed comply with nema standards and conform to federal specification wcnumc class numa .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
b .
highway and sign lighting and its device .
use panel boards and circuit breakers conforming to the following num .
numvolt .
for numvolt installations use panel boards that are singlephase numwire with numampere mainrated busses conforming to federal specification wpnumc type num class num .
use circuit breakers that are ul listed comply with nema standards and to federal specification wcnumb for class numa or class numb .
num .
numvolt .
for numvolt installations use panel boards that are singlephase numwire have main busses rated as designated and conform to federal specification wpnumc type num class num .
use circuit breakers that are ul listed comply with nema standards and conform to federal specification wcnumb for class numb .
num .
numvolt .
for numvolt installations use panel boards that are the size and type indicated and conform to federal specification wpnumc type num class num .
use circuit breakers that are ul listed and comply with nema standards .
ensure that the circuit breakers are manually operated moldedcase units conforming to federal specification wcnumb for class numb .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num num photoelectric controls use photoelectric controls that are rated for the control or lighting circuit voltage indicated .
provide mounting hardware to allow the unit to be installed in whatever type of location is shown .
ensure that the mounting conforms to the eei nema standards for physical and electrical interchangeability of light sensitive control devices .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num pedestals poles transformer bases and mast bracket arms fabricate pedestals poles transformer bases and mast bracket arms for traffic signal and highway lighting with materials according to the appropriate astm standard and the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
weld and fabricate steel members according to aws dnum structural welding code .
for aluminum members weld and fabricate according to ansiaws dnum structural welding code aluminum .
ensure that welding is performed by welders who are qualified according to ansiaws dnum or ansiaws dnum as appropriate .
submit copies of the welder qualifications upon request .
perform at least the minimum specified number of quality control inspections according to the applicable ansiaashtoaws specification and any other tests and inspections necessary to control the quality of the work .
ensure that aluminum poles lighting bracket arms and traffic signal mast arms have a rotary sandpolish finish giving a nonreflecting outer surface .
ensure that the external surfaces of transformer bases and shoe bases have a satintype finish .
hotdip galvanize steel poles and steel traffic signal arms according to astm a num .
if wire or cable passes through a hole or runs along a surface at any point through or on the complete assembly ensure that the holes and surfaces are deburred and void of any sharp edges or protuberances that may damage the wire or cable .
install rubber grommets in the entrance hole to the shaft and mast arms where midmounted traffic signals are installed .
when installing aluminum traffic signal standards use stainless steel hardware bolts nuts and washers conforming to num .
for steel traffic signal standards use galvanized hardware bolts nuts and washers conforming to num .
the manufacturer shall test standards and mast bracket arms to ensure compliance with specified material and strength requirements .
perform testing that also ensures that the items have been manufactured in conformance with the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
ensure aluminum poles and mast bracket arms are factory wrapped to protect them during shipment .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
submit num copies of the certification stipulating that the items conform to the strength and material requirements .
num tower poles fabricate according to aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
num lamps submit a certificate of compliance as specified in num for all materials components and assemblies .
num .
traffic signal .
ensure that traffic signal lamps are num volts and clear .
use numwatt lamps that are rated for num hours of life and numwatt lamps that are rated for num hours of life .
ensure that the lamps meet or exceed the beam candlepower requirements of the ite signal lamp standard and conform to with the following table num requirements for traffic signal lamps indication size wattage rated initial lumens center length num inch num num num inches num inch num num num inches pedestrian num num num inches num .
highway lighting .
use high pressure sodium lamps that have electrical physical and photometric characteristics that conform to ansi standards .
ensure that the lamps are rated for num hours of average num life based on num hours per start and are equipped with borosilicate glass have a mogul base have a universal burning position and are of the following ansi designation initial lumen rating and nominal lamp voltage table num requirements for highway lighting lamps wattage wattage designation lumens voltage num scnum num num num vanum num num num wanum num num use mercury vapor lamps that have electrical physical and photometric characteristics that conform to ansi standards .
ensure that the lamps are rated for num hours of average life based on num hours per start are equipped with borosilicate glass have a mogul base have a universal burning position and are of the following ansi designation and initial lumen rating in the vertical burning position table num requirements for highway lighting lamps designation wattage lumens h numkcw num num h numglw num num num .
sign lighting .
use lamps for sign luminaires that are numwatt phosphorcoated mercury lamps conforming to ansi h numkcrnumdx .
section num miscellaneous num geotextiles provide geotextile rolls with protective wrapping and before placement store rolls in a manner that protects against moisture and minimizes exposure to ultraviolet radiation .
for applications that are above ground or exposed to ultraviolet radiation provide geotextiles that are inert to commonly encountered chemicals and are stabilized against ultraviolet light degradation .
label each roll to provide product identification .
use geotextiles conforming to the requirements in table num for the intended use .
table num requirements for geotextiles category test method class subsurface drainage geotextile aashto m num class num stabilization geotextile aashto m num class num temporary silt fencenum aashto m num erosion control geotextilenum num aashto m num class num or num paving fabric aashto m num num .
use the same geotextile requirements for both silt fence and heavyduty silt fence .
reinforce heavyduty silt fence with wire mesh as shown on the plans .
num .
for inlet filters use class num for woven monofilament geotextiles or class num for all other types of geotextiles .
num .
for inlet filter type num in addition to the aashto m num requirements ensure that the geotextiles burst strength is at least num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm d num .
for geotextiles that are being permanently incorporated into the contract submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num sediment control bag manufacture sediment control bags using polypropylene nonwoven geotextiles conforming to the requirements in table num .
manufacture sediment control bag with a fill spout large enough to accommodate a numinch discharge hose and with straps to secure the hose and prevent pumped water from escaping without being filtered .
num table num requirements for sediment control bag geotextile property test method requirements weight ozydnum minimum astm d num num grab tensile strength lbs minimum astm d num num puncture strength lbs minimum astm d num num flow rate galminftnum minimum astm d num num permittivity secnum minimum astm d num num mullen burst strength psi minimum astm d num num uv stability minimum astm d num num apparent opening size mm maximum astm d num num num hay and straw use stalks of oats wheat rye or barley that is relatively free from seeds noxious weeds and other foreign matter as straw .
ensure that the stalks are free from decayed matter and from organic matter soluble in water .
use timothy redtop or native grasses for hay .
bind haybales with wire or baling twine .
use an ultraviolet light stabilized polypropylene twine that has a knot strength of num pounds and straight break strength of num pounds .
num gabion wire baskets provide gabion wire baskets that conform to the dimensions shown on the plans within a tolerance of num percent .
use wire mesh that is galvanized steel wire having a minimum size of no .
num gauge and a tensile strength between num and num pounds per square inch .
ensure that the zinc coating is num pounds per square yard when tested according to astm a num .
fabricate mesh openings to be hexagonal in shape and uniform in size .
for baskets less than num inches in height use openings measuring approximately num num inches .
for baskets greater than or equal to num inches in height use openings measuring approximately num num inches .
fabricate the wire mesh to be nonravelling when a single strand is cut .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
num geomembrane liner for geomembrane liner systems use hdpe sheeting with a nominal thickness of num mils .
manufacture the geomembrane of new first quality resin formulated specifically for the intended purpose .
use resin as specified in table num .
table num requirements for hdpe resin property test method requirements specific gravity astm d num num melt index astm d num num gnum min carbon black content astm d num num num ensure that the surface of the geomembrane does not have striations roughness pinholes or bubbles and is free of holes blisters and any foreign matter such as soil or oil accumulation .
submit a certification of compliance as specified in num .
if requested by the re attach a certification from the resin manufacturer certifying that the resin meets the requirements of table num .
num waterstops for metallic waterstops use sheet copper conforming to astm b num uns no .
cnum with a weight of num ounces per square foot .
use synthetic rubber or pvc nonmetallic waterstops conforming to section num of aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num submit certifications of compliance for waterstops as specified in num .
num epoxy bonding compound for epoxy bonding use a numcomponent epoxyresin bonding system for application to concrete .
ensure that the epoxy bonding compound conforms to astm c num type num grade num or num class b or c and is listed on the qpl .
submit certifications of compliance for epoxy bonding compound as specified in num .
num water use water in mixing or curing of concrete that is free of oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetable or other substances injurious to the finished product .
ensure that water conforms to aashto t num .
the contractor may use water known to be of potable quality without testing .
if the source of water is shallow enclose the intake to exclude silt mud grass or other foreign materials .
if requested by the me or re submit copies of test results for water .
num sodium chloride rock salt use sodium chloride conforming to astm d num type i grade num with the following exceptions num .
ensure that the sodium chloride is in the form of rock salt containing at the time of delivery not more than num percent moisture as determined by drying at num num f to constant weight .
num .
do not provide evaporated solar or other salt instead of rock salt .
num sleeves use schedule num pvc drainage pipe according to astm d num .
num epoxy injection material provide epoxy injection material listed on the qpl that meets the requirements of astm c num type i or iv grade num class b or c. submit certifications of compliance for epoxy injection material as specified in num .
num polyethylene sheeting provide polyethylene sheeting that is at least num mil in thickness .
for concrete curing process use white polyethylene sheeting as specified in num .
num floating turbidity barrier provide commercially made yellow or international orange floating turbidity barriers made of reinforced pvc sheeting as follows table num requirements for floating turbidity barriernum type num type num type num fabric type polyester or nylon reinforced pvc polyester or nylon reinforced pvc nylon reinforced pvc with polypropylene filtration panelnum thickness mils minimum num num num for pvc and filtration panel weight oz.ydnum .
minimum num num num grab tensile strength lbs minimum num num num uv inhibited yes yes yes seams heat welded heat welded heat welded stress plates aluminum connecting hardware galvanized galvanized galvanized floatation lbsft minimumnum num num num num table num requirements for floating turbidity barriernum type num type num type num bottom load chain or bottom weightsnum num in .
galvanized num lbsft .
minimum num in .
galvanized num lbsft .
minimum num in .
galvanized numlbsft min standard depthnum num ft. num ft. num ft. standard lengthnum num num ft. num num ft. num num ft. num .
submit manufacture specification to the department for approval .
specifications vary slightly by manufacturer .
num .
floatation for barriers of depths greater than num feet is to be minimum num pounds per foot .
floatation must be sufficient to maintain the top of the barrier at an elevation num inches above the water .
num .
load chains or bottom weights shall be heavy enough to keep the floating turbidity relatively vertical in all flows .
num .
the depth of the barrier may be greater than or lesser than num feet and shall be designed for the site .
num .
the maximum length for barriers of depth greater than num feet is num feet .
num .
the polypropylene filtration panel shall be no more than approximately num percent of the surface area .
num detectable warning surface for detectable warning surfaces use a surface or a coating material that is safety red in color according to fedstd numb color chip no .
num and has a num bpn minimum slip resistance when tested according to astm e num .
ensure that the finished product is stabilized against uv degradation and adheres to the substrate without peeling or blistering .
num division num equipment section num traffic control equipment num flashing arrow board provide type a and type c flashing arrow boards according to the mutcd and the following requirements num .
nonreflective black boards equipped with batteryoperated amber lights .
num .
a minimum peak luminous intensity of num candelas and equipped with photocells that will automatically reduce the luminous intensity to num candelas when the ambient light level drops to num footcandles .
num .
a light on the rear face of the board to indicate that the lights are operating .
num .
solid state controls with polarity and surge protection .
num .
panel operation controls mounted in a lockable enclosure .
ensure flashing arrow boards are equipped with a diesel charged battery system .
do not use gasoline powered systems .
with re approval the contractor may use flashing arrow boards equipped with solar charged battery systems in non moving operations .
the department may require a solar charged battery system in noise sensitive areas .
securely mount flashing arrow boards on a manufacturerapproved numwheeled towing trailer .
num portable variable message sign provide a portable variable message sign capable of displaying messages that are visible under ideal day and night conditions from a minimum distance of num mile and that are legible from a minimum distance of num feet with a viewing angle of at least num degrees .
ensure that the portable variable message sign is able to operate in ambient temperatures of num to num f and is capable of withstanding wind gusts up to num miles per hour when positioned .
provide a portable variable message sign with the following num .
sign panel .
provide a sign panel capable of displaying num lines of a message with each line capable of displaying up to num characters .
ensure that the characters have a minimum height of num inches a minimum width of num inches and are spaced at least num inches apart .
compose characters of a num wide by num high pixel matrix with each pixel composed of between num and num led lights .
ensure that the led lights have a dominant wavelength between num and num nanometers and are set against a black background .
ensure that the led lights provide a minimum daylight luminance of num candelas per square meter .
ensure that the sign is equipped with a photocell to automatically reduce the led lights luminance to between num to num candelas per square meter when the ambient light level drops to num footcandles .
ensure that led lights maintain constant luminance intensity with changes in battery voltage .
ensure that the sign panel is covered with an ultravioletresistant clear polycarbonate .
num .
controller .
ensure that the controller is unaffected by radio transmissions .
ensure that the controller is capable of displaying num messages sequentially .
ensure that controller has an adjustable display rate with a minimum of num seconds per phase .
ensure that the controller is capable of storing num user programmed messages in nonvolatile memory that will retain the programmed messages when power is interrupted .
provide a controller display screen that allows the operator to review messages before displaying on the message sign .
ensure that the controller display shows the operator all programming instructions .
ensure that the messages are able to be programmed at the sign with an integral or plugin keyboard and remotely with a cellular telephone .
secure panel controls in a lockable weatherproof enclosure .
prevent unauthorized access to the controller by requiring a password to the keyboard .
prevent unauthorized remote access by requiring a password .
if the correct password is not entered within num seconds of initial phone contact the phone call will terminate .
num .
power source .
equip portable variable message signs with either a diesel charged or a solar charged battery system .
ensure that the variable message sign is also capable of operating on numvolt ac electrical service .
the department may require a solar charged battery system in noise sensitive areas .
provide the power with a num battery back up system capable of providing continuous operation when the primary power source fails .
ensure that the power source meets the following requirements a. diesel .
ensure that the fuel tank is capable of operating the sign for a period of num hours without refueling .
equip with an exhaust muffler and a united states department of forestry approved spark arrester .
ensure that the engine is shock mounted to reduce vibration and locked in a ventilated enclosure .
b .
solar .
provide solar panels capable of recharging the batteries at a rate of num hours of sun for num hours of sign usage .
ensure that the battery capacity is capable of operating the sign for a period of num days without sunlight .
num .
structural support system .
mount the variable message sign on a portable numwheeled trailer .
ensure that the sign panel is capable of being raised or lowered during sustained wind speeds of num miles per hour .
ensure that the sign panel is capable of being locked into position and is capable of being positioned at the proper height and orientation required for visibility according to the mutcd .
num traffic control truck with mounted crash cushions provide a truck having a minimum gross weight of num tons affixed with a bedmounted type c flashing arrow board as specified in num and a rear mounted crash cushion .
the contractor may use precast concrete ballast to meet the weight requirement .
when using ballast ensure that it is securely fastened to the truck .
provide crash cushions that conforms to the following requirements num .
meets nchrp num level num crashworthiness requirements .
num .
designed to be attached to the rear of a truck .
num .
equipped with a numdegree hydraulic tilt system to raise and lower the crash cushion .
the tilt system shall have a locking mechanism to secure the crash cushion when in the raised position .
num .
if equipped with energy absorbing modules ensure that they are painted yellow .
num .
displays alternating numinch wide black and yellow bands composed of type iiiretroreflective sheeting as specified in astm d num in an inverted v chevron pattern on the surface of the rear module that faces traffic .
when in the raised position ensure that the surface of the rear facing module also displays the chevron pattern .
num .
equipped with standard trailer lighting systems including brake lights taillights and turn signals that are visible in the raised and lowered positions .
section num compaction equipment num pneumatictired compactor provide a selfpropelled numaxle pneumatictired compactor equipped with pneumatic tires mounted to completely cover the area to be compacted in a single pass .
provide compactors with a minimum width of num feet .
ensure that the wheels on at least num axle oscillate vertically either independently or in pairs .
equip wheels with smooth widetread compactor tires of equal size and diameter .
ensure that the compactor is capable of producing a uniform ground contact pressure on a level unyielding surface through a range of num to num pounds per square inch on all wheels .
uniformly inflate all tires .
ensure that tire pressures do not vary by more than num pounds per square inch .
provide charts and tabulations showing the contact areas and contact pressures for the full range of tire inflation pressures and for the full range of loadings for the tires used .
maintain operating tire contact pressure using ballast and do not allow tire inflation pressure combinations to exceed the recommendations of the tire and rim association incorporated for the applicable tire size and ply rating .
do not provide wobblewheeled compactors .
num dynamic compactor provide a vibratory roller or vibratory padtype compactor capable of operating at the optimum frequency of vibration required for the size and type of compactor used and for the type of material being compacted .
mount on the vibratory num roller a readily visible instruction plate containing the manufacturers recommended operating frequency amplitude and roller speed .
provide vibratory pad type compactors when access with a vibratory roller is not practical .
num steelwheel roller provide a powerdriven numaxle tandem roller with a load of at least num pounds per inch of width of tread of drive roll and a total ballasted weight of at least num tons .
num padfoot roller provide a tamping type or padfoot roller with num or more cylinders having pads of not less than num inches in length and capable of developing a pressure of not less than num pounds per square inch of bearing surface when a complete row of pads is in contact with a level surface .
section num hma site equipment num materials transfer vehicle mtv ensure that the mtv is capable of independently delivering hma from the hauling equipment to the paving equipment .
ensure that the mtv is equipped with a highcapacity truck unloading system to receive mixtures a storage system capable of holding at least num tons of hma and a discharge conveyor capable of swiveling to either side to deliver hma to the paving spreader while allowing the mtv to operate from an adjacent lane .
ensure that the mtv is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
provide a paver hopper insert with a minimum capacity of num tons in the hopper of conventional paving equipment .
provide a remixing system to continuously blend the hma before placement .
remixing may occur within the mtv or in the paver hopper .
num hma curb machine provide a selfpropelled automatic hma curb machine specifically designed to produce hma curb or a paver with attachments that produces curb of uniform texture shape and density .
num hma paver for paving widths of num feet or more provide a selfpropelled hma paver with an activated screed or strikeoff assembly capable of spreading and finishing hma in the lane widths and thicknesses required .
ensure that the paver is capable of being operated at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory laying of the mixture .
ensure that the paver is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
ensure that the paver is also equipped with the following num .
receiving hopper and distribution system .
ensure that the receiving hopper is equipped with a distribution system capable of placing the hma uniformly in front of the screed .
num .
screed or strikeoff assembly .
ensure that the screed or strikeoff assembly produces finished surface of the required evenness and texture without tearing shoving or gouging the hma .
ensure that the screed or strikeoff assembly compacts the full width of the course being laid .
num .
screed heater .
ensure that the paver is equipped with a system for heating the screed or strikeoff assembly .
num .
sloped plate .
when constructing longitudinal wedge joints ensure that the paver is equipped with a sloped plate .
ensure that the sloped plate is attached to the paver screed extension and is capable of producing a wedge edge having a face slope of numhnumv .
ensure that the plate can accommodate compacted layer thicknesses from num to num inches .
mount the bottom of the sloped plate num to num inch above the existing surface .
ensure that the sloped plate is interchangeable for use on either side of the screed .
num num .
automatic slope controls .
ensure that the automatic slope control system maintains the screed or strikeoff assembly in a constant position relative to profile and crossslope references .
use references to ensure that control of the screed or strikeoff position is independent of irregularities in the underlying surface and spreader operation .
when paving in widths that exceed the manufacturers recommendations for use of the automatic slope control use an re approved grade reference system on both sides of the paver .
if the re determines that the automatic controls are ineffective the contractor may use other re approved methods .
num .
automatic profile control .
for the first lift of paving use a stringline or an re approved electronic grade reference system for longitudinal grade control .
for a stringline reference system provide a line supported by devices compatible with the type of automatic paver control system used .
use stringline and supports capable of maintaining line and grade at the point of support while withstanding the tensioning necessary to prevent sag in excess of num inch between supports spaced num feet apart .
install additional supports spaced num feet or less apart to remove any apparent deviation of the stringline from the specified grade .
the re may require spacings of num feet at the crest and bottom of vertical curves .
if the first lift of paving is placed on or adjacent to a surface that has been placed to the specified line grade and crosssection and has been approved by the re the contractor may use a skitype reference system .
for subsequent lifts of paving use a skitype grade reference system .
the re may allow the use of a joint matching shoe instead of the ski during paving .
num .
manual override system .
ensure that the paver is capable of manual override of the automatic controls while the paver is in automatic operation .
for paving widths of less than num feet provide a paver that is capable of spreading and finishing hma to the shown widths and thicknesses .
num ultrathin lift paver provide a selfpropelled paver specifically designed for applying ultrathin friction course .
provide a single unit capable of spraying the modified asphalt tackseal coat and spreading the mixture .
ensure that the paver is capable of spreading without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture to produce a smooth surface .
use a paver that is heated and capable of spreading and finishing the modified asphalt tackseal coat and the ultrathin hma material to the widths and application rates shown .
provide pavers capable of operation at forward speeds of num to num feet per minute .
do not operate pavers at speeds less than num feet per minute .
ensure that the paver is equipped with an automatic reverse signal alarm that is audible above the surrounding noise .
num hma compactor provide to the re the manufacturers technical data sheets including the weight and dimensions of the rollers to be used .
ensure that the roller is equipped with adjustable scrapers to keep wheels clean and with a system to keep wheels moist to prevent hma from sticking to the wheels .
use wheels free of flat areas openings or projections that may mar the surface .
ensure that the roller is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
use rollers capable of reversing direction without backlash and that conform to the following num .
steelwheel roller .
provide a powerdriven numaxle tandem roller with a load of at least num pounds per inch of width of tread of drive roll and a total ballast weight of at least num tons .
num .
hma vibratory roller .
provide a selfpropelled vibratory roller with at least num smooth steel drums .
use a vibratory roller having a static weight of at least num tons and that is capable of maintaining the frequency and amplitude of vibration specified by the manufacturer .
ensure that the vibratory roller is also equipped with the following num .
one light on each fender or alternatively num light above the roller visible from a distance of num feet .
ensure that the light blinks when the vibratory system is in operation .
num .
provide a speed indicator in feet per minute or tenths of a mile per hour and a frequency indicator to allow the operator to closely control the rolling speed .
num .
equip rollers with an automatic vibration disconnect system that automatically shuts off the vibration when the roller is in a stationary position .
provide a mechanical override system in the num event of temporary failure of the automatic system that shuts off the vibration when the roller is in a stationary position .
provide instruction sheets for each vibratory roller used indicating operational instructions recommended amplitude vibrations per minute and speed settings .
num vibratory drum compactor provide a selfpropelled vibratory drum compactor equipped with num or num smooth steel drums having a minimum centrifugal force of num pounds per inch of width of tread of drive roll .
ensure that the selfpropelled vibratory drum compactor is capable of maintaining the frequency of vibration and amplitude specified by the manufacturers .
for each vibratory roller used provide the manufacturers recommendations indicating operational instructions recommended amplitude vibrations per minute and speed settings .
num bituminous material distributor provide a pressurized bituminous material distributor capable of maintaining bituminous material within the specified temperature range and applying the material uniformly over variable surface widths of up to num feet .
ensure that the bituminous material distributor is equipped with the following num .
temperature gauge on the truck body to indicate the temperature of the contained bituminous material .
num .
a separate power unit for the pump .
num .
full circulation spray bars that are adjustable laterally and vertically .
num .
an analog or digital readout meter calibrated in english units .
num sealer application system provide sealing equipment for sealing joints or cracks that consists of a kettle or melter and an applicator wand .
ensure that the melter is a double boiler with the space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heat transfer medium .
ensure that the melter includes positive temperature control mechanical agitation recirculation pumps and thermometers for continuous reading of the temperature of both the sealing compound and the heat transfer medium .
use a heated or insulated applicator wand to maintain the pouring temperature of the sealant during the placing operation .
do not use pouring pots or similar devices to fill sawed joints or cracks .
section num pile driving equipment num impact hammer ensure that air hydraulic and diesel hammers develop at least num footpounds of energy per blow .
ensure that drop hammers have a ram weight of at least num pounds and a maximum drop of num feet .
for steam or air hammers ensure that the weight of the ram is at least num the weight of the pile .
for diesel hammers ensure that the weight of the ram is at least num the weight of the pile .
provide diesel hammers equipped with gauges and charts for the determination of the actual driving energy produced under all driving conditions .
num .
hammer cushion .
ensure that impact pile driving equipment except for gravity hammers are equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer and pile and to ensure uniform driving .
provide hammer cushions made of manufactured materials according to the hammer manufacturers guidelines .
do not use wood rope wire rope hose tires or asbestos hammer cushions .
as recommended by the hammer manufacturer place a striker plate on the hammer cushion to ensure uniform compression of the cushion material .
inspect the hammer cushion in the presence of the re when beginning pile driving at each structure or after each num hours of pile driving whichever is less .
replace the hammer cushion when its thickness is less than num percent of the original thickness .
num num .
pile cushion .
use pile cushions made of plywood to protect the heads of concrete piles .
ensure that the plywood thickness is at least num inches before driving .
ensure that the pile cushion dimensions match the crosssectional area of the pile head .
provide a new pile cushion for each pile .
immediately replace the pile cushion if it splits is compressed to half of its original thickness begins to burn or does not function as intended .
num .
pile drive head .
equip piles driven with impact hammers with a pile drive head to distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
ensure that the pile drive head is aligned axially with the hammer and the pile .
use leads to guide the pile drive head .
ensure that the pile drive head fits around the pile head and prevents the transfer of torsional forces during driving operations while maintaining the proper alignment of the hammer and the pile .
for steel and timber piles ensure that the pile heads are cut squarely and provide a pile drive head to hold the longitudinal axis of the pile in line with the hammer .
for precast concrete and prestressed concrete piles ensure that the pile head is plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts to the pile head .
for special types of piles provide appropriate pile drive heads mandrels or other devices to ensure that the piles are driven without damage .
num vibratory hammer select the vibratory hammer that satisfies the equation in which driving amplitude equals num times the eccentric moment divided by the vibratory load as shown below .
vibratory load driving amplitude num eccentric moment ensure that the solution of this equation is between num and num inch .
the vibratory load is the sum of the weight of the pile and the weight of the vibrating mass of the vibrator including the weight of the clamp housing and jaws .
obtain the eccentric moment from the manufacturer .
num leads and followers provide pile driving leads that are straight and support the vertical or battered pile and hammer in proper position throughout the driving operation .
use leads that allow the hammer to move freely and ensure concentric impact for each blow .
use leads that are of sufficient length so that followers are not required .
use either fixed or swinging leads .
use guys or braces to hold fixed leads in position to ensure support of the pile during driving operations .
when using swinging leads fit with a pile gate at the bottom of the leads .
when using swinging leads the re may require a horizontal brace for battered piles .
to maintain alignment ensure that swinging leads are embedded in the ground or that the pile is constrained in a structural frame such as a template .
except where piles are driven through water do not use followers unless approved by the re .
section num concrete site equipment num pavement forms provide straightsided metal forms with a thickness of at least num inch and sections at least num feet in length .
ensure that forms have a depth at least equal to the thickness of the concrete without horizontal joint and a base width at least equal to the depth of the forms .
use flexible or curved forms of wood or metal with the proper radius for curves with a numfoot radius or less .
provide forms with devices for secure setting to ensure that when in place the forms will withstand without visible deflection or settlement the impact and vibration of the consolidating and finishing equipment .
ensure that flange braces extend outward on the base at least twothirds the height of the form .
ensure that the top face of the form does not vary from a true plane by more than num inch in num feet and that the face of the form does not vary more than num inch .
num ensure that the forms are capable of tightly locking ends of abutting sections for secure setting .
use metal pins of the required size and length to hold the forms rigidly and securely in place .
ensure that pins are at least num feet in length .
num spreading and finishing machine provide a vibratory power driven spreading and finishing machine capable of striking off screeding consolidating and floating the concrete to the required crosssection and elevation .
ensure that the spreading and finishing machine has sufficient weight and strength to produce the necessary pressure and is capable of being adjusted to produce the cross section and finish required .
ensure that the spreading and finishing machine is geared to operate consistently and smoothly and is equipped with at least num oscillatingtype transverse screeds and a scraping device to keep the tops of the forms clean .
num spreading and finishing machine for concrete bridge decks provide a selfpropelled rotating cylinder type or oscillating type finishing machine .
the contractor may use longitudinal or transverse type finishing machines .
ensure that the finishing machine is capable of operating forward and backward to repeat passes to correct surface irregularities and to produce a surface that conforms to the required profile grade crosssection and surface tolerances .
if using a longitudinal finishing machine ensure that the machine is capable of finishing the full length of the span or finishing the full length between designated or approved construction joints .
if using a transverse finishing machine ensure that the machine is of sufficient size to finish the full width of deck between curbs or the full distance between longitudinal construction joints .
ensure that the machine is equipped to travel on steel rails pipe or other supported grade controls securely fastened in place to prevent any appreciable deflection between supports .
num vibrator use spud vibrators for consolidating concrete .
the contractor may use hand operated vibrators or vibrators attached to the spreading and finishing machine or mounted on a separate carriage .
ensure that vibrators have a minimum frequency of num impulses per minute .
except for handheld vibrators ensure that vibration operation is controlled by the forward movement of the spreading and finishing machine so that vibration automatically ceases when the forward movement of the spreader is stopped .
num slipform paver provide a selfpropelled slipform paver designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the concrete for the full depth of the slab in num pass of the machine .
ensure that the slipform paver is equipped with automatic alignment and grade controls consisting of a sensing device that continuously remains in contact with a sensing guide .
use a slipform paver that is capable of vibrating the concrete for the full width and depth of the slab and that automatically ceases vibrating when the pavers forward movement is stopped .
num slipform extrusion machine provide a slipform extrusion machine capable of placing concrete through a mold of proper crosssection to produce concrete of the specified shape surface texture and density .
ensure that the slipform machine is capable of consolidating the freshly placed concrete in num pass of the machine .
ensure that the slipform machine is equipped with internal vibrators for consolidating the concrete along the faces of forms and adjacent to joints to produce a homogenous parapet free from voids and honeycombs and requiring no further finishing other than that required for class num finish .
ensure that the forming section of the slipform machine is adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine to conform to the predetermined grade line .
attach a grade line gauge or pointer to the machine to ensure that continual comparison between the barrier being placed and the established grade line as shown by the offset guide line can be made .
ensure that the slipform machine is equipped with an automatic reverse signal alarm that is audible above the surrounding noise .
num num epoxy resin injection equipment provide a positiveplacement fixedratio type pump for injecting epoxy resin adhesive into concrete cracks .
ensure that the equipment is capable of automatically mixing num components at the nozzle .
also ensure that the equipment is equipped with a rubber nozzle arrangement that will allow injection of adhesive without air entrapment at pressures of up to num pounds per square inch to ensure complete penetration of cracks .
also ensure that the machine is equipped with a pressure gauge at or near the nozzle to verify the working pressure .
section num concrete pavement rehabilitation equipment num breaker a. resonant breaker .
provide a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency breaker specifically designed for rubblizing concrete pavement .
ensure that the machine is capable of producing lowamplitude num inch maximum blows with a numpound force and delivering blows to the existing concrete surface at a rate of at least num cycles per second .
equip the resonant breaker with a screen to protect vehicles in adjacent lanes from flying chips during breaking .
b. multihead breaker .
provide a selfcontained selfpropelled multihead breaker specifically designed for rubblizing concrete pavement .
ensure that the multihead breaker is capable of rubblizing the full lane width .
mount pavement breaking hammers so that there is continuous breakage from side to side .
ensure that the lift height of the hammers is independently adjustable .
equip the multihead breaker with a screen to protect vehicles in adjacent lanes from flying chips during breaking .
num seating equipment a. zgrid roller .
provide a vibratory roller fitted with a z pattern grid on the drum face .
ensure that the roller has a gross weight of at least num tons and is capable of seating the rubblized pavement .
b. vibratory roller .
provide a vibratory roller fitted with a smooth steel drum .
ensure that the roller has a gross weight of at least num tons and is capable of seating the rubblized pavement and providing an even surface for the hma overlay .
num grout pumping unit a. positivedisplacement injection or nonpulsating progressivecavity pump .
use either positivedisplacement injection or nonpulsing progressivecavity pumps .
ensure that the injection pump produces a maximum pressure of num pounds per square inch when pumping grout and that meets the numsecond flow cone time .
ensure that the pump is capable of sustaining continuous pumping at rates as low as num gallons per minute .
if the pump fails to meet this requirement modify the system by adding a recirculating hose and valve at the discharge of the pump .
b. truckmounted pumping unit .
provide a truckmounted pumping unit capable of injecting highdensity polyurethane at a controlled rate directly beneath the concrete pavement .
ensure that the pumping unit is equipped with a manufacturers certified meter to measure the amount of highdensity polyurethane injected at each location .
ensure that the system is capable of immediate control of the material flow to avoid excessive lifting of the pavement slabs .
ensure that each pumping unit is equipped with a digital output device capable of recording pump strokes .
convert the pump strokes to pounds using a calibration chart obtained from the pump manufacturer .
ensure that each digital output device is equipped with a manual reset button .
num mixer provide a highspeed centrifugal pump mixer or highspeed shearblade mixer .
ensure that the centrifugal pump mixer is capable of pulling the grout through a mixing chamber at high pressure and high velocity .
operate the shearblade mixer between num and num rotations per minute creating a high shearing action and subsequent pressure release to make the mixture homogenous .
num num injection device provide grout hole packers of either the drive packer or expanding rubber type to hold the injection pipe and discharge nozzle tightly in place while grout is being pumped .
ensure that hoses used for transporting grout from the pump to the packer are num to num inches in diameter .
num lift monitoring equipment provide dial gauges and a laser leveling unit capable of measuring vertical uplift or deflection to num inch to detect slab movement with respect to a stable reference point .
ensure that the equipment is capable of detecting the movement of the pavement edge or any num outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
obtain re approval of the devices before using .
num deflection testing equipment provide a falling weight deflectometer capable of applying at least num pounds of force to test joints and cracks .
ensure that reference calibration of the falling weight deflectometer is performed annually at a strategic highway research program calibration center .
submit certification of reference calibration to the re before beginning testing .
ensure that relative calibration is performed no more than num days before testing .
num grinding machine provide a selfpropelled machine equipped with diamond blades designed for grinding and texturing concrete surface courses .
ensure that the machine is properly sized to grind a strip at least num feet in width without operating in adjacent traffic lanes .
ensure that the grinding machine will not damage or cause strain to the underlying concrete surface course or cause excessive ravels aggregate fractures spalls or disturbance of transverse or longitudinal joints .
ensure that the grinding machine is capable of immediately collecting the slurry produced from the operations .
the contractor may use a grinding machine that does not collect slurry if the re approves an alternate slurry collection method .
num scarification equipment provide selfpropelled scarification equipment that is capable of scarifying across the cutting path in num pass to a minimum depth of num inch .
use equipment capable of establishing profile grades by referencing from existing grades and capable of controlling cross slopes .
use equipment capable of removing milled material from the surface and preventing dust and other materials from escaping into the air .
use equipment with a floating type head that allows for deeper cutting in areas of deteriorated concrete and that is capable of locking out the head float .
section num traffic striping equipment num epoxy striping unit provide epoxy striping equipment designed to apply longlife material in variable widths at a consistent temperature .
ensure that the epoxy striping equipment is capable of continuously mixing and agitating the material and is equipped with the following num .
epoxy striping units .
provide the following with each epoxy striping unit num .
a calibration sheet certified by the manufacturer or testing agency that shows the number of the truck the capacity and an outage table in increments of not over num inch .
num .
a metal rod for each holding vessel with accurate divisions marked and consecutively numbered starting at the bottom .
do not use a rod less than num foot longer than the depth of the vessel .
num .
slipproof steps with handrails to ground level and a slipproof catwalk with handrail running along the top of the vessel .
num .
epoxy striping applicator .
ensure that the epoxy striping applicator is equipped with the following num .
a tachometer and a pressure gauge .
num num .
a calibrated holding vessel for each longlife material component .
ensure that the holding vessels for the epoxy pigments and hardener have thermometers for measuring the temperature of vessel contents .
num .
a separate power unit for the pumps used to mix and distribute the components .
num .
mixing and conveying parts and the shaping dies or spray gun that is capable of maintaining the material at optimum plastic temperature .
num .
a mechanical glass bead dispenser that automatically dispense beads uniformly on wet stripes or markings at the rates specified .
num thermoplastic applicator provide a thermoplastic applicator designed to apply thermoplastic in multiple widths between num to num inches and multiple thickness settings to achieve above the pavement thickness of num to num mils .
ensure that the thermoplastic applicator is equipped with the following num .
an oiljacketed or airjacketed premelting kettle equipped with an automatic thermostat control device to provide positive temperature control and continuous mixing and agitation of the thermoplastic material .
num .
an applicator storage kettle with an automatic thermostat control device to maintain the thermoplastic material at the application temperature and provide continuous mixing and agitation of the thermoplastic material during installation .
ensure that the thermoplastic applicator has a capacity for containing a minimum of num pounds of molten thermoplastic .
the department may require special thickness equipment for in lane or shoulder transverse rumble strip pavement markings .
num traffic stripe and marking removal equipment for removing traffic stripes and traffic markings provide equipment containing a vacuum system to remove all millings from the pavement surface and prevent residue from becoming airborne .
num rumble strip cutting machine provide a rumble strip cutting machine equipped with an acceptable guide that extends in front of the machine and is clearly visible to the operator to maintain alignment .
section num miscellaneous equipment num milling machine provide a selfpropelled planing grinding or cutting milling machine with variable operating speeds that is capable of removing hma or concrete without the use of heat .
ensure that the milling machine is equipped with automatic grade controls .
use either a stringline or ski type reference system .
if a ski type reference system is used ensure that the ski has a minimum length of num feet .
ensure that the milling machine is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
the re may not require use of the automatic grade controls at intersections and other locations .
immediately replace teeth in the milling drum that become dislodged broken or unevenly worn with teeth of the same length as the remaining teeth in that row .
num straightedge provide an aluminum straightedge at least num feet in length .
provide up to a numfoot straightedge if requested by the re .
ensure that straightedges are kept clean and straight .
num num mechanical sweeper provide a selfpropelled vacuum or vacuum assisted sweeper that is capable of collecting and containing debris .
do not use steel bristles .
ensure that the sweeper is equipped with an automatic audible warning signal when operating in reverse .
num pavement saw provide a powerdriven pavement saw capable of sawing to the required dimensions in num pass without causing uncontrolled cracking .
equip the pavement saw with watercooled circular diamondedge blades or abrasive wheels and alignment guides .
ensure that the pavement saw is capable of immediately collecting the slurry produced from the operations .
the contractor may use a pavement saw that does not collect slurry if the re approves an alternate slurry collection method .
when sawcutting grooves use a multibladed saw with an adequate number of blades and alignment wheels .
provide within the project limits spare saw blades and at least num standby saw that meets the above requirements .
num air compressor provide compressors for air blowing that filter moisture and oil from the air deliver air at a minimum of num cubic feet per minute and develop a nozzle pressure of at least num pounds per square inch .
num hotair lance provide a compressed air system designed for generating hot air at a temperature of at least num f. ensure that the hot air lance is capable of delivering air at the minimum rate of num cubic feet per minute at num pounds per square inch .
section num hma plant equipment num hma plant a .
requirements for hma mixing plants .
use fully automated batch type or drum mixing type plants for the preparation of hma mixtures .
ensure that the hma plant is designed equipped calibrated and operated to deliver wellcoated homogeneous hma mixtures conforming to the job mix formula .
immediately correct defects that adversely affect the functioning of a plant or plant unit or the quality of the mixture .
ensure that all plant laboratory and truck scales are inspected and certified by an independent scale company accredited according to international organization of standards international electrotechnical commission num or a state or county office of weights and measures .
ensure that certification is performed annually or every num months if directed by the me .
ensure that the hma plant is equipped with the following num .
plant laboratory .
provide and maintain a plant laboratory at each plant site for the mes use for sampling and acceptance testing and for the producers use for quality control testing during periods of production .
ensure that the plant laboratory has an unobstructed view of the trucks as they are loaded .
ensure that excluding the sanitary facilities the plant laboratory has a floor area of at least num square feet a ceiling height of at least num feet adequate ventilation and artificial lighting .
provide sanitary facilities located within the same building .
ensure that the plant laboratory is weathertight heated airconditioned and can maintain a temperature of between num and num f. for plants producing more than num tons of hma mixture per day obtain the mes approval of the laboratory size and available facilities .
ensure that the plant laboratory is equipped with the following a .
general equipment .
provide the following num .
an office for the exclusive use of the me with a floor area of at least num square feet .
num .
work benches totaling at least num num feet .
num .
two desks num table and at least num armed desk chairs .
num num .
fourdrawer legalsize file cabinet with lock and num keys .
num .
shelves and supply cabinets .
num .
water cooler capable of dispensing hot and cold water or a refrigerator supplied with bottled water .
num .
telephone with a direct private line with no monitoring or recording devices attached .
num .
class abc fire extinguisher meeting fire underwriters approval .
num .
a stocked numperson firstaid box according to ansi standards .
num .
electrical outlets sufficient in number and capacity for operating equipment .
num .
approximately num num feet of cork board or other mounting surface hung on a wall for the exclusive use of the me .
num .
mechanical shakers screens and sieves according to aashto m num .
install and bolt down the mechanical shaker in a sounddampening and dustproof enclosure .
provide at least a num inch diameter exhaust fan in the enclosure .
num .
sink with hot and cold running water having adequate pressure drainboard and drain capable of handling elutriable material .
num .
stand that holds and elevates sieves to allow material to properly drain .
num .
twoelement hot plate or electric range having dialtype thermostatic controls to adjust the heat for drying aggregates .
include a numinch fan capable of exhausting dust and fumes .
num .
small hand tools required for sampling and testing .
num .
computer and work station requirements as specified in num.d .
the me may reduce or eliminate the requirement for the computer based upon operational needs .
b .
testing equipment .
provide the following testing equipment num .
hood enclosed on num sides top and bottom and of such size to enclose the operations of drying and weighing in which a vapor or gas is emitted .
ensure that the hood is designed and constructed so that any operation involving testing within the hood does not require the insertion of any portion of the testers body other than hands and arms .
ensure that the hood contains an exhaust system capable of exhausting air to the outside at num yards per minute linear velocity based upon an interior hood opening measuring num num feet with an exhaust fan rated at num to num cubic feet per minute .
num .
when acceptance procedures for fully automated batch plants using hot bin samples according to njdot bnum are used an numinch shaker and a larger shaker are required .
num .
apparatus to perform testing according to aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num and aashto t num .
num .
apparatus to perform testing according to aashto t num .
calibrate the gyratory compactor using the internal angle .
num .
aggregate storage .
provide storage space for each size and source of aggregate .
keep different aggregates separate until they have been delivered to the coldfeed belt or elevator .
maintain the aggregate storage area and stockpile the separate materials as specified in num .
num .
aggregate bins .
ensure that the plant has coldfeed aggregate storage bins of sufficient number and capacity to store the amount of aggregate required to keep the plant in continuous operation .
ensure that the bins are designed to prevent overflow of material from each bin compartment to another .
provide at least num coldfeed aggregate bin for each stockpile of material to be used .
provide an indicator on each bin to show the gate opening .
num .
equipment for preparation of asphalt binder .
ensure that the tanks for storage of asphalt binder are equipped to uniformly heat the material to the required temperature under effective and positive control at all times .
ensure that heating is accomplished so that no flame comes in contact with the heating tank .
provide a circulating system of sufficient capacity for the binder to ensure continuous circulation between the storage tank and proportioning units during the entire operating period .
ensure that the discharge end of the binder circulating pipe is maintained below the surface of the binder in the storage tank to prevent discharge of hot binder into the open air .
ensure that pipe lines and fittings are steam or oil jacketed electrically or otherwise heated and insulated to prevent heat loss .
num provide valves according to aashto t num except ensure that a sampling valve is also located in the lowest third of each storage tank .
num .
feeder for dryer .
provide separate feeders for each size and source of aggregate .
feed each size onto the belt going to the dryer by mechanical feeders with separate adjustable gates .
use adjustable feeders capable of delivering the separate aggregates onto the belt in proper proportions to ensure a constant and uniform flow of material from each bin .
num .
thermometric equipment .
affix an armored thermometer or dial thermometer of adequate range in the asphalt binder feed line near the charging valve at the mixer unit .
also ensure that plant is equipped with a recording thermometer pyrometer or other thermometric instrument positioned at the discharge chute of the dryer to indicate and automatically record the temperature of the heated aggregates .
num .
dust collector .
ensure that the plant is equipped with a dust collector capable of wasting or uniformly returning to the plant all or any part of the material collected as directed .
install and operate dust collecting systems according to n.j.a.c num et seq .
num .
safety .
provide adequate and safe stairways to the mixer platform and sampling points .
place guarded ladders to other plant units at all points where accessibility to plant operations is required .
provide overhead protection at necessary locations .
provide ample and unobstructed space on the mixing platform .
maintain a clear and unobstructed passage at all times in and around the truck loading area .
keep this area free from drippings from the mixing platform .
provide accessibility to the top of truck bodies using num platforms located away from the mixing plant to enable samples and temperature data to be obtained from each side of loaded trucks .
the department will allow one platform if the truck has room to turn around and return to the platform .
when plant production occurs during nighttime hours provide permanently fixed lighting throughout the plant operations plant laboratory and truck scale areas to ensure a clear view of the operations .
also provide permanently mounted lighting at the sampling platforms to sufficiently illuminate the bed of the truck for inspection and sampling operations .
num .
truck scales .
use directreading cabinet dial type or an electronic load cell platform truck scales with a visual indicating device capable of automatically printing both gross and tare weights and time and date on the delivery ticket .
equip scales with a motion detection device or a time delay relay that prevents printing the weight on the delivery ticket until the scale is fully at rest .
remove or permanently lock tare beams in place .
ensure that the scale has a manufacturers rating equal to or greater than the maximum gross load being weighed .
ensure that the approaches to the scale at both ends are at a level grade at the same elevation as the platform .
house the scale cabinet and dial and the mechanical weight recorder in a suitable shelter with adequate heat and light .
num .
automated release agent system .
install and use a system that automatically sprays the truck bed with a release agent to prevent the build up of hma in the bed .
ensure that the equipment sprays a thin even coat of release agent over the entire interior surface .
supply a nonpetroleum based release agent to the system .
num .
surge and storage bins .
a plant may store hma in a surge or storage bin if the supplier has obtained department approval .
ensure that each bin is equipped with a signaling device that automatically provides a visible or audible signal when the material in the bin reaches the num num ton level .
ensure that the signal device is visible or audible from within the batch room and remains in operation until the bin level exceeds the specified minimum .
the supplier may store the hma in a surge or storage bin for up to num hours .
in extreme circumstances the me may approve the storage of hma in a surge or storage bin for up to num hours .
if the surge or storage system is changed or altered notify the department of the modification .
the department may require reevaluation to continue operations .
num b .
requirements for fully automated batch type plants .
use fully automated batch type plants only for mixtures containing up to num percent rap .
perform daily checks to ensure that hoppers are discharging completely and that the balance returns to zero tare whenever the hoppers are emptied .
when directed make checks to verify the accuracy of the batch scales within the normal weighing range and to ensure that the interlocking devices and automatic recording equipment are functioning properly .
when the accuracy of the batch scales is not within the required weighing tolerances the department may require weighing of all trucks on an approved truck scale .
ensure that the batch plant is equipped with controls for proportioning the rap into the mixture without damaging the asphalt binder in the reclaimed material .
if the rap is introduced into the system before the hot bins ensure that the proportioning controls include weigh belts or belt scales .
ensure that these items electronically interlock the new aggregate feed with the rap feed and vary the feed rates as required to maintain the required ratio of new aggregate to rap .
prepare the recycled hma mixtures by the heat transfer method of recycling .
ensure that the rap does not come in direct contact with the flame in the dryer .
adjust the temperature of new aggregate leaving the dryer and the time interval of the dry and wet mixing cycles as needed .
before combining with the heated new aggregate ensure that the rap passes through a numinch vibrating scalping screen .
ensure that fully automated batch type plants are also equipped with the following num .
dryer .
provide a dryer or dryers that continuously agitate the aggregate during the heating and drying process .
use a dryer capable of drying and heating the aggregate to the specified moisture and temperature requirements without leaving any visible unburned oil or carbon residue on the aggregate when discharged .
num .
screens .
use plant screens that are capable of screening aggregates to the specified sizes and proportions and have capacities greater than the capacity of the mixer .
num .
aggregate hot bins .
ensure that the plant is equipped with at least num aggregate storage bins of sufficient capacity to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
arrange the bins to ensure separate and adequate storage of appropriate fractions of the mineral aggregates .
provide separate dry storage when using mineral filler or hydrated lime and ensure that the plant is equipped to feed such material into the mixer accurately and uniformly .
provide each bin with properly sized and located overflow pipes to prevent the material from backing up into other compartments or bins .
ensure that each compartment is provided with an individual outlet gate that is leakfree when closed and that will cut off flow quickly and completely .
provide bins with means to obtain representative samples .
ensure that each bin is equipped with a signaling device that automatically provides a visible or audible signal when the level of aggregate reaches the lowest num percent level and remains in operation until the bin level exceeds the specified minimum .
num .
plant scales .
use springless dial type or electronic load cell type plant scales with a readout accurate to within the tolerances allowed by the new jersey department of law and public safety office of weights and measures .
locate scales so that they are plainly visible to the plant operator at all times .
for aggregate amounts less than num pounds ensure that the graduation of scales used in weighing is not greater than num pounds .
for aggregate amounts from num to num pounds ensure that the graduation of scales used in the weighing is not greater than num pounds .
for aggregate amounts more than num pounds ensure that the graduation of scales used in the weighing is not greater than num percent of the capacity of the scales .
for weighting asphalt binder use scales that conform to the requirements for aggregate scales except that they shall read to the nearest pound and they shall have a capacity of not more than num percent of the normal amount of asphalt binder required .
ensure that plants are capable of continuously weighing the various components of the mixture for the full range of batch sizes within the tolerances specified in table num .
these tolerances are based on the total batch weight of the hma mixture .
num table num weighing tolerances mixture component tolerance each aggregate component num percent mineral filler num percent asphalt binder num percent zero return aggregates num percent zero return asphalt binder num percent if mineral filler is used in a batch cycle ensure that the allowable tolerance for the aggregate component weighed just before the filler in a cumulative weighing system is num percent .
num .
weigh box or hopper .
ensure that the plant is equipped with the means for accurately weighing each size of aggregate in a weigh box or hopper suspended on scales that is sufficiently sized to prevent overflow to the pugmill .
ensure that no material can leak into the mixer while a batch is being weighed when the discharge gate is closed .
support the weigh box or hopper on fulcrums and knife edges that are not easily thrown out of alignment or adjustment .
num .
asphalt binder control .
when using an asphalt binder bucket use a type recommended by the plant manufacturer .
ensure that the length of the discharge opening or spray bar is at least num the length of the mixer and that it discharges directly into the mixer .
ensure that the asphalt binder bucket discharge valve and spray are adequately heated .
ensure that the plant has an adequately heated quickacting nondrip charging valve located directly over the asphalt binder bucket .
when a volumetric meter is used ensure that it automatically meters the asphalt binder into each batch .
ensure that the dial to indicate the amount of asphalt binder has the capacity to measure at least num percent more than the asphalt binder required in num batch .
ensure that the meter can be locked at any dial setting and automatically resets to this reading after the addition of asphalt binder to each batch .
locate the dial in full view of the mixer operator .
automatically control the flow of binder material to begin when the dry mixing period is finished .
ensure that all of the asphalt binder material required for num batch is discharged within num seconds after the flow has started .
ensure that the size and spacing of the spray bar openings provide uniform application of asphalt binder for the full length of the mixer .
num .
mixer .
use a batch mixer capable of producing a uniform mixture within the job mix tolerances .
if not enclosed equip the mixer box with a dust hood .
ensure that the clearance of paddles does not exceed num inches from all fixed and moving parts .
num .
control of mixing time .
ensure that the mixer is equipped with an accurate time lock to control the operations of a complete mixing cycle .
it shall lock the weigh box gate after charging of the mixer until the closing of the mixer gate at the completion of the cycle .
it shall lock the asphalt binder discharge throughout the dry mixing period and shall lock the mixer gate throughout the dry and wet mixing periods .
the dry mixing period is defined as the interval of time between the opening of the weigh box gate and the start of introduction of asphalt binder .
the wet mixing period is defined as the interval of time between the start of introduction of asphalt binder and the opening of the mixer gate .
ensure that timing control is adjustable and capable of being set at intervals of num seconds or less .
as a part of the timing device install a mechanical batch counter designed to register only completely mixed batches .
set time intervals in the presence of the me to provide aggregate coating as specified in num .
num .
automated batching and mixing control .
ensure that fully automated plants include an automatic batching and mixing control system including an automatic printer system conforming to the following num .
ensure that the recording equipment and batch scales are interlocked .
maintain the panels providing access to interlocking devices under sealed conditions .
num num .
ensure that the system contains auxiliary interlocking cutoff circuits to interrupt and stop the automatic cycling of the batching operations any time the weighing tolerances are exceeded when any aggregate bin becomes empty or when there is a malfunctioning of any portion of the control system .
a platform truck scale is not required .
however if the automatic proportioning or recording devices becomes inoperative or inaccurate then manually operate the plant to complete the days production with the approval of the re .
in this case a platform truck scale is mandatory for manual operation .
num .
the department will make independent checks on batch weights by weighing trucks before and after loading and may request an inspection of the plant scales by the new jersey department of law and public safety office of weights and measures for verification of the automatic printout tickets .
c. requirements for drum mixing plants .
the contractor may use drum mixing plants in the preparation of hma paving mixtures .
heat coat and mix the hma mixture in a parallel flow counter flow or other approved type of dryermixer .
ensure that the drum mixing plant includes the following num .
aggregate bins .
equip the fine aggregate bin compartments with a vibrator or other antibridging device that is automatically actuated when bridging of the material occurs .
ensure that this device automatically shuts off when continuous material flow is restored .
num .
mineral filler bin .
when adding mineral filler use a bin and feeder that is separate from the aggregate cold bins .
ensure that the equipment is capable of feeding the mineral filler at adjustable rates .
ensure that the mineral filler feed rate in tons per hour is accurate to within num percent of the indicated rate throughout the range of the plants production capacity .
ensure that the feeder is interlocked to stop production if the flow of mineral filler is interrupted .
num .
aggregate feeder .
ensure that the plant is equipped with a mechanical system for uniformly and continuously feeding each aggregate in its proper proportion onto a collecting belt and then into the drum mixer .
ensure that the feeder system is designed so that the aggregates on the collector belt pass through a numinch scalping screen or other device to remove oversized material or debris before entering the mixer .
provide one feeder for each bin compartment .
ensure that each aggregate feeder is interlocked to stop production if flow of aggregate from any of the cold bins is interrupted .
use a variable speed system that provides for total and proportional control to regulate the quantity of aggregate fed to the drum mixer .
ensure that the individual bin feeder belts or the intermediate collecting belt that delivers the aggregate to the main feed for the drum mixer are equipped with belt type scales load cells .
use belt type scales load cells that are capable of continuously displaying at the operators station the weight of aggregate flow in tons per hour or the corresponding percentage of total mix from each individual bin and the accumulated total from each bin in tons .
ensure that the aggregate feed rate in tons per hour from each bin is accurate to within num percent of the indicated rate throughout the range of the plants production capacity .
provide the means to conveniently divert the aggregate coldfeed delivery into trucks or other containers for checking the accuracy of the aggregate feed system .
provide the means to obtain representative samples of the composite aggregate from the main feed to the drum mixer at any time during production .
for mixes containing rap the drum mix plant shall have a means for adding the rap to the dryermixer in a manner that does not damage the asphalt binder in the reclaimed material .
provide control for proportioning the rap into the mixture .
provide the means for compensating for the moisture in the rap .
ensure that the rap passes through a num inch vibrating scalping screen before being combined with the heated new aggregate .
num .
asphalt binder metering system .
ensure that the plant is equipped with a metering system that introduces the proper amount of asphalt binder into the mix .
use a system that is capable of measuring the quantity and temperature of the asphalt binder introduced into the mix and transmitting that data to the operators station .
ensure that the metering system is interlocked to stop production if the flow is interrupted .
num ensure that the metering system includes a temperature compensation device to correct the quantity of asphalt binder introduced into the mix to num f. ensure that the flow of asphalt binder to the drum mixer is continuously displayed at the operators station in units of tons per hour corrected to num f or as the corresponding percentage of total mix .
ensure that the feed rate in tons per hour is accurate to within num percent of the indicated rate throughout the range of the plants production capacity .
ensure that the accumulated weight of asphalt binder fed to the mixer is totaled .
provide convenient means for diverting the asphalt binder into trucks or other containers for checking the accuracy of the metering system .
num .
proportioning controls .
ensure that the combined aggregates pass over a weigh belt or belt scale that is electronically interlocked with the asphalt binder metering system to automatically vary the asphalt binder feed rate as required to maintain the required asphalt binder content in the mixture .
make provisions for introducing the moisture content of the coldfeed aggregates into the composite aggregate weigh belt signal and correcting wet aggregate weight to dry aggregate weight .
continuously display by electronic readout at the operators station the dry weight of the composite aggregate flow in units of tons per hour and total .
ensure that the composite aggregate feed rate is accurate to within num percent of the indicated rate .
equip belt conveyors with scrapers or other suitable devices to prevent adherence or other loss of the weighed coldfeed aggregate .
before the start of production of department mixes ensure that plant controls are calibrated .
report to the me any changes in or modifications to the equipment or operation occurring subsequent to the initial calibration .
the me may direct calibration checks or a new plant calibration .
the me may also direct recalibrating the plant if the finished mixture displays composition deficiencies .
for each drum mix plant placed in operation submit num complete sets of plant drawings a plant operators manual and a plan detailing the method of plant calibration .
the me will witness the calibration of the individual coldfeeders at several production rates throughout the range of the plants capacity .
submit a copy of the computations for the combined rate of flow and a plot of calibration charts indicating the rate of aggregate delivery in tons per hour from each coldfeeder for particular dial settings and gate openings .
determine calibration points by independently diverting each coldfeed into trucks or running each feed through the plant and determining the proper console dial setting corresponding to the measured rate of delivery .
determine calibration points in increments of approximately num tons per hour of total aggregate flow .
the me will witness a check on the mineral filler and asphalt binder feeds at several production rate increments throughout the range of the plants capacity .
divert the asphalt binder into trucks or other containers for weight or volumetric measurements to calibrate the asphalt binder metering system and subsequent checks .
the method used to calibrate the mineral filler feeder system is subject to approval .
num .
drum mixer .
use a drum mixer that continually agitates the mixture of aggregate and asphalt binder during heating .
the drum mixer should not adversely affect the aggregate or asphalt binder during drying and heating operations .
equip the mixer discharge with a pyrometer or thermometer probe to record the temperature of the mixture with the data transmitted to the operators station .
ensure that the mixer is equipped to safely and conveniently obtain representative mixture samples before introduction into the surge bin .
the me may perform test comparisons between the consistency of the asphalt binder in its original form from plant tank samples and in processed form from mixture recovery samples obtained before the mixtures introduction into the surge bin .
the me will use the results of the consistency tests to determine whether a processing improvement is necessary to eliminate excessive volatilization oxidation or other causes of premature hardening .
num .
emission control system .
ensure that the plant is equipped with an emission control system conforming to all applicable emission limitations .
num .
control console .
ensure that the following items are included in the control console at the operators station num .
cold aggregate feed controls capable of both total and proportional control of the aggregates .
num .
dryer burner controls that automatically control the temperature of the mix and record the mix temperature at the dryer discharge .
num num .
aggregate weigh belt readouts displaying the weight of material being proportioned from each aggregate bin in tons per hour or the corresponding percentage of total mix weight and the total flow over the main feeder to the drum mixer in tons per hour .
ensure that the accumulated weights in tons from each bin and the total feed to the mixer are separately totaled and are continuously displayed or are available on demand from a printout device .
num .
mineral filler readouts displaying the weight of material being proportioned from the mineral filler bin in tons per hour or the corresponding percentage of total mix weight together with an accumulative total in tons .
num .
asphalt binder metering system readouts indicating the quantity of asphalt binder corrected to num f being proportioned into the mix together with an accumulative total in tons and a recording pyrometer or thermometer that records the temperature of the asphalt binder at the pump .
num .
proportioning controls that set the asphalt binder content as well as the aggregate moisture adjustment .
num .
modifications .
when producing mixes containing num to num percent of rap ensure that the mixing time allows thorough blending of new and reclaimed materials and complete coating all aggregate particles .
if lumps of reclaimed material are observed in the mixture as it is discharged from the drum adjust the mixing time in the drum or make other changes in the production process to correct this condition .
ensure that the temperature of the mixture at discharge from the plant or surge and storage bins is maintained at or above the temperature required to deliver the material to the work site and achieve optimum compaction .
num hma trucks transport the mixture from the mixing plant to the project limits in trucks equipped with tight clean bodies .
the contractor may lightly coat the trucks with a fine aggregate soap or lime solution or other such nonpetroleumbased release agent .
do not use a petroleumbased product as a release agent .
permanently equip trucks with an airfoil that is capable at any speed or under any weather conditions to deflect air over the tarp and to prevent air from going under the tarp .
ensure that the airfoil is affixed no more than num feet in front of the tarp roll and be at least as high as the top of the tarp roll .
provide a waterproof tarp that is capable of withstanding normal handling and placement temperatures of up to num f without damaging the fabric has a minimum weight of num ounces per square yard and is properly sized to completely cover the load .
immediately cover each truckload after loading at the plant with the tarp to protect the mixture from the weather .
ensure that the tarp securely meets or overlaps the top of the tailgate and is securely held in place so as to prevent air from lifting the tarp during transportation .
ensure that the truck body is heated or insulated as necessary to ensure delivery of the mixture at the specified temperature .
remove any truck from the work that does not have an airfoil or does not have an approved tarp until such conditions are corrected and the truck is presented for inspection to the re .
the re or me may require that the contractor make available the vehicles used for transporting hma mixture for inspection at the plant laboratory before shipping materials .
section num concrete plant and mixing equipment num batching plant ensure that plant laboratory and truck scales are inspected and certified by an independent scale company accredited according to international organization of standards international electrotechnical commission num or a state or county office of weights and measures .
ensure that certification is performed annually or every num months if directed by the me .
ensure that aggregate reserves at the batching plant are stockpiled as specified in num .
provide a batching plant with the specified site layout and equipment features capable of ensuring a continuous supply of concrete to the work .
ensure that the batching plant is equipped with the following num .
plant laboratory .
provide and maintain a plant laboratory at each plant site for the mes use for sampling and acceptance testing and for the producers use for quality control testing during periods of production .
num ensure that the plant laboratory has an unobstructed view of the trucks as they are loaded .
ensure that excluding the sanitary facilities the plant laboratory has a floor area of at least num square feet a ceiling height of at least num feet adequate ventilation and artificial lighting .
the me may reapprove a previously approved concrete plant with a undersized laboratory if it functionally meets the needs for testing .
provide sanitary facilities located within the same building .
ensure that the plant laboratory is weathertight heated airconditioned and can maintain a temperature of between num and num f. ensure that the plant laboratory is equipped with the following a .
general equipment .
provide general equipment as specified in num.a .
b .
testing equipment .
provide the following testing equipment num .
platform scale of num pounds minimum capacity with a beam or dial with significant graduations of num pound or less .
num .
apparatus to perform testing according to aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num and aashto t num .
num .
miscellaneous items including rubber hammer masons trowels pointed shovel small and large sugar scoops heavy galvanized pail approximately numquart capacity aggregate sample pans brushes flashlight glassware steel straightedge approximately num num inches and such expendable supplies necessary for the tests to be performed .
num .
batch counter .
ensure that the batching plant is equipped with a nonresettable batch counter that indicates the number of batches proportioned .
num .
bins and hoppers .
provide bins with separate compartments for fine aggregate for each size of coarse aggregate and for each brand and type of cement at the batching plant .
ensure that the weighing hoppers are sealed and vented to prevent dusting during operation .
use separate scales and hoppers for cement with a device to indicate the complete discharge of the batch of cement into the mixing drum .
ensure that the weighing hoppers and scales are of adequate size and capable of being locked .
ensure that the hopper discharge mechanism is interlocked against opening until the full batch is in the hopper and the scale is balanced against opening while the hopper is being filled against closing until the hopper is entirely discharged and the scale back in balance and against opening if the batch in the hopper is either overweight or underweight by more than num percent of the amount specified .
ensure that the weighing hopper discharge gate operates in a manner that does not affect the scale balance .
ensure that the discharge chute boot or other such device is suspended from the encasement and not from the weighing hopper and is constructed so that cement does not lodge therein .
ensure that there is no loss of cement by air currents or otherwise .
ensure that there are means available to monitor the required cement content in each batch .
num .
scales .
use beam scales springless dial scales or electronic load cell scales with a readout when weighing aggregates and cement .
use scales that are accurate to within num percent for cement and within num percent for aggregate throughout the range of use .
when using beam type scales provide a dial for indicating to the operator the required load in the weighing beams and for indicating critical position .
ensure that the weigh beam and device are in full view of the operator who shall have convenient access to all controls while charging the hopper .
ensure that poises are capable of being locked in any position to prevent unauthorized change .
num .
water measuring equipment .
measure water by volume or by weight .
ensure that the range or error for water measuring equipment is less than num percent .
ensure that the measuring device automatically registers and stops the flow of water when the designated quantity has been delivered into the mixing drum .
if measuring by volume ensure that the water measuring device contains an auxiliary tank from which to fill the measuring tank .
ensure that the measuring tank is equipped with outside taps and valves or equivalent means to accurately calibrate the tank and to provide for the quick and accurate determination of the amount of water in the tank .
ensure that the volume of the auxiliary tank is at least equal to that of the measuring tank .
num .
chemical admixtures .
use an automatic displacement dispenser for adding each admixture .
ensure that the plant is equipped with a separate dispensing system with a visual sight gauge for each chemical admixture incorporated into the concrete .
provide a system capable of dispensing the total amount required to within num num percent or num ounce whichever is greater .
provide convenient means to calibrate each system .
provide chemical admixture devices with each truck mixer approved for dispensing admixtures at the placement site .
num .
mineral admixtures .
ensure that mineral admixtures stored at the batching plant are located in a separate storage facility .
do not use a split silo to store mineral admixtures and cement or num different mineral admixtures .
ensure that scales and batching tolerances are consistent with those specified for cement .
num .
automatic batching system .
ensure that batching plants equipped to proportion aggregates and bulk cement by means of automatic weighing and recording devices contain the following a .
automatic batching controls .
ensure that batching equipment in the system for batching by weight is actuated by a single starting mechanism .
the department will allow a separate starting mechanism for volumetric batching of water or admixtures not batched at the time of initial weighing .
ensure that each automatic batcher returns to zero balance and each volumetric device resets to start or signal empty before it may be charged .
ensure that the discharge of any ingredient in the system does not start until all weighed ingredients have been batched until all batching controls have been cleared of the previous batch with scale returning to zero balance and until volumetric devices reset to start or signal empty .
for cumulative batchers provide interlocked sequential controls .
ensure that automatic batching controls start the weighing operation of each material and stop automatically when the designated weight of each material has been reached interlocked in such a way that num .
the charging device can not be actuated until the scale has returned to zero balance within num percent of the scale capacity .
num .
the discharge device can not be actuated until the required material is within the applicable tolerances .
num .
the discharge device can not be actuated if the charging device or the discharge device is open .
b .
recording devices .
ensure that automatic batching plants are equipped with an accurate recorder or recorders that provide a permanent and continuous record of batching operations .
provide a maximum of num recording units in lockable enclosures with each plant .
provide batching records as directed by the me .
ensure each recorder produces a digital record on tickets providing the following information num .
the quantity or batched weights of each aggregate cement water and admixture .
num .
the zerobalance condition of each scale after batches have been discharged or before the start of the batching operation .
num .
a means of identifying each admixture batched .
num .
the time date and batch number of each batch delivered .
num .
mix formula or concrete classification identification .
num .
safety .
provide adequate and safe stairways at access points to plant operations .
provide overhead protection at locations where deemed necessary .
ensure that gears pulleys chains sprockets and other hazardous moving parts are guarded and protected .
num concrete trucks ensure that mixers have a fixed metal plate or plates on which the following information is plainly marked num .
the manufacturers capacity rating in terms of the gross drum volume num .
the capacity of the drum in terms of the volume of mixed concrete and num .
the manufacturers designated drum speed of rotation for both mixing and agitation .
the me will inspect the mechanical condition of the truck mixer the mixing and agitation rates the accuracy of the watermeasuring device the sizes of the discharge opening and chutes and the general condition and wear of the blades .
the me will not approve mixers if the pickup and throwover blades are broken missing or excessively worn .
examine num mixers on a daily basis for drum and blade cleanliness leaks in the mixing water system and the condition of the water measuring device and revolution counter .
ensure that the concrete supplier maintains in a convenient location a copy of the manufacturers design for each size and type of truck showing the dimensions and arrangements of the blades the dimensions of the drum the gross volume of the drum the recommended rates of rotation for all types of operations and any other pertinent information .
ensure that the mixing watermeasuring device is plainly visible to the truck operator when operating the mixing water and the drum controls and to the me while standing on the ground .
keep measuring indicators clean and in good condition .
ensure that trucks for the delivery of centralmix concrete have a revolving watertight drum that is capable of uniformly transporting and discharging the mixed concrete .
ensure that the speed of the drum conforms with the manufacturers stated agitating speed .
ensure that the mixing water tank pump and the piping are kept clean and free of leaks .
provide documentation showing the date and results of calibration of the watermeasuring device on each truck mixer .
provide copies if requested .
ensure that calibrated with the date of the last calibration is stenciled on the mixing water tank near the measuring device .
num .
central mixing plant truck .
ensure that mixers are equipped with electricallyactuated counters allowing easy verification of the number of revolutions of the drum .
ensure that the counter unit is positioned on the truck and plainly visible if the drivers door is open .
num .
transit mixing truck .
if necessary each transit mixer shall only use the mixing water tank and measuring device for providing tempering water .
ensure that truck mixers used for transit mix concrete are equipped with an electrically operated counter unit containing num counters that is nonresettable except by use of a numvolt device utilizing a nonstandard plug located at the batching plant .
use one counter to record only those revolutions at speeds recommended by the manufacturer of the truck mixer as mixing speed and to record the total of all such mixing revolutions from the time the truck is loaded .
use the other counter to record revolutions of the drum at all speeds and to record the total revolutions from the time the truck is loaded .
ensure that the unit includes an indicator on the front panel that shows if the instrument has been turned off or tampered with in any manner after being reset at the time of loading .
ensure that the counter unit and the resetting device conform to the nec .
ensure that the counter unit is positioned on the truck and plainly visible if the drivers door is open .
num mobile mixer ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with a cement bin of sufficient capacity to store and supply the quantity of dry cement required to produce the maximum volume as rated by the manufacturer .
ensure that the cement bin is free of moisture and contamination at all times .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with aggregate bins of sufficient capacity to separately store the quantities of fine and coarse aggregates required to produce the maximum volume of concrete as rated by the manufacturer .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with the means to prevent contamination or intermixing of the fine and coarse aggregates during loading and transporting .
ensure that aggregate bins are covered when moisture can enter the bins .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with the means for readily determining the level of aggregates within the aggregate bins without the need to climb up on the truck .
ensure that the aggregate is maintained at the proper level to allow the correct volume to enter the mix .
ensure that the aggregate bins are equipped with vibrators or other means to maintain a smooth even and continuous flow of aggregate from the bins .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with water tanks of sufficient capacity to store enough water to produce the maximum concrete volume at the slump specified for each concrete item as rated by the manufacturer .
when using concrete additives in the mix ensure that the truck mixer is capable of storing the additives incorporating them into the mix and measuring the rate of flow of each additive into the mix .
ensure that the truck mixer includes a feeder unit mounted under the compartment bins to deliver the ingredients to the mixing unit .
num ensure that each bin on the truck has an accurately controlled individual gate or feeding mechanism to form an orifice for volumetrically measuring the material drawn from each bin compartment .
ensure that the cement bin feeding mechanism is set to discharge continuously and at a uniform rate the required volumetric weight equivalent of cement .
ensure that the gates of the aggregate bins are calibrated at the various openings to discharge the required volumetric weight equivalent of aggregates .
equip the mixer truck with a material flow indicator attached to the metering gates to monitor the continuous flow of material .
ensure that the indicator sounds an alarm when a continuous flow of material does not pass through the metering gates .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped to allow checking of the calibration of the gate openings and meters by means of weight test samples .
ensure that the calibration of the gate openings and meters are checked and certified for each concrete mix design at least once per year by a certified testing agency .
if approved by the me a representative of the contractor may perform the calibration if it can be shown that the representative is knowledgeable in the proper techniques of calibration .
notify the me at least num week before the annual calibration date .
the me may require a calibration check or a yield test at any time .
the accuracy of the mixer to proportion the specified mix is acceptable if the calibration check shows that the equivalent weights of each component are within the tolerances specified in table num .
table num weighing tolerances mixture component tolerance cement num to num percent fine aggregate num percent coarse aggregate num percent admixtures num percent water num percent ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with a revolution counter indicator allowing the reading of the volumetric weight equivalent of cement discharged during the concrete mixing operation .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with fine and coarse aggregate dials to allow adjustment of the gates of the aggregate bins for volumetric proportioning of aggregates .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with a water meter or gauge to register the discharge rate of water by volume entering the mix .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with automatic means for maintaining the operating speed of the proportioning and mixing equipment .
ensure that the truck mixer is operated within num percent of the manufacturers rated speed .
ensure that the tolerance is met whether the mixer is moving or standing still .
ensure that the truck mixer is equipped with a tachometer mounted on the unit to measure the operating speed .
ensure that all indicators dials meters tachometers and controls are easily visible in full view and close enough to be read or adjusted by the operator while mixing concrete .
instead of a time clock the counter unit may contain a third counter an electricallyoperated timer that is nonresettable except by use of the numvolt device .
num smallbatch mixer where small quantities of concrete or mortar are needed provide a mixer with a minimum mixing capacity to produce a numbag mix .
use smallbatch mixers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num section num precast and prestressed concrete plant equipment num precast plant a .
plant certification .
ensure that the plant manufacturing precast concrete members is certified in the applicable category by the npca the american concrete pipe association acpa or pci certified as specified in num .
provide written documentation of the certification to the me upon request .
b .
forms and casting beds .
ensure that forms and casting beds are carefully aligned substantial and firm braced fastened tightly together to prevent mortar leakage and strong enough to withstand the action of mechanical vibrators .
ensure that forms are constructed to allow movement of the members without damage during release of the prestressing force .
before placing concrete obtain me approval for the casting beds and all form work .
num prestressed plant a .
plant certification .
ensure that the plant manufacturing prestressed concrete members is certified by pci in the category applicable to the work .
ensure that the certification of the plant is in accordance with appendix d option a of the pci mnlnum .
provide written documentation of the certification to the me upon request .
b. jacks .
ensure that prestressing is performed with jacking equipment .
use hydraulic jacks that are equipped with pressure gauges .
ensure that the combination of jack and gauge is calibrated by a certified testing agency and provide calibration charts to the me showing the relationship between dial gage pressure and force delivered .
ensure that jacks and pumps are calibrated as a unit are clearly marked and are used as a unit .
should other types of jacks be used provide calibrated proving rings or other devices so that the jacking forces may be known .
ensure that the calibration of jacks and gauges is performed at least once per year .
if any jack or gauge provides erratic results or if gauge pressure and elongations indicate differing stresses of more than num percent ensure that recalibration is performed immediately .
ensure that strand elongations are measurable to at least the nearest num inch .
c. forms and casting beds .
ensure that forms and casting beds are carefully aligned substantial and firm braced fastened tightly together to prevent mortar leakage and strong enough to withstand the action of mechanical vibrators .
ensure that forms are constructed to allow movement of the members without damage during release of the prestressing force .
obtain approval from the me for the casting beds and all form work before placing concrete .
d. load cells .
ensure that plants manufacturing prestressed concrete members have at least num calibrated load cells to verify stressing operations .
e. grouting equipment .
provide grouting equipment according to division ii section num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num mes office provide and maintain in good condition an office conveniently located at the prestressing plant for the exclusive use of the me during production and until all items have been shipped to the project limits .
ensure that the office has a minimum area of num square feet .
provide means to maintain office temperature between num and num f. ensure that the office doors and windows are equipped with adequate locks and provide the necessary keys to the me .
provide convenient access to potable water and clean functional sanitary facilities .
provide the me with access to a facsimile fax machine and photocopier at the fabrication plant for department or projectrelated use .
provide telephone and fax service .
ensure that the office also includes the following equipment num .
one telephone and direct private telephone line with an answering machine or voice mail capability .
ensure the telephone line is free of monitoring or recording devices .
num .
one direct private telephone line for computer connectivity .
ensure the telephone line is free of monitoring or recording devices .
num .
two desks and num chairs .
num .
one numdrawer file cabinet with a lock and num keys .
num .
a stocked numperson firstaid box conforming to ansi standards .
num njdot test methods njdot anum mortarmaking properties of fine aggregate a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the mortarmaking properties of fine aggregate by tensile strength at the age of num days when compared to standard ottawa mortar .
b .
apparatus .
use apparatus as required in aashto t num and aashto t num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
prepare standard ottawa mortar according to aashto t num and test according to aashto t num .
num .
using the fine aggregate sample prepare the mortar according to aashto t num and test according to aashto t num .
replace the standard ottawa sand with the same weight of fine aggregate sample and use sufficient mixing water to produce the same consistency as obtained with the standard ottawa mortar .
d. report .
report the strength of the fine aggregate sample as a percentage of the standard ottawa mortar at num days .
njdot anum determining percentage of mica in fine aggregate a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the mica content of fine aggregate .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
binocular microscope leica zeiss wild or equivalent with num minimum magnification and using a standard num high quality lens .
num .
no .
num and no .
num sieves conforming to aashto m num .
num .
mechanical sieve shaker conforming to aashto t num .
num .
microsplitter or spinning riffler splitter .
num .
balance conforming to aashto m num and having a minimum capacity of num grams with a precision of num gram .
num .
balance for weighing separated mica in stainless steel containers having a minimum capacity of num grams with a precision of num grams and conforming to aashto m num .
num .
stainlesssteel sample container with lid .
num .
oven for drying sample to a constant weight at a temperature of num num f. num .
stainlesssteel spatula .
num .
size num or smaller paintbrush with loose hairs trimmed .
num .
microscopic picking tray as used by the american association of petroleum geologists or equivalent for placement within microscope working area .
num .
water in a suitable container for wetting paintbrush .
num .
various suitable larger brushes for moving and spreading sample on picking tray .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
ensure that the examiner has a minimum numyear degree in geology or a related science and an understanding of mineralogy petrographic analysis and optical microscopy .
num .
take the test sample from a representative sample from a field stockpile .
after oven drying to a constant mass at a temperature of num num f split the sample into approximately num grams weighed to the nearest num gram .
num .
sieve the num gram sample according to aashto t num using a no .
num sieve and a no .
num sieve .
retain the material passing the no .
num sieve and retained on the no .
num sieve .
num .
reduce the retained sample to approximately num grams .
using a microsplitter or a spinning riffler further split the sample into num approximately numgram samples of fine aggregate .
choose num of the twenty numgram samples at random for analysis .
num num .
place the first chosen sample on a microscopic picking tray and quarter using a stainlesssteel spatula .
with a large brush sweep num of the num sample aliquots to the periphery of the picking tray for possible further analysis .
num .
wet the bristles of the small paintbrush and under numx viewing power separate the mica minerals from the rest of the fine aggregate num .
after picking at least num percent of the mica from the sample aliquot carefully brush the separated mica into preweighed and labeled stainlesssteel sample container with lid .
brush the micafree portion of the sample aliquot into another preweighed and labeled sample container with lid .
num .
if deemed necessary the examiner may analyze other quarter aliquots of the sample brushed aside in step num .
follow steps num and num to analyze additional aliquots brushing the mica and the micafree portions into their respective containers with the first aliquot analyzed .
num .
with the lids off dry both portions of the sample to constant weight .
num .
using a scale with a precision of num grams weigh both samples with the lids on to prevent loss .
record weights of the mica and the micafree portions .
the sum of these is the weight of sample and should be approximately num grams for each aliquot analyzed .
num .
repeat steps num through num for the second randomly chosen numgram sample .
d. calculations and report .
calculate the percent of mica for each sample analyzed using the following equation num weight of sample percent of mica weight of mica in grams e. report .
report the final mica content as the average of the results of the num samples to the nearest num percent .
njdot anum petrographic analysis to determine lithological composition of coarse aggregate a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the quantity of the rock types and deleterious material components in coarse aggregates or in the coarse aggregate fraction of a dga or soil aggregate .
determinations may include the carbonate rock content of crushed gravels and the weathered and decomposed content of crushed stone or soil aggregate .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
binocular microscope leica zeiss wild or equivalent with num minimum magnification and using a standard num high quality lens .
num .
no .
num and no .
num sieves conforming to aashto m num .
num .
mechanical sieve shaker conforming to aashto t num .
num .
balance conforming to aashto m num and having a minimum capacity of num grams with a precision of num gram .
num .
oven for drying sample to a constant weight at a temperature of num num f. num .
num dilute hydrochloric acid hcl in an eyedrop container .
num .
geology or mason hammer .
num .
scratching devices with known mohs hardness values .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
ensure that the examiner has a minimum numyear degree in geology or a related science and an understanding of mineralogy petrographic analysis and optical microscopy .
num .
oven dry sample to a constant weight .
split the sample to a sample size that will result in a testing sample size as specified in table anum after sieving .
num table anum test sample size aggregate size sieve size for retention approximate test sample size no .
num or larger no .
num num grams no .
num or no .
num no .
num num grams dga or inum no .
num num grams num .
for aggregate sizes no .
num and larger sieve the sample over a no .
num sieve .
for aggregate size no .
num or no .
num sieve the sample over a no .
num sieve .
ensure that the sample size after sieving is as specified in table anum .
num .
wash the sample to remove any coating that would make particle examination difficult .
if needed use a mild detergent such as calgon to clean the aggregate .
after washing ovendry the sample to a constant mass at a temperature of num num f. num .
separate the prepared sample into rock types as defined in astm c num .
perform the separation using visual examination with the aid of the binocular microscope dilute hcl hammer and scratching implements .
num .
examine the sample for deleterious material such as weathered leached porous friable faultfractured altered or otherwise unsound particles that could impair coarse aggregate performance .
use the following guidelines to determine if coarse aggregate particles are deleteriously weathered or decomposed num .
can be broken into several pieces by a light hammer tap .
num .
show more than superficial oxidation or alteration of feldspars .
num .
appear porous or are determined by the examiner to be porous .
num .
show numerous microfractures cleavage planes or slickensides due to faulting .
num .
are of abnormal coloration throughout due to chemical or mechanical alteration .
num .
separate the deleteriously weathered and decomposed fraction into its own group .
num .
weigh the rock types and deleterious material group to the nearest num grams and record .
d. calculations .
calculate the percentage of rock types and percentage of deleterious material by dividing the individual weight by the weight of the total sample and multiplying by num .
e. report .
report the percentage by weight of individual rock types as defined in astm c num and percentage by weight of deleterious material .
njdot anum determining percent of adherent fines present in coarse aggregate a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the percentage of adherent fines present in coarse aggregate .
b .
apparatus .
use apparatus as required in aashto t num and a no .
num sieve conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
obtain a test sample from a representative field sample .
num .
dry the test sample to constant mass at a temperature of num num f. num .
weigh the sample to the nearest num percent .
num .
sieve the sample for less than num minute over a no .
num sieve .
weigh the material retained on the no .
num sieve .
consider the material passing the no .
num sieve as nonadherent fines .
num .
test the material retained on the no .
num sieve according to aashto t num to determine the weight of material passing the no .
num sieve .
consider material passing the no .
num sieve as adherent fines .
num d. calculations .
calculate the percentage of nonadherent fines and the percentage of adherent fines as follows num w w w percent of non adherent fines t num t num w w w percent of adherent fines num a num where wt total weight of test sample as determined in step num wnum weight retained on no .
num sieve as determined in step num wa weight of sample after washing over the no .
num sieve as determined in step num e. report .
report the percent nonadherent fines and the percent adherent fines .
njdot anum scratch hardness test for coarse aggregate particles a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the percent of soft particles contained in coarse aggregates on the basis of scratch hardness .
this test method is suitable for use on no .
num no .
num or equivalent sized coarse aggregate .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
scratch hardness apparatus consisting of a brass rod num inch in diameter with a rounded point mounted in a device so that a load of num num pounds is applied to the specimen tested .
ensure that the brass rod is of suitable hardness so that when filed to a sharp point it will scratch a copper penny us lincoln design but fail to scratch a nickel us jefferson design .
num .
sieve sizes num inch num inch num inch and num inch conforming to aashto m num .
num .
apparatus required to perform aashto t num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
dry the coarse aggregate sample and split into portions for the various tests to be performed .
ensure that the portion of the sample for scratch hardness testing is sized so that it will yield not less than the amounts of the sizes specified in table anum that are available in amounts of num percent or more .
table anum minimum size of sample to be tested sieve size inches sample mass grams num to num num num to num num num to num num num .
perform a gradation test on num portion according to aashto t num to determine the percent retained on the num num and num inch sieves and the percent passing the numinch sieve .
num .
separate the test sample into fractionated sizes as specified in table anum .
discard material passing the num inch sieve or retained on the num inch sieve .
also discard fractions on sieves that represent less than num percent of the overall sample .
num .
if the sample contains less than num percent of any of the sizes specified in table anum do not test that size .
for the purpose of calculating test results consider the fractionated size to contain the same percentage of soft particles as the average of the next larger and the next smaller size .
if one of these sizes is absent consider the fractionated size to contain the same percentage of soft particles as the next larger or next smaller size whichever is present .
num .
take a representative sample meeting the sample size requirements in table anum of each of the fractionated sizes to be tested .
num .
test each particle of aggregate in a fractionated size using the following steps num num place the piece of coarse aggregate under the scratch hardness apparatus forcing the piece of aggregate to touch the sharpened brass rod .
num push up on the numpound weighted brass rod with the piece of aggregate and pull the aggregate forward .
ensure that the brass rod remains in firm contact with the piece of aggregate at least from the center to the edge of the aggregate on one face .
num examine the particle to determine if it was scratched .
consider the particle to be soft if a groove was made in it without deposition of metal from the brass rod or if separate particles are detached from the rock mass .
consider the particle to be hard if a metal streak was made on it by the brass rod and no groove was made .
if a particle contains more than one type of rock and is determined to be partly hard and partly soft consider the particle soft if the soft part is more than num percent of the particle .
num assign the particles to groups of soft or hard particles .
num .
separately weigh the hard and soft particles groups for the fractionated size to the nearest num percent .
num .
repeat steps num and num for each of the fractionated sizes .
d. report .
report the following num .
for each fractionated size mass of particles tested with the brass rod .
num .
for each fractionated size mass of particles classified as soft in the test .
num .
for each fractionated size percent of test sample classified as soft by mass .
num .
for the sample percent of soft particles calculated by weighted average based on the original gradation .
round the sample percent of soft particles to the nearest whole number .
njdot anum determining gradation of densegraded aggregate containing rap a .
scope .
this test method is used to rapidly determine the gradation of dga containing more than num percent rap .
due to the melting and adhering of the asphalt portion of rap typical oven or hotplate drying of the sample is detrimental .
this test method is a modification of aashto t num .
b .
apparatus .
use apparatus according to aashto t num t num t num and m num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
sieve a minimum numgram sample of dga without drying wetsieved through the following sieves numinch numinch numinch and no .
num .
weigh the material retained on each sieve and the material passing the no .
num sieve .
record the weights .
num .
reduce the material passing the no .
num sieve to a numgram sample .
num .
spread the num gram sample out in a pan and put it in an oven preheated to num num f for approximately num hours .
at num minute intervals remove the sample from the oven and weigh it .
remix the material to promote even and thorough drying then return it to the oven .
continue to dry the material until it reaches a constant weight .
num .
after drying the material passing the no .
num sieve to a constant weight record the final weight .
num .
wash the material passing the no .
num sieve according to aashto t num and dry the sample using the procedure in step num .
num .
determine the gradation of the sample according to aashto t num .
num .
mathematically combine the gradation results of the plus no .
num and minus no .
num portions of the material for a final gradation .
d. report .
report the mathematically combined gradation results reported as a total percent passing the required sieves .
num njdot bnum falling head permeability test for asphaltstabilized drainage course a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the permeability of asphaltstabilized drainage course asdc materials .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
falling head permeability apparatus consisting of the following num a numinch inside diameter standpipe that is at least num inches high with num timing marks approximately num inches apart num a top support that will fit over the mold and into which the standpipe will fit with a clamping system to ensure that it will not leak during testing .
num a bottom support into which the mold can fit and capable of supporting the apparatus with a clamping system to ensure that it will not leak during testing .
include a flap gate in the bottom of the bottom support to keep the water from flowing until after the testing has begun .
num two rubber gaskets .
num .
steel cylinder molds numinch high numinch inside diameter .
num .
a steel ruler with numinch graduations .
num .
a stopwatch capable of measuring up to num minutes with an accuracy of num second .
num .
a source of clean cold tap water .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num prepare and compact num asdc specimens according to aashto t num .
num .
measure the height of the mold the distance from the top of the mold to the top of the compacted specimen and the distance from the bottom of the mold to the bottom of the compacted specimen .
calculate the compacted height of the asdc sample l in inches as the height of the mold minus the num distances measured .
num .
place a numinch diameter cylinder mold with a compacted asdc specimen into the bottom support ring of the falling head permeability apparatus .
place a rubber gasket along the bottom edge of the cylinder mold to prevent water leakage .
num .
place a rubber gasket at the top edge of the cylinder mold .
num .
place the upper support ring and plastic standpipe on top of the numinch diameter cylinder mold .
num .
lock the upper support ring to the cylinder mold with the wing nuts .
the permeability apparatus is now assembled and ready for permeability testing .
num .
place the assembled permeability apparatus near the water source and a suitable drain .
num .
with the bottom flap gate closed fill the plastic standpipe to the top with water and then turn off the water .
num .
start the permeability flow test by opening the bottom flap gate to allow water to flow through the specimen .
num .
start the stopwatch when the water level drops to the first timing mark down from top of the standpipe .
num .
stop the stopwatch when the water level drops to the second timing mark down from the top of the standpipe .
num .
record the time in seconds .
num .
repeat the permeability test with additional compacted asdc specimens for a total of num trials .
num d. calculations .
calculate the permeability of each sample using the following equation num ln num num h h t l k where k falling head permeability feetday .
l height of compacted asdc specimen .
t time in seconds for water level to fall from first timing mark to second timing mark .
hnum distance in inches from first timing mark to bottom of specimen .
hnum distance in inches from second timing mark to bottom of specimen .
ln natural logarithm .
e. report .
for each of the num compacted asdc samples report l t hnum hnum and the permeability .
report the average permeability of the num samples .
njdot bnum sampling hma mixtures a .
scope .
this test method is used to sample hma mixtures at the plant .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
table of random numbers .
num .
shovel .
num .
bucket or pail of suitable size to collect sample .
num .
scoop and spatulas .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
lot sizes .
when taking samples from the truck at the plant apply the rates of sampling to the plants production for all department projects rather than for individual projects .
divide the production into successive lots of the size as specified in section num for the mixture being sampled .
take num samples for volumetric acceptance testing composition testing maximum specific gravity testing and comparison testing from each lot .
the me will assign consecutive lot numbers for each type of mix at the plant .
include the assigned lot identification number on each weigh ticket .
num .
obtaining samples .
the me will use a table of random numbers to select the ton of mix to be sampled for each sample in the lot .
based on the ton of mix determine the truckload to be sampled .
obtain samples from the designated truckloads of material using the following method num .
flip a coin to determine which half of the truck to sample .
if heads sample the front half of the truck .
if tails sample the rear half of the truck .
num .
do not sample at the very bottom of a pile or in areas between piles to reduce the possibility of including segregated material in the sample .
num .
dig a furrow num to num inches deep that extends along the conical pile within the half of the truck to be sampled .
follow the slope of the pile starting as near to the center of the truck as possible .
num .
from the furrow shovel approximately equal volumes of material from the top third center third and bottom third of the pile .
sample enough material to perform all required testing .
num .
mixing and reducing samples .
mix the sample taken from the truck using a scoop .
clean all tools by scraping with spatulas before and after each remixing to prevent buildup of asphalt and fines on the tools .
do not use solvents to clean tools between uses .
after mixing reduce the sample as follows a. gyratory specimen .
scoop a representative portion of hma from the container of material to be molded into one specimen for volumetric testing according to aashto t num .
ensure that the hma is at the specified compaction temperature when molding the specimen .
b .
composition sample .
after the removal of material for the gyratory specimen remix the remaining material .
perform composition testing by the ignition method by taking a representative sample from the num remixed material and testing according to aashto t num .
if composition analysis is being performed by hot bin analysis njdot bnum a composition sample of hma mix is not necessary .
c. maximum specific gravity sample .
remix the remaining material .
take a sample for determining maximum specific gravity and test according to aashto t num. d. comparison sample .
remix the remaining material and prepare a comparison sample weighing approximately num pounds .
place the comparison sample in a container that is sealed and labeled .
store the comparison sample at the plant for at least num months so it will be available for selection by the me .
num .
identifying samples .
identify samples by lot number and position in the lots sampling sequence .
use a number followed by a letter to identify the sample .
use the lot number as the number and label the first second third fourth and fifth samples in the lot as a b c d and e respectively .
if multiple samples are taken from the same truckload of mix assign the same identification code to each of the samples .
d. report .
report deviations to the specified sampling procedure .
njdot bnum selecting cores for maximum specific gravity testing in air voids determination a .
scope .
this test method is used to randomly select the core samples on which the maximum specific gravity will be determined according to aashto t num for use in the calculation of air voids for acceptance of a lot and the procedure to be followed in the event of a possible failing lot .
b .
procedure .
perform the following steps num .
determine the bulk specific gravity according to aashto t num on each core from the lot .
num .
randomly select num core sample from a numcore sample lot using a computergenerated random number selection program .
num .
determine the maximum specific gravity of the randomly selected core according to aashto t num .
num .
determine the air void comparison limits based on air void acceptance limits specified for the mix being tested .
add num percent to the lower acceptance limit for the lower comparison limit and subtract num percent from the upper acceptance limit for the upper comparison limit .
num .
calculate the air void content for the randomly selected core using its maximum specific gravity determined in step num and its bulk specific gravity determined in step num .
num .
if the percent air voids for the randomly selected core is outside the comparison limits determined in step num perform maximum specific gravity testing on the remaining cores in the lot .
do not perform steps num to num .
num .
if the air void content for the randomly selected core is within the comparison limits determined in step num use the maximum specific gravity of the randomly selected core and the individual bulk specific gravities to determine the air void content of the remaining cores in the lot .
num .
if the air void content of any num of the cores in the lot as calculated in step num falls outside of the comparison limits as determined in step num perform maximum specific gravity testing on the remaining cores in the lot .
use the individual maximum specific gravities and bulk specific gravities to determine the air void content of each core .
num .
if the air void content of all of the cores in the lot as calculated in step num fall inside of the comparison limits as determined in step num use the air void contents for the individual cores as determined in step num .
c. calculations .
calculate the air voids for each core as follows num a a b air voids where a maximum specific gravity b bulk specific gravity d. report .
report the air void content for each core to the nearest num percent .
num njdot bnum measuring thickness of hma cores a .
scope .
this test method is used to measure the individual lift thicknesses of drilled hma cores .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
caliper device to measure the axial lengths of individual lifts to the nearest numinch mounted on a support .
num .
support designed to hold the specimen with its axis in a horizontal position by num metal roller bearings sufficiently rigid and stable to maintain alignment without distortion or deflection .
num .
gauge to calibrate and check the zero reference point of the apparatus .
ensure that the apparatus accommodates specimens from num to num inches in length .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
if the caliper device is electronic turn it on .
ensure that the caliper device is zeroed and set to the correct units of measure .
num .
place the specimen in the measuring apparatus with the smooth end of the core which is the top or upper surface of the pavement firmly against the zero reference point .
num .
take num length measurements approximately num degrees apart around the circumference of the specimen using the caliper device to measure the distance from the zero reference point top of the core to the bottom of the first lift .
if a measuring point is not representative of the plane of the core lift because of a small projection or depression rotate the specimen slightly about its axis and take the measurement at the nearest representative point .
num .
read each of the num measurements for the lift to the nearest num inch .
calculate the average of the num measurements for the lift to the nearest num inch and record .
num .
repeat steps num and num for each lift to be measured by measuring from the zero reference point top of the core to the bottom of the lift being measured .
d. report .
report the following to the nearest num inch num .
average thickness of the first lift which is the average distance for the first lift as determined in step num .
num .
average thickness of the second lift which is determined by subtracting the average thickness for the first lift from the distance measured in step num for the second lift .
num .
average thickness of subsequent lifts which is determined by subtracting the average thicknesses for all preceding lifts from the average distance measured in step num for the lift .
njdot bnum determining composition of hma mixture using hot bin sample analysis a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the gradation and asphalt content of a hma mixture by use of bin samples and printout ticket .
b .
apparatus .
use apparatus according to aashto t num t num and t num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
when taking samples for hot bin analysis apply the rates of sampling to the plants production for all department projects rather than for individual projects .
num .
divide the production into successive lots of the size as specified in section num for the mixture being sampled .
take num samples for composition testing from each lot .
take num samples of the hma as specified in njdot bnum for volumetric acceptance testing maximum specific gravity testing and comparison testing from each lot .
time the hma sampling to correspond with the hot bin samples .
num .
the me will assign consecutive lot numbers for each type of mix at the plant .
include the assigned lot identification number on each weigh ticket .
num .
the me will use a table of random numbers to select the ton of mix to be sampled for each sample in the lot .
based on the ton of mix determine the portion of the production to be sampled .
num num .
the suppliers quality control technician shall take random samples of not less than num pounds from each hot bin for each num tons batched as directed by the me .
when mineral filler is used take a minimum of one filler sample per lot .
num .
use a minimum sample weight for testing of num pounds for bins no .
num and no .
num num pounds for bin no .
num and num pounds for bin no .
num .
use a minimum test sample weight of num grams for bin no .
num and num grams for mineral filler .
num .
for test samples from bins no .
num num num and num weigh the sample and sieve the aggregate according to aashto t num down to the no .
num sieve with a catch pan underneath .
conduct the sieving operation by means of a mechanical sieve shaker .
if more than num percent of the aggregate is passing the no .
num sieve wash and grade that portion according to aashto t num and t num .
num .
wash and grade the bin no .
num test sample according to aashto t num and t num .
num .
for each bin record the weight retained on each sieve determined in the grading process and the wash loss and pan weights for determination of the percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num .
wash and grade the mineral filler sample according to aashto t num .
d. calculations .
calculate the asphalt content by dividing the recorded delivery ticket asphalt cement weight for the load by the total load weight .
calculate the percent of material from each bin by dividing the recorded delivery ticket weights for each bin by the total aggregate weight of the load .
calculate the mix gradation by computing the percentage of material passing each sieve for each bin and multiplying the percentage by the individual bin percentage and then summing the products for each sieve .
e. report .
report the asphalt content to the nearest num percent on the work sheet and the daily inspection report and rounded to the nearest num percent when reported on the lot data report .
report bin percentages bin gradations and the mix gradation to the nearest num percent on the work sheet and daily inspection report .
on the lot data report report the mix gradation to the nearest num percent on the no .
num sieve to the nearest num percent on the no .
num sieve and to the nearest num percent on all other sieves .
njdot bnum determining percent of air voids in opengraded hma a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the percent of air voids in compacted opengraded hma specimens .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
apparatus for determining maximum specific gravity according to aashto t num .
num .
caliper accurate to num inch .
num .
balance accurate to num gram and conforming to requirements of aashto m num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
weigh specimen in air to the nearest num gram .
num .
measure the height of the specimen at num approximately equidistant locations and average .
record the average height to the nearest num inch .
num .
measure the diameter of the specimen at num approximately equidistant locations and average .
record the average diameter to the nearest num inch .
num .
determine the maximum specific gravity of the specimen as specified in aashto t num .
d. calculations .
perform the following calculations num .
calculate the volume of each specimen based on the average height and diameter and convert to cubic centimeters .
num num .
calculate the bulk specific gravity of the specimens using the formula num num num gcm density gcm bulk specific gravity where density mass divided by volume num gcmnum density of water at num f num .
determine the maximum specific gravity of the specimen according to aashto t num .
num .
calculate the percent of air voids using the formula num maximum specific gravity maximum specific gravity bulk specific gravity percent air voids e. report .
report the percent air voids of each specimen and the average percent air voids of the specimens to the nearest num percent .
njdot bnum determining optimum asphalt content for opengraded friction course ogfc a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the optimum percent asphalt in an ogfc mixture .
the test method uses a visual draindown analysis to determine optimum asphalt content .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
ovens capable of maintaining temperatures as specified in this method .
num .
clear glass pyrex numinch diameter pie pans .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
heat aggregate to num f. heat molds to num f. heat binder to the manufacturers recommended mixing temperature .
num .
using numgram batches mix aggregate with asphalt at a minimum of num asphalt contents num at the estimated jmf asphalt content and num each at and num percent of the estimated jmf asphalt content .
after mixing check the temperature to ensure that it is num num f. cool or reheat as necessary to meet the temperature tolerance .
num .
place each numgram batch into a clean clear glass pyrex numinch pie pan .
num .
place samples in an oven at num num f for num hour .
remove and let cool for num hour at room temperature .
num .
visually observe the amount of liquid asphalt on the bottom of each pan .
num .
select the asphalt content where ample bonding is evident without having excessive drainage as evidenced by an appearance of unconnected pools of asphalt binder around aggregate points of contact .
d. report .
report the asphalt contents tested the observations for each asphalt content and the optimum asphalt content determined in step num .
njdot bnum determining job mix formula for modified opengraded friction course mixes a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine gradation and the percent asphalt in a mogfc mixture .
the gradation is verified to ensure stoneonstone contact and the impact resistance of the final jmf is verified .
the optimum asphalt content ac is determined from num aggregate surface area num relative voids in mineral aggregate vma and num visual draindown determination of asphalt content .
a simple average of these num criteria is used to determine the jmf asphalt content .
num b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
equipment as needed for aashto t num .
num .
equipment as needed for superpave mix design as specified in aashto t num .
num .
equipment as needed for aashto t num .
num .
ovens capable of maintaining temperatures as specified in this method .
num .
clear glass pyrex numinch diameter pie pans .
num .
l.a. abrasion machine conforming to aashto t num .
num .
equipment as needed for aashto t num .
num .
no .
num sieve according to aashto m num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
verification of stoneonstone contact .
choose the design gradation to meet the air void requirements and to ensure that the aggregate skeleton exhibits stoneonstone contact .
sieve aggregates proportioned to meet the selected jmf gradation over a no .
num sieve .
keep the material retained on the no .
num sieve as the coarse aggregate fraction .
determine the unit weight guwca of the coarse aggregate fraction of the aggregate using the dry rodding technique according to aashto t num for the selected jmf determine the voids in the coarse aggregate of the mix vcamix based on specimens compacted with num gyrations according to aashto t num .
calculate sbca uwca sbca drc g g num g vca where vcadrc the voids in the coarse aggregate fraction of the jmf aggregate skeleton .
gsbca the bulk specific gravity of the coarse aggregate fraction as determined by aashto t num .
guwca the unit weight of the coarse aggregate fraction expressed in kilograms per cubic meter as determined by aashto t num. sbca mb ca mix g g p num vca where vcamix the voids in the coarse aggregate fraction of the mix .
the coarse aggregate fraction of the aggregate is that portion of the jmf aggregate skeleton not passing the no .
num sieve .
pca the percent of the coarse aggregate fraction by weight of total mix .
gmb the bulk specific gravity of the mix at the design ac content as determined by section num .
gsbca the bulk specific gravity of the coarse aggregate fraction as determined by aashto t num .
for stoneonstone contact vcamix must be less than vcadrc num .
surface area asphalt content .
determine surface area asphalt content according to njdot bnum .
num .
relative vma asphalt content .
mix aggregate graded to proposed jmf with asphalt and fiber at num asphalt contents num at the estimated jmf asphalt content num each at and num percent and num each at and num percent of the estimated jmf asphalt content according to aashto t num .
after mixing return sample to the oven if necessary and when at the recommended compaction temperature compact the specimens .
compact num specimens at each asphalt content using num gyrations of a superpave gyratory compactor according to aashto t num .
determine the bulk specific gravity gmb from each specimen according to njdot bnum or aashto tp num .
determine maximum specific gravity gmm at each asphalt content according to aashto t num .
from gmb gmm and each known asphalt content calculate volumetric information as follows plot asphalt content versus relative vma and select the asphalt content at the lowest point on the curve .
mm mb a g num g v num num mb b b g v b a r v v vma where b percent ac by weight of total mix gmb the bulk specific gravity of the specimen as determined by njdot bnum or aashto tp num .
gmm the maximum specific gravity at each asphalt content as determined by aashto t num .
va volume of air is equal to the percent air voids .
vb percent by volume of asphalt cement .
vmar relative vma the volume of the fiber absorbed asphalt and specific gravity of asphalt binder are not accounted for in this procedure .
this procedure measures relative vma not the true vma .
num .
visual draindown asphalt content .
prepare numgram samples of the uncompacted mix for each of the asphalt contents .
place each sample into a clean clear glass pyrex numinch pie pans .
place samples in oven for num hour at the binder manufacturers recommended mixing temperature .
remove and let cool for num hour at room temperature .
visually observe the amount of liquid asphalt on the bottom of each pan .
select asphalt content where ample bonding is evident without having excessive drainage as evidenced by an appearance of unconnected pools of asphalt binder around aggregate points of contact .
num .
select optimum asphalt content for jmf .
determine the jmf asphalt content by averaging the results from the num methods surface area relative vma and draindown .
num ac ac ac ac dd vma sc jmf where acjmf the design jmf acsc the asphalt content determined by the surface area in step num .
acvma the asphalt content determined by relative vma in step num .
acdd the asphalt content determined by draindown in step num .
num .
verification of abrasion and impact resistance of jmf cantabro test .
compact num specimens using the jmf at the optimum asphalt content as specified in step num .
age the specimens for num days num hours in an oven at num num f. weigh each sample .
utilizing a los angeles machine conforming to aashto t num without the charge of steel balls subject the aged samples to num revolutions at num to num revolutions per minute .
after the num revolutions reweigh the samples .
calculate the percent loss num a a b ploss where ploss the loss expressed as percent of aged sample before l.a. abrasion machine treatment .
a the weight of the sample before modified l.a. abrasion test .
b the weight of the sample after modified l.a. abrasion test .
if the loss is less than num percent the jmf is acceptable .
if the jmf is determined to be unacceptable redesign the mix .
d. report .
report all test results on me provided forms .
num njdot bnum determining asphalt content for mogfc courses by aggregate surface area a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the asphalt content to be used in mogfc mixes based on the surface area of the aggregate .
this percentage is averaged with asphalt contents determined according to njdot bnum to arrive at a design asphalt content for a mogfc mix design .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
ovens capable of maintaining temperatures of num num f and num num f. num .
balance meeting the requirements of aashto m num class d. num .
two metal funnels having minimum dimensions of num inch top diameter num inch high and num inch orifice .
the funnels shall have a metal strainer soldered where the base of the cone connects to the top of the spout .
the equivalent size of the strainer shall not be larger than no .
num sieve .
num .
a numinch sieve and a no .
num sieve according to aashto m num .
num .
sae no .
num lubricating oil .
num .
two rubber stoppers to fit the funnel outlets .
num .
ring stand to support the funnels during testing .
num .
equipment required in aashto t num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
determine the apparent specific gravity of the aggregate passing the numinch sieve and retained on the no .
num sieve according to aashto t num .
num .
through quartering obtain num samples weighing approximately num grams representative of the material passing the numinch sieve and retained on the no .
num sieve .
num .
dry the sample in the num f oven to a constant weight and allow to cool to room temperature .
num .
weigh out num grams of the material and place in the metal funnel .
num .
place a stopper in the funnel outlet and fill funnel with sae no .
num oil immersing the aggregate .
num .
after num minutes remove the stopper and allow the oil to drain for num minutes .
num .
place the funnel containing the aggregate on a pan in the oven maintained at num f for num minutes of additional draining .
num .
remove the sample from the funnel cool to room temperature reweigh to the nearest num gram and record .
d. calculations .
perform the following calculations num .
calculate the percent oil retained for each sample as follows num a b a r where r percent oil retained a weight of sample before test b weight of sample after test num .
using the average percent oil retained of the num samples calculate the corrected percent oil retained as follows num num g r r a c where rc corrected percent oil retained ga apparent specific gravity of aggregate num constant num .
using the corrected percent oil retained determine the surface constant kc from table bnum .
num num .
calculate the design asphalt content as follows a c g num k num num design asphalt content table bnum determination of surface constant kc corr .
oil kc corr .
oil kc corr .
oil kc corr .
oil kc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num e. report .
report all test results on me provided forms .
njdot cnum determining yield of concrete produced by continuous mixingtype truck mixers a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the yield of concrete that is proportioned volumetrically in a continuousmixingtype truck mixer .
b .
apparatus .
the apparatus will consist of a numcubic yard container having dimensions of num num num inches .
construct the container using materials that do not become deformed when filled with concrete .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
set all controls of the mixer unit at the settings approved for the mix design being checked .
num .
activate the mixer and discharge sufficient material to fill the mixing auger assembly and discharge chute .
then deactivate the mixing unit .
num num .
reset cement meter to zero and reactivate the mixer and discharge material into the numcubic yard container until it is levelstruck full making provision for the material settling into all corners .
num .
record the count as shown on the cement meter .
d. calculation .
calculate the cement count that is equivalent to the amount of cement specified in the mix design for num cubic yard .
calculate the yield by dividing the actual cement count by the specified count and multiplying by num .
the result will be num num percent .
e. report .
report the yield to the nearest num cubic yard .
njdot cnum quicksetting patch materials a .
scope .
this test method is used for determination of quickset patch materials properties for approval and quality assurance .
b .
apparatus .
use apparatus as needed to perform testing according to aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto tnum aashto t num and astm c num .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
preparation of samples .
prepare samples according to manufacturers recommendations .
if several design mixes are given test the material with the highest allowable water amount that is consistent with its intended use as a patching material .
if the material is to be used at temperatures different than num f the me may test the time of set bond and compressive strength at a different temperature in the allowable range of temperature .
num .
tests .
test materials according to the following a .
time of set .
run time of set test according to aashto t num except cardboard molds may be used .
b .
strength development .
for type num and num test num cubes per test according to aashto t num .
for type numa and numb make two num numinch cylinders per test according to aashto r num .
cure specimens covered with a plastic cover over the cylinder for num hours and then cure without the plastic cover at num to num f and num percent relative humidity until testing .
test according to aashto t num. c. bond strength arizona shear method .
prepare four num numinch composite cylinders consisting of a base cylinder of hardened conventional concrete and an upper portion of the patching material .
make the base concrete from num numinch cylinders having a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
cut the cylinders into equal halves along a numdegree angle with the vertical axis .
after being cut etch the base cylinders with a num percent solution of hydrochloric acid and placed in num numinch cylinder molds with cut face up .
when preparing the composite cylinders brush a small amount of the patching material into the sawcut surface of the base cylinder .
fill the remaining half of the cylinder mold with patching material using the standard consolidation procedures defined in aashto r num .
cure specimens covered with a plastic cover over the cylinder for num hours and then cure without the plastic cover at num to num f and num percent relative humidity until testing .
remove the cylinders from the mold after num hours .
test num specimens at num days and num specimens at num days according to aashto t num. d. expansionshrinkage .
monitor change in volume and length from batching until the materials reach equilibrium .
prepare four num num numinch autoclave bars according to aashto t num for type num and type num .
prepare four num num numinch autoclave bars according to aashto t num for type numa and numb .
cure at num to num f and num percent relative humidity for num hours .
record initial reading after num hours then place num bars in water bath in moisture room and leave the other bars in the initial curing conditions .
take a reading on each bar every num hours until stability has been attained .
e. durability .
prepare four num numinch cylinders for each material .
test num cylinders according to aashto t num for numday compressive strength .
test the remaining num cylinders as follows num num .
cure for num hours at num to num f and num percent relative humidity followed by numday cure in a lime water solution .
num .
following the numday cure period begin a numcycle freezethaw test .
each cycle will consist of num hours freeze air and num hours thaw solution .
proportion the durability solution by weight of num percent water num percent sodium chloride and num percent calcium chloride .
num .
after every tenth cycle examine cylinders visually and record condition according to astm c num .
num .
at the end of the num cycles perform compressive test according to aashto t num and report the results as a percentage of the numday compressive strength result .
f. permeability .
prepare one num numinch cylinder and cure for num hours at num to num f and num percent relative humidity .
saw cut the cylinder into two num numinch cylinders .
seal all sides and the bottom with hot paraffin leaving the sawcut surface exposed .
place cylinders in durability solution noted in step e for num days .
measure the amount of chlorides at the numinch numinch and numinch levels from the top surface according to aashto t num. g. chlorides in raw material .
measure the amount of chlorides according to aashto t num. h. color .
note the color of the cured material .
i. sieve analysis .
for type numb patch analyze the numinch numinch no .
num no .
num and no .
num sieves according to aashto t num .
report the amount and type of aggregate at approval .
d. report .
include the following in the report num .
manufacturer and name of product .
num .
type of patch material .
num .
mix design used .
num .
temperature tested at .
num .
time of set to the nearest minute .
num .
strength development to the nearest num pounds per square inch .
num .
bond strength to the nearest num pounds per square inch .
num .
expansionshrinkage to num percent .
num .
durability to the nearest whole number .
num .
permeability to the nearest num pounds per cubic yard .
num .
chlorides to the nearest num percent .
num .
color of material .
num .
sieve analysis to nearest num percent .
njdot cnum calcium nitrite presence in plastic concrete a .
scope .
this test method is used to determine the presence of calcium nitrite in the plastic concrete state .
perform testing on a freshly mixed concrete sample .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus and materials num .
quantofix test strips for high range nitrite no .
num .
num .
num cubic centimeter disposable syringes with leurlok tip no .
num .
num .
disposable filters num inchnum micron no .
slhanum .
num .
widemouth container .
num .
measuring cups marked in milliliters .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
determine the amount of concrete to be tested based on the design amount of calcium nitrite and table cnum .
add concrete to premeasured num gallons of water in a wide mouth container .
use the water in the container to rinse out the measuring cup .
num .
shake the container for num to num minutes until contents are well mixed .
num num .
using the syringe uptake approximately num milliliters of extraction water from the container .
attach a disposable filter to the end of the syringe .
num .
filter the extraction water into a clean cup .
num .
dip the test strip into the clear filtered extraction water and compare the color to the chart on the side of the test strip container .
num .
use the table cnum to determine if the reading on test strips corresponds with the expected reading for the design amount of calcium nitrite .
table cnum parameters for calcium nitrite testing design amount of calcium nitrite galcy volume of concrete to be added oz .
expected reading on test strip num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num d. report .
report the reading on the test strip .
report if the sample passed or failed .
njdot cnum slump flow test and visual stability index test a .
scope .
the slump flow is used to assess the horizontal free flow of selfconsolidating concrete scc in the absence of obstructions .
the test method is based on the test method for determining the slump aashto t num .
the diameter of the concrete circle is a measure for the flowability of the scc .
the visual stability index vsi is a visual evaluation of the segregation of the scc during the slump flow test .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
mold in the shape of a truncated cone with the internal dimensions numinch diameter at the base numinch diameter at the top and a height of num inches .
num .
base plate of a stiff nonabsorbing material at least numinches square marked with a circle marking the central location for the slump cone .
num .
handheld wood or metal float or trowel .
num .
wheelbarrow or other container to hold at least num cubic feet of scc .
num .
ruler or tape measure at least num inches long .
num .
a scoop or suitable container for filling specimen molds with scc .
experience has shown pails and plastic cylinder molds to be suitable containers .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
sample the freshly mixed scc according to aashto t num .
num .
observe the scc in the wheelbarrow for segregation .
num .
moisten the base plate and inside of slump cone .
num .
place base plate on level stable ground .
place the inverted slump cone centrally on the base plate and hold down firmly .
num .
fill the cone with the scoop or other suitable container in num lift .
do not tamp rod or vibrate .
strike off the scc level with the cone with the trowel .
num .
remove any surplus scc from the base plate around the cone .
num .
raise the cone vertically and allow the scc to flow out freely .
num .
measure the final diameter of the scc in num perpendicular directions .
num .
calculate the average of the num measured diameters this is the slump flow in inches .
num .
rate the stability of the mixture in num increments by visual examination as specified in table cnum .
num table cnum visual stability index vsi rating criteria rating criteria num no evidence of segregation in slump flow patty or in the wheelbarrow .
num no mortar halo or aggregate pile in the slump flow patty but some slight bleed or air popping on the surface of the concrete in the wheelbarrow .
num a slight mortar halo num inch andor aggregate pile in the slump flow patty and highly noticeable bleeding in the wheelbarrow .
num clearly segregating by evidence of a large mortar halo num inch andor large aggregate pile in the center of the concrete patty and a thick layer or paste on the surface of the resting concrete in the wheelbarrow .
d. report .
report the following num .
identification number .
num .
location of concrete represented .
num .
date and time of testing .
num .
slump flow in inches .
num .
vsi rating .
num .
results of any other tests on the fresh concrete .
njdot cnum static segregation of hardened selfconsolidating concrete cylinders a .
scope .
this test method is used for determining the static segregation resistance stability of scc using hardened test specimens .
this method provides a visual assessment of static segregation resistance of scc using a hardened visual stability index hvsi rating to evaluate molded or cored hardened concrete cylinders cut lengthwise in num .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
num numinch cylinder molds for casting concrete test specimens shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num .
handheld wood or metal float or trowel .
num .
a saw with a diamond or siliconcarbide cutting edge and capable of cutting specimens without excessive heating or shock .
num .
a suitable container for filling specimen molds with scc .
experience has shown pails and plastic cylinder molds to be suitable containers .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
sample plastic scc according to aashto t num .
num .
mold two num numinch test specimens as near as practical to the place where they are to be stored .
if it is not practical to mold the specimens where they will be stored move them to the place of storage immediately after strike off .
place molds on a rigid surface free from vibration and other disturbances .
ensure that the supporting surface is level to within num inch per foot .
num .
fill the specimen molds in num lift poured using a suitable container without vibration rodding or tapping .
num .
strike off the surface of the concrete level with the top of the mold using a float or trowel .
num .
immediately after molding and finishing cap the specimens with a plastic cylinder lid or cover with a plastic bag .
store for a period up to num hours at a minimum temperature of num f. num .
before subjecting the specimens to sawing ensure that they have been cured for a minimum curing period of num hours or have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch according to aashto t num .
num .
saw specimens lengthwise down the center .
if a specimen can not be satisfactorily sawed smooth due to lack of curing then do not disturb the remaining specimens for an additional minimum curing period of num hours .
num .
make a visual assessment of the cut planes of the hardened concrete cylinder or core using the criteria in table cnum .
wet the cut planes to facilitate visual inspection .
num table cnum hvsi specimens rating criteria rating criteria num stable no mortar layer at the top of the cut plane and no variance in size and percent area of coarse aggregate distribution from top to bottom .
num stable no mortar layer at the top of the cut plane but slight variance in size and percent area of coarse aggregate distribution from top to bottom .
num unstable slight mortar layer less than num inch tall at the top of the cut plane and distinct variance in size and percent area of coarse aggregate distribution from top to bottom .
num unstable clearly segregated as evidenced by a mortar layer greater than num inch tall andor considerable variance in size and percent area of coarse aggregate distribution from top to bottom .
d. report .
report the following num .
identification number .
num .
location of concrete represented .
num .
date and time of molding .
num .
hvsi rating for each hardened specimen .
num .
results of any other tests on the fresh concrete .
njdot rnum operating inertial profiler systems for evaluating pavement profiles a .
scope .
this test method describes the procedure for operating and verifying the calibration of an astm e num class num inertial profiler system ips .
b .
apparatus .
use an ips that meets the requirements of aashto mp num and astm e num class num and the following num .
certify the ips according to aashto pp num at least every num years .
if a system component is replaced recertify the system .
perform the certification at a site approved by the department .
num .
the data system provides the raw profile data in an ascii format acceptable to the department .
num .
the computer program uses a highpass filter set at num feet and reads an ascii or text file for computing the international roughness index iri in inches per mile .
num .
the current version of roadruf proval or other department approved pavement profile analysis software is used to compute the iri .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
operate the ips according to aashto pp num and astm e num .
num .
on a daily basis before data collection check the equipment and operating system for operational stability and calibration .
perform necessary calibration procedures according to equipment manufacturers procedures and applicable standards .
operators shall maintain a log documenting the calibration history .
num .
ensure that the operators of the ips have completed a profile training course such as nhi course num have been trained specifically on the ips they will be operating and are proficient in the operation of the ips .
num .
make provisions to automatically start and stop the ips recording at the beginning and end of testing .
place retroreflective traffic striping tape or other approved mechanism at the beginning and end of each direction of travel for automatically triggering the start and stop of profile measurements .
num .
collect at least nummile of data before the area to be tested to allow the system to stabilize before profile measurements are obtained .
collect data in a continuous run through the length to be tested .
if the run is interrupted discard the results and rerun the length .
num .
submit the raw data for determination of the iri .
num njdot snum rotationalcapacity test on long bolts in tension calibrator a .
scope .
this test method is used for determination of highstrength steel bolt assembly acceptance for rotational capacity using a tension calibrator .
use this test method for bolts long enough to fit in the tension calibrator .
use njdot snum for bolts that are too short to fit in the tension calibrator .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
calibrated bolt tension measuring device of size required for bolts to be tested such as skidmore wilhelm calibrator .
num .
calibrated torque wrench dial type .
num .
spacers andor washers with holesize no larger than num inch greater than bolt to be tested .
num .
steel section for mounting the bolt calibrator such as a flange of a girder or cross frame accessible from the ground .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
to determine if the bolt is long enough for testing mark the first num to num full threads that are located closest to the bolt head .
insert the bolt into the tension calibrator and assemble a washer and nut onto the bolt up to the marked threads .
use a rotational capacity washer from the same rotational capacity lot as the bolt and nut .
if a washer is not required for the installation use an astm f num washer of the proper diameter for the test .
if the nut can not be fully threaded onto the bolt shank then the bolt is too short for testing and must be tested as specified in njdot snum .
if the nut is at least flush with the end of the bolt shank then continue testing .
num .
take apart the bolt assembly .
use shim plates or washers under the bolt head as needed to ensure that the num to num threads that were marked in step num are located within the grip of the device but are just visible from the opposite side .
reassemble the bolt washer and nut .
num .
tighten the nut using a hand wrench to the minimum snug tension as specified in table snum .
do not exceed the minimum snug tension by more than num kips .
table snum snug tension requirements bolt size num num num num num num num num num minimum snug tension kips num num num num num num num num num num .
match mark a corner of the nut and the face plate of the bolt calibrator .
num .
using the calibrated manual torque wrench tighten the bolt to the minimum tension listed in table snum num .
read and record the wrench torque required to reach the tension with the nut in motion .
read the actual bolt tension and record as the initial tension .
table snum initial tension requirements bolt size num num num num num num num num num minimum initial tension kips num num num num num num num num num num .
further tighten the bolt to the rotation listed in table snum .
measure rotation from the match mark in step num .
record the bolts final tension as indicated on the calibrator .
if an assembly fails by stripping or fracturing before reaching the rotation listed in table snum the assembly fails the test .
table snum required rotation rotation bolt length num degrees num turn num diameters num degrees num turn num diameters and num diameters num degrees num turns num diameters num .
the final bolt tension measured in step num must equal or exceed the value in table snum .
assemblies that do not meet this tension fail the test .
num table snum final tension requirements bolt size num num num num num num num num num minimum final tension kips num num num num num num num num num num .
loosen the assembly and remove nut to examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
check for signs of thread shear failure stripping or torsional failure of the nut and bolt .
assemblies that have evidence of thread shear stripping or torsional distress fail the test .
d. calculations .
calculate the maximum allowable torque in footpounds as follows maximum allowable torque num p d where p measured initial tension in pounds d bolt diameter in feet compare the torque as measured in step num to the maximum allowable torque .
if the measured torque is greater than the maximum allowable torque the assembly fails the test .
e. report .
report the following num .
size manufacturer and lot number for the bolt assembly .
num .
measured initial tension and torque .
num .
measured final tension and torque .
num .
observations of the thread condition .
num .
passfail status of the bolt assembly .
njdot snum rotationalcapacity test on bolts too short to fit tension calibrator a .
scope .
this test method is used for determination of highstrength steel bolt assembly acceptance for rotational capacity for bolt assemblies that are too short to fit in a tension calibrator .
use njdot snum for bolts that are long enough to fit in the tension calibrator .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
calibrated torque wrench and spud wrench or equivalent .
num .
spacers andor washers with holesize no larger than num inch greater than bolt to be tested .
num .
steel section with normal size hole to install bolt .
any available splice hole can be used with a plate thickness that will provide the number of threads under the nut required in step num of the procedure .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
before testing verify that the bolt is too short for testing as specified in njdot snum .
num .
mark on the first num to num threads that are located closest to the bolt head .
num .
insert the bolt into the steel section using shim plates or washers under the bolt head as needed to ensure that the num to num threads that were marked in step num are just visible from the opposite side .
assemble a washer and nut onto the bolt up to the marked threads .
use a rotational capacity washer from the same rotationalcapacity lot as the bolt and nut .
if a washer is not required for the installation use an astm f num washer of the proper diameter for the test .
num .
snug the bolt using a hand wrench .
do not exceed num percent of the torque determined in step num .
num .
match mark a corner of the nut and the plate .
num .
using the torque wrench tighten the nut to the rotation listed in table snum .
use a second wrench to prevent rotation of the bolt head during tightening .
record the torque required to reach this rotation .
measure and record the torque required to reach the rotation with the nut in motion .
num table snum required initial rotation rotation bolt length num degrees num turn num diameters num degrees num turn num diameters and num diameters num degrees num turn num diameters num .
if the measured torque exceeds the values listed in table snum the assembly fails the test .
table snum maximum torque requirements bolt size num num num num num num num num num maximum torque ftlbs num num num num num num num num num num .
tighten the bolt further to the rotation required in table snum .
measure the rotation from the initial marking in step num .
assemblies that fail before this rotation either by stripping or fracture fail the test .
table snum final initial rotation rotation bolt length num degrees num turn num diameters num degrees num turn num diameters and num diameters num degrees num turns num diameters num .
loosen the assembly and remove nut to examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
check for signs of thread shear failure stripping or torsional failure of the nut and bolt .
assemblies that have evidence of thread shear failure stripping or torsional failure fail the test .
d. report .
report the following num .
size manufacturer and lot number for the bolt assembly .
num .
measured torque at the initial rotation .
num .
observations of the thread condition .
num .
passfail status of the bolt assembly .
njdot snum verifying direct tension indicators dti a .
scope .
use this test method to verify and install highstrength steel bolts using direct tension indicators dtis .
b .
apparatus .
use the following apparatus num .
calibrated bolt tension measuring device such as a skidmorewilhelm calibrator with a special flat insert in place of normal bolt head holding insert .
the special insert is required to allow access to measure the dti gaps .
num .
tapered leaf thickness feeler gauge num inch .
use the same gauge as to be used to inspect the bolts after installation .
num .
steel section to mount bolt calibrator such as a flange of girder or cross frame that is accessible from the ground .
num .
impact and manual wrenches to tighten bolts .
equipment should be the same as to be used in the work .
c. procedure .
perform the following steps num .
install bolt nut dti and standard washer into bolt tension measuring device .
ensure that the assembly matches that to be used in the work unless bolts are too short to fit in the device .
if the bolts are too short use longer bolts of the same diameter and from the same manufacturer to perform the dti verification .
test num assemblies for each rotationalcapacity lot .
num .
tighten the nut to the tension listed in table snum .
use another wrench on the bolt head to prevent rotation of the head against the dti if the dti is under the bolt head .
if an impact wrench is used tighten to a load slightly below the required load and use a manual wrench to attain the required tension .
num table snum bolt tension for a num bolts bolt size num num num num num num num bolt tension kipsnum num num num num num num num num .
bolt tension equals num minimum installation tension num .
determine and record the number of spaces between the protrusions on the dti that the num inch thickness gauge is refused .
the total number of spaces and the maximum verification refusals are listed in table snum .
if the number of spaces that the gauge is refused exceeds the maximum verification refusals listed in table snum the dti fails the verification test .
table snum dti maximum verification refusals bolt size num num num num num num num number of spaces on dtis num num num num num num num maximum verification refusalsnum num num num num num num num num .
if the dti is coated and under the nut the maximum verification refusals is the number of spaces on the washer minus num .
num .
further tighten the bolt until the numinch thickness gage is refused at all spaces but a visible gap exists in at least one space .
record the load as read on the tension measuring device .
num .
remove the bolt from the calibrator and turn the nut on the threads of the bolt by hand .
if the nut is able to be turned on the complete length of the threads the dti is acceptable .
if the nut is unable to go the full length but the load at the minimum dti gap measured in step num is less than num percent of the average tension recorded during the rotationalcapacity test the dti is acceptable .
if the nut can not be run the full thread length and the tension at the smallest gap condition is greater than num percent of the average tension recorded during the rotationalcapacity test the dti is not acceptable .
num .
if any of the num dtis for the lot are found to be not acceptable reject the dti lot .
d. report .
report the following num .
size manufacturer and lot number for the bolt assembly used in the testing .
num .
size manufacturer and lot number for the dti .
num .
results of testing .
njdot st statistical tables table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
this empirically derived table for a sample size of num is suitable only for use in the concrete strength analysis in num .
num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
this empirically derived table for a sample size of num is suitable only for use in the concrete strength analysis in num .
num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num .
num table stnum estimation of lot percent defective for sample size num qnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
numbers in the body of the table are estimates of lot percent defective corresponding to specific values of q the quality index .
for values of q greater than or equal to zero the estimate of percent defective is read directly from the table .
for values of q less than zero the table value must be subtracted from num. i index num numbar open steel parapet num a abandoned vehicles towingnum abbreviationsnum absorbent boomnum acceptancenum partial num acid producing soil document controlnum excavationnum remediationnum sampling and analysis num temporarily storingnum adhesive anchor bolt system num adhesive anchors bridge railing num admixtures airentrainingnum chemicalnum corrosion inhibitor num affirmative actionnum aggregate num blast furnace slag num broken stonenum coarsenum concrete num densegradednum fine aggregate num hma num mineral fillernum mortar and groutnum reclaimed asphalt pavement rapnum recycled concrete aggregate num riprap stonesnum soil aggregatenum sourcenum stockpiles num virgin and rap mixturenum washed gravelnum aggregate base course num compaction acceptance testingnum correcting thickness num density control stripsnum compactingnum density tests num placement num preparing subgrade or subbase num thickness requirementsnum air compressor num airentraining admixturesnum aluminum alloy boltingnum anchoragesnum annulment of award num approach slabs num approach bridge num approved working drawingsnum asbestos removalnum asbuilt quantities num asphalt binder num asphalt price adjustment num asphaltstabilized drainage course num compacting num composition num delivering hma num grading num mix design num paving plan num protecting num sampling and testing num spreading num thickness requirements num transporting hma num weather limitations num assignment num audits num authority change to make num department num inspection num re num automobile liability insurance num award cancellation of num conditional num contract of num b backfilling subsurface areas num bar chart schedule num requirements num updates num barrier curb num bridge num fixedform num slipform num concrete num dowelled num base course aggregate num concrete num baseline schedule num beam guide rail num num anchorages num blockouts num controlled release terminals num delineators num driving posts num element num end treatments num num post spacing num posts and spacers num rail element num removal of num reset beam guide rail num rub rail num num ii bearing assemblies reinforced elastomericnum structuralnum highload multirotational hlmr num seismic isolation num elastomeric num slidingnum bearing padsnum bearings installingnum anchor boltsnum bridge seat bearing areasnum setting num shipping num storingnum working drawingsnum bicycle safe gratesnum bid documents escrownum bidder disqualification ofnum qualifications num registration num bids balancednum consideration of num irregularnum preparation ofnum public openingnum qualifications to num rejection of all num submission ofnum withdrawal ofnum bituminous material distributornum bituminous materialsnum aphalt bindernum cutback asphaltsnum limitations for use num emulsified asphaltsnum temperaturevolume correction factorsnum blasting plannum blockoutsnum num bolts anchornum highstrength steel num steelnum bond paymentnum performance num posted in lieu of retainagesnum proposalnum bonding and grounding cable and wirenum materialsnum boom absorbentnum breaker multiheadnum resonantnum bridge approachesnum num barrier curb num fixedform num slipformnum decks num drainage num fence chainlink num grates num inlet frames num parapet num fixedform num slipform num railing num aluminum num anchors num steel num scuppers num bridge decks num acceptance testing num curing num date panel num dry run num forms num grooved surface num installing joint assemblies num installing reinforcement steel num joint assemblies num installation num modular expansion num preformed elastomeric num strip seal expansion num working drawings num limitations of placing concrete num loading num opening to traffic num permissible surface variations num placement plan num placing concrete num rehabilitation num repair of concrete deck num scarification num removable forms num repair of num saw cut grooved surface num sip forms num surface remedial measures num surface requirements num surface texture finish num underdeck inspection num bridges existing painting num removal of num bulkheads num timber sheet piling num c cabinets electrical num meter num cable bonding and grounding num connecting to utilities num electrical num fiber optic num installing num racks num num iii slacknum testingnum traffic signal num cable connectorsnum camera surveillance systemnum camera num camera standard num controller num equipment trainingnum final documentationnum foundationnum maintenance num testingnum cancellation of award of contract num cast boxesnum cast stone lettering panelnum castings num extension frames num gray iron num resettingnum rings num setting num castinplace retaining wallsnum caution fencenum cell phones num cementnum certification of compliancenum certified working drawings num chainlink fencesee fence change ordernum protestingnum changes to the contractnum authority to makenum change order num character num constructive acceleration num delaysnum differing site conditionsnum field order num force account num inefficiencies num new work num notice num protestingnum quantity decreasesnum quantity increases num tracking costsnum typesnum unacceptable cost calculation methods num unrecoverable costsnum channel protectionnum num channelizing guide postsnum character of work changes to num chemical admixtures num claims by contractornum claims committeenum clay or shale bricknum cleanup finalnum clearing and grubbing num clearing sitenum bridges num clearing and grubbing num mailbox and sign relocation num plugging pipe num preparation num removing electrical material and equipment num removing pipe inlets and manholes num sidewalks driveways curbs and gutters num structures num coarse aggregate num cofferdams num permanent num temporary num cold joint paving num cold weather conditions num colorcoated nonvegetative surface num commencement of work num notice num submissions num communication equipment num communication hub num compacting asphaltstabilized drainage course num hma num subbase num compactor dynamic num hma num pneumatictired num vibratory drum num completion num interim num substantial num compost num composted sewerage sludge num comprehensive autombile liability insurance num comprehensive general liability insurance num computer system num concrete acceptance testing requirements num slump and air entrainment num strength num nonpayadjustment items num payadjustment items num admixtures num aggregate num approaches num barrier curb num bridge num fixedform num slipform num base course num batching plant num automatic batching system num batch counter num bins num chemical admixtures num hoppers num laboratory num mineral admixtures num scales num water measuring equipment num brick num cement num iv composition num drivewaynum num hpc compositionnum control and acceptance testingnum mix design num mixingnum islandnum num mix designnum mixer mobilenum smallbatch num mixing centralplant and transitnum batch tolerancesnum batchingnum delivery ticketsnum rejection criterianum requirementsnum mobilenum on the projectnum small mixers num parapetnum fixed formnum slipformnum pavement partial depth repairnum placing seal for cofferdamnum precast nonstructural num acceptance requirementsnum componentsnum curingnum fabricationnum finishing num quality controlnum removing forms num shipping and handling num retaining wallsnum acceptance requirementsnum componentsnum curingnum fabricationnum finishing num form removalnum quality controlnum shipping and handling num structuralnum acceptance requirementsnum componentnum curingnum fabricationnum finishing num quality controlnum removing forms num shipping and handling num precast plant num prestressednum acceptance requirements num components num curing num fabrication num finishing num quality assurance num quality control num removing forms num shipping and handling num prestressed plant num quality control num rubblizng num scc composition num control and acceptance testing num mix design num mixing num verification of pumpability num sidewalk num num bridge num slope gutters num slope protection num sloping curb num structures placing concrete seal method num tremie num trucks num central mixing num transit mixing num concrete barrier curb dowelled num concrete base course num placing concrete num relief joints num sawcutting num slipform paving num setting joint assemblies num thickness testing num concrete block inlets and manholes num concrete pavement repair diamond grinding existing num full depth using concrete num retrofit dowel bars num sealing joints in concrete pavement num concrete slab stabilization num deflection testing num highdensity polyurethane grout drilling holes num experience num lifting num repairing cracks num weather limitations num pozzolan grout num drilling holes num repairing cracks num testing num void filling num weather limitations num concrete surface course num concreting plan num core samples num curing num diamond grinding num v fixed form method consolidating num control testingnum finishing num placing concrete num removing formsnum setting formsnum setting joint assembliesnum setting tie barsnum surface correction num formsnum installing longitudinal joint tiesnum opening to traffic num partial depth repair num opening to traffic num placing concrete num preparation num placing limitationsnum placing methods num protectin surfacenum ride quality requirementsnum sawcuttingnum sealing jointsnum strength requirementsnum thickness requirementsnum average core thicknessnum individual core thicknessnum underlayer preparationnum weather limitations num concrete vertical curbnum concrete washout systemnum concurrent delaysnum conditional awardnum conductor cable assignmentsnum conduit flexible metallicnum num flexible nonmetallicnum num rigid metallic num num num rigid nonmetallic num num conflicts of interestnum conformity with contractnum plans num specifications num conformity with the contract discrepenciesnum construction barrier curb num driveway num layout num signsnum constructive accelerationnum contract assignmentnum award ofnum conformity with num examination of num execution of num failure to execute num intent of num nonwaivernum plans num specifications num working drawings num contract time num extensions num modifications to num reductions num time impact evaluation num types of delay num excusable noncompensable num nonexcusable num contractor damaged caused by num independent num responsibilities num risks assumed by num contractual claim resolution process num satisfying notice requirements num steps num i re num ii dispute review board drb num iii claims committee num iv nonbinding mediation num contractual notice num initial num res response num control center system num control fill method num control strip num embankment num control of work num control points and stakes num controlled low strength material clsm num controlled release terminals num controlled traffic signal system num controller num equipment training num final documentation num maintenance num testing num controller controlled traffic signal system num its num turn on num converting inlets to manholes num cooperation with others num utilities num coordinator traffic control num core samples concrete surface course num correspondence with re format num crash cushion temporary num traffic control truck num crash cushions num crosshole sonic logging csl num installing tubes num reporting num steel cage installation num testing num vi culverts precast concretenum removal ofnum curbnum concrete protection and curing num num concrete barriernum concrete barrier dowelled num concrete slopingnum concrete sloping dowelled num concrete vertical num concrete verticalnum construction barriernum dresed stonenum granitenum resetnum hma num quarryspilt stonenum removal ofnum stonenum curb piecesnum curing bridge decksnum structural concretenum curing compound num curing facilitynum equipment num furnishingsnum maintenance num utilities and lightingnum curing materials burlap clothnum liquid membraneforming compounds num polyethylene sheetingnum cutback asphaltsnum d daily communicationsnum damages liquidated num date panelnum debris disposal of num defaultnum deflection inspection of hdpe pipenum deflection testingnum deflection testing equipmentnum delay damagesnum payment for labor escalationnum material escalation num nonproductive activity num storage num delineators ground mountednum mounting to beam guide rail num delineators flexiblenum barrier curb mountednum ground mountednum guide rail mountednum demolition of buildings num rodents control and extermination num safety plan num utility disconnections num densegraded aggregate num recycled concrete aggregate num virgin num virgin and rap mixture num density control method num density control strips aggregate base course num compacting num density tests num departmentfurnished materials num detectable warning surfacenum num dewatering basin num diamond grinding num existing concrete pavement num differing site conditions num direct tension indicators num disabled vehicles towing num disadvantaged business enterprises num discrimination in employment num disposal of debris num excess or unusable material num hazardous regulated material num materials num regulated material num dispute review board drb num dolphins num dowel bars num drainage course asphaltstabilized num drainage structures num cleaning num culverts num headwalls num inlets num manholes num drainage bridge num drilled shafts num aligning num approval of num constructing using casings num permanent num removable num temporary num constructing using slurries num mineral num polymer num construction sequence limitations num core drilling num crosshole sonic logging csl num demonstration num excavating num cleaning num dry method num obstructions num verification num wet method num vii excavation lognum installation plannum num load testsnum linear variable displacement transducers lvdtsnum ocell installationnum posttest grouting procedures num reportingnum testingnum locatingnum placing concrete limitations num methodsnum pumped methodnum tremie method num reinforcement steel cages num removing obstructionsnum rock socketing num drilling and blasting num blasting plannum blasting test sections num explosives num presplitting num production blastingnum safetynum driveway num concrete num construction num hma num ductile iron castings num ductile iron water num dynamic compactornum dynamic message system num controller num equipment trainingnum final documentationnum foundationnum maintenance num sign num sign with controllernum standardnum testingnum dynamic pile load test num e echelon paving num electricalnum bonding and grounding num cable num cable racks num conduit bridgenum controller num existing systemsnum foundations num general itemsnum highway lightingnum lighting mast arm num lighting standard num luminairenum sign lightingnum temporarynum tower lightingnum underdeck lightingnum intelligent transporation systems its num its num camera surveillance system num controlled traffic signal system num dynamic message system num fiber optic cable num general system num equipment training num final documentation num maintenance num general system testing num road weather information system num traffic volume system num travel time systems num weigh in motion system num junction box num meter cabinet num pedestrian signal head num rigid metallic conduit num testing circuits and system num traffic signal num circuits num controllers num image detector num interim num loop detector num loop detector cable num mast arm num push button num standards num temporary num traffic signal cable num traffic signal head num wire num electrical materials num bonding and grounding num bushings num cabinets num cable and wire num cable connectors num cable racks num cast boxes and fittings num circuit breakers num conduit and fittings num electrical tape num friction num insulating num jacket num ground rods num ground wire num lamps num highway lighting num sign lighting num traffic signal num loop wire num mast bracket arms num meter cabinets num multiple lighting wire num panel boards num pedestals num photoelectric controls num poles num viii resin splicing kits num service wirenum single conductor signal wire num traffic signal cablenum transformer bases num electrical tape num embankmentnum constructing num constructing with concretenum hma num rocknum soil aggregate and rocknum density control method num placing and compacting methods num control fill methodnum density control methodnum directed methodnum enddumping methodnum slope stabilizing num emergency spill kitnum emergency towing servicenum emerging small business enterprises num employers liability insurancenum emulsified asphaltsnum end treatmentsnum enddumping method num enviornmental managernum enviornmental protection num archeological sites num forests num hazardous materials num historical sitesnum navigable watersnum epoxy bedding compoundnum bonding compound num injection materialnum resin injection equipment num striping applicatornum striping unitnum traffic stripes num waterproofing num num equipment air compressor num bituminous material distributornum concrete batching plantnum concrete trucksnum deflection testing equipmentnum dynamic compactor num epoxy resin injection equipment num epoxy striping applicator num epoxy striping unitnum flashing arrow boardnum flexural beam testing num grinding machinenum grout pumping unit num cavity pumpnum truck mountednum hma compactornum steelwheelnum vibratorynum hma curb machine num hma paver num hma plant num hma trucks num hotair lance num impact hammer num injection device num leads and followers num lift monitoring equipment num materials transfer vehiclemtv num mechanical sweeper num milling machine num mixer num mobile mixer num multihead breaker num nuclear density guage num padfoot roller num pavement forms num pavement saw num pneumatictired compactors num portable variable message sign num precast plant num prestressed plant num resonant breaker num rumble strip cutting machine num scarification num sealer application system num slipform extrusion machine num slipform paver num smallbatch mixer num spreading and finishing machine num spreading and finishing machine bridge decks num steelwheel roller num straightedge num thermoplastic applicator num traffic control truck with mounted crash cushions num traffic stripe and marking removal equipment num ultrathin paver num vibrator num vibratory drum compactor num vibratory hammer num vibratory roller num zgrid roller num escrow bid documents num estimates num subcontractor certification num ethics standards num evaluation of subsurface and surface conditions num excavation num acid producing soil num temporily storing num blasting plan num dewatering num disposal of acid producing soil num hazardous regulated material num material num regulated material num document control num materials and handling reports num ppc logs num ix sampling logs and analytical reportsnum soilsediment usage tracking lognum transport manifestsnum drilling and blastingnum foundation and bridge areasnum measuring elevation num regulated materialnum document controlnum sampling and analysisnum temporarily storingnum reuse of materialnum rock areas num strippingnum test pitnum unclassifiednum temporarily storingnum water pipe num wet areasnum excess liability insurancenum excusable compensable delays num excusable noncompensable delaysnum by othersnum catclysmic natural phenomenanum extreme weathernum labor disputes num shortage of materialsnum sovereign acts of the state num utilitiesnum war and unrestnum execution of contractnum explosives storagenum use of num extension frames num f fencenum bridgenum caution num num chainlinknum num gatesnum heavyduty silt num material num repairingnum silt num snownum temporary num fender systems num fertilizer num applicationnum fertilizing num fiber mulchnum num fiber optic cable num equipment trainingnum final documentationnum installationnum maintenance num splicingnum testingnum level num num level num num otdrnum power meter num tracer wire num fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber num fiberglass reinforced plastic piles num fiberglassconcrete composite piles num field office num cell phones num communication equipment num computer system num fax machine num lavatory num maintenance num office equipment num office furnishings num size requirements num telephone num telephone service num utilities num field order num filters inlet num final certificate num final cleanup num finishing structural concrete num fire hydrant num relocating num resetting num flagger num flashing arrow board num num flexible metallic conduit num flexible nonmetallic conduit backfilling num excavation num installation num flexural beam testing equipment num floating turbidity barrier num num fly ash num force account num payment for direct labor num equipment num equipment contractorowned num equipment rented num extraordinary expenses num indirect labor costs num insurance num labor fringe benefits num materials num overhead num profit num subcontractors num foreign material num federal aid projects num wholly statefunded projects num forms pavement num foundation electrical num castinplace num precast num excavation num its num x fuel price adjustmentnum fuel usage factornum full depth concrete pavement repair curing concrete num dowelsnum joint ties num opening to traffic num placing concrete num placing limitationsnum preparation num sawcutting and sealing joints num setting forms num g gabion basket stonenum gabion wallsnum gabion wire basketsnum galvanizingzinc coatingnum gas mains num airpressure test num backfillingnum bridges num excavatingnum handlingnum installation prequalificationnum installingnum bell joint encapsulationnum fusing plastic pipe num hot tap preparationnum thrust restraintsnum welding steel pipenum schedulingnum storingnum tieinnum tiein assistance num gas valve boxes resetnum gatesnum general liability insurancenum geomembrane liner num geotextilesnum grading hma num granite curbnum num grass seed mixturesnum gratesnum bicycle safe num gray iron castingsnum grinding machine num ground mounted delineatorsnum groutnum mixernum nonshrink typenum grubbingnum guide rail see beam guide rail guy wirenum h hauling restrictionsnum hay num haybalenum haybale check dams with temporary stone outlets num hazardous regulated material disposal of num headwalls precast concrete num heating and housing num heavyduty silt fence num herbicides num high voltage lines num highway lighting num lighting mast arm num lighting standard num luminaire num sign lighting num temporary system num tower lighting num underdeck lighting num hma num aggregates for num compactor num steelwheel roller num vibratory roller num composition num construction air void requirements num compacting num conditioning existing surfaces num grading num longitudinal joints num opening to traffic num paving plan num prime coat application num spreading num tack coat application num test strip num transporation of hma num transverse joints num weather limitations num curb num curb machine num driveway num num drum mixing plants num aggregate bins num aggregate feeder num asphalt binder metering system num control console num drum mixer num emission control system num mineral filler bin num modifications num proportioning controls num fully automated batchtype plants aggregate hot bins num asphalt binder control num automated batching and mixing control num control of mixing time num dryer num hopper num mixer num plant scales num screens num weigh box num fully automated batchtype plants num island num xi joints num cold joing pavingnum echelon pavingnum longitudinalnum material num mix designnum mix designationnum mixing plantsnum aggregate bins num aggregate storagenum automatic release agent system num dust collector num feeder for dryernum laboratorynum preparation of asphalt bindernum safety num thermometric equipment num truck scalesnum nonvegetative surfacesnum patchnum pavernum automatic profile controlnum automatic slope controlsnum manual override system num receiving hopper and distribution systemnum screednum screed heaternum sloped platenum strikeoff assembly num plants and equipment surge and storage binsnum sampling and testing num sidewalknum num test stripnum nuclear density gauge readingsnum quality control core density test results num roller patternnum temperaturesnum trucks for transporting mixtures num hma coursesnum acceptance num core samples num irinum ride quality requirementsnum thickness requirementsnum surface course thickness num total thickness num hma friction courses num hma overlays sawing and sealing joints num hot weather concretingnum hotair lance num hydrostatic pressure testingnum i image detector num impact hammernum hammer cushionnum pile cushion num pile drive headnum independent contractornum inertial barrier systemnum injection device num inlet frames num inlets num block and brick num converting to manholes num filters num precast num reconstructing num removal of num sediment traps temporary num setting castings num inlets filters num type num num type num num inlets sediment traps temporary num inquiries num after award of the contract num before award of the contract num inspection num of plant materials num plant num safe access num insulated blankets num insulated forms num insurance num automobile num comprehensive automobile liability num comprehensive general liability num employers liability num excess liability num liability num maintenance num marine liability num owners and contractors protective liability num policies num pollution liability num protective liability num railroad protective liability num types num workers compensation num intent of contract num interim completion num island num concrete num hma num its camera surveillance system num controlled traffic signal system num device testing level a num level b num level c num dynamic message system num fiber optic cable num general system num communication cable num communication hub num control center num controller num final documentation num foundation num junction box num xii maintenancenum general system testingnum device testingnum project testingnum road weather information system num traffic volume systemnum travel time systemsnum weigh in motion systemnum j joint assemblies modularnum preformed elastomericnum strip seal expansionnum joint materialsnum preformed elastomeric joint sealer num preformed expansion joint fillernum sealernum strip seal expansion damnum joint tiesnum junction boxnum castinplacenum covernum fabricatednum foundationnum castinplace num precastnum frame num metal num precast num l laboratory materials field num ladder rungsnum lampsnum landscaping fertilizingnum mowing num mulching num planting num selective clearing num selective thinningnum sodding num soil preparation num topsoil stabilization num topsoiling num tree removal num tree trimmingnum turf repair strip num turf seedingnum landscaping materials num binders num composted sewerage sludgenum fertilizernum limestone pulverizednum miscellaneous materials num mulch num plant materialsnum seed mixturesnum sod num topsoilnum topsoil stabilization matting num lane occupancy charges num latex paint num laws ordinances and regulations insurance requirements num lead health and safety plan lhsap num leads and followers num legal jurisdiction num applicable law num approvals num licenses num permits num soverign immunity num liability insurance num limitation of num personal for public officials num lift monitoring equipment num lighting highway num luminaire num mast arm num signs num standard num temporary highway num tower num underdeck num limestone pulverized num limitation of liability num limitations of placing structural concrete num liquidated damages num load restrictions num longlife traffic stripes num loop detector connecting num installing num testing num loop detector cable num luminaire num lighting replacement assemblies num m mailbox and sign relocation num maintaining and protecting traffic num flagger num police num traffic control directors num maintenance num curing facility num its operational num regular num materials field laboratory num sesc num manholes num block and brick num covers num precast num reconstructing num removal of num setting castings num xiii marine liability insurance num markers temporary pavementnum masonry units clay or shale bricknum concrete blocknum concrete brick num granite curbs num stone facing for pier shaftsnum stone paving block num mass concrete num mast armnum mast bracket armsnum material numbar open steel parapet num aggregate for concrete mortar and groutnum coarse aggregate num fine aggregatenum lightweight aggregatenum aggregate for hma coarse aggregatenum crushed recycled container glass crcgnum fine aggregatenum ground bituminous shingle material gbsmnum mineral filler num reclaimed asphalt pavement rapnum remediated petroleum contaminated soil aggregate rpcsanum aggregatesnum aluminum alloy boltingnum aluminum paintnum asphalt binder num asphaltstabilized drainage coursenum beam guid rail end treatmentsnum miscellaneous hardwarenum posts and blockoutsnum rail element num rub railnum bearing padsnum bituminous num blast furnace slag num bridge railing aluminum num steelnum broken stonenum castingsnum ductile iron num gray iron num cement num clay brick num coal tar epoxy paintnum coarse aggregate num coatings asphalt waterproofingnum detectable warning surface num epoxy waterproofingnum for nonvegetative surfacenum galvanizingzinc coating num components for drainage structures num carbon steel extension frames and rings num ladder rungs num scuppers num concrete num concrete admixtures airentraining num chemical num corrosion inhibitor num mineral fly ash num silica fume num slag num viscosity modifying num concrete block for inlets and manholes num concrete brick num concrete stain num controlled low strength material num curing burlap cloth num liquid membraneforming compound num white polyethylene sheeting num curing facility num cutback asphalts num densegraded aggregate num recycled concrete aggregate num virgin num virgin and rap mixture num departmentfurnished num dimensional lumber for structures num sheet piling num direct tension indicators num emulsified asphalts num epoxy bonding compound num epoxy injection num epoxy traffic stripes num fence caution num chainlink num snow num fertilizer num fiberglass reinforced plastic lumber num fiberglass reinforced plastic piles num fiberglassconcrete composite piles num flexible delineators num floating turbidity barrier num foreign num gabion basket stone num gabion wire baskets num geomembrane liner num geotextiles num grit num grout epoxy num nonshrink num grout for undersealing concrete pavement highdensity polyurethane num pozzolan num hay num high tensile strength alloy bars num highstrength steel bolting num hightensilestrength numwire prestressing strand num hma num hpc num xiv inspectionnum joint assemblies modularnum preformed elastomeric compression type num strip seal expansion glandular type num joint sealernum lampsnum mast bracket arms num modified opengraded friction course num mortarnum mulch gravelnum shredded hardwood barknum shredded woodnum stone num strawnum wood cellulose fiber num wood chipnum nonstructural precast concretenum opengraded friction coursenum pavement repair mixes class v and enum pedestalsnum photoelectric controlsnum pipe concretenum corrugated aluminum alloy culvertnum corrugated aluminum alloy underdrainnum corrugated steel num ductile iron waternum highdensity polyethylene hdpe num plastic drainage num steel alloy for bridge storm drains num pipe arches corrugated aluminum alloy culvert num corrugated steel num pipe bedding class anum class b num class c num class dnum polesnum polyethylene sheetingnum polymer modified tack coatnum polymerized joint adhesivenum posttensioning reinforcementnum barsnum strands num precast concrete retaining walls num preformed joint fillernum prestressed concrete num prestressing reinforcement num pulverized limestone num quality requirements num questionnaire num quicksetting patchnum raised pavement markersrpmnum rebar coupling devicesnum reinforced elastomeric bearing assembliesnum reinforcement for concrete pavement dowel bars num tie bars and joint tiesnum tie bolts num reinforcement steel num bars num dowels num spiral num structural shapes plates and bars num welded wire num riprap stones num samples num scc num sediment control bag num shale brick num sign num sign structures num sign supports breakaway for ground mounted signs num mounting materials num nonbreakaway for ground mounted signs num steel num timber num sleeves num sodium chloride rock salt num soil additives compost num composted sewerage sludge num soil aggregate num source of supply num stainless steel bolting num steel bolting num adhesive anchor bolt system num anchor bolts num bolts num nuts and washers num steel casings for drilled shafts num steel piles num stone curb num dressed stone num quarrysplit stone num stone facing for pier shafts num stone matrix asphalt num stone paving block num straw num structural bearing assemblies num structural precast concrete num structural steel num fabrication num structural steel paint num tackifers fiber mulch num synthetic plastic emulsion num vegetable based gels num temporary traffic stripes and markings latex paint num removable black line masking tape num temporary pavement markers num temporary pavement tape num tests num thermoplastic traffic markings num timber round piling num routed spacers num sawn posts num xv spacers num timber connectors and hardwarenum timber treatment num topsoilnum tower polesnum transformer bases num ultrathin hmanum unacceptable num unusable disposal ofnum washed gravel num waternum waterstopsnum materials field laboratorynum cell phonesnum communication equipmentnum computer systems num fax machine num laboratory equipment num lavatory num maintencenum office equipmentnum office furnishingsnum parking num telephones num utilities and lightingnum materials handling plan num materials transfer vehiclemtv num measuring elevationnum quantities num mechanical sweepernum meter cabinetnum meter cabinetsnum milling concrete num equipment num hma num milling machinenum mineral admixtures fly ash num silica fumenum slagnum mineral fillernum mineral slurry num mixer num mobile mixer num mobilizationnum modified opengraded friction course compacting num composition num deliverynum gradingnum mix designnum opening to traffic num paving plannum ride quality requirementsnum sampling and testing num spreadingnum test stripnum thickness requirementsnum transportation num weather limitations num monitoring wells num monthly payments num monument box num monuments num rock socket num survey num monuments and markers preservation of num mortar num num mowing num existing areas num seeded areas num mulch num gravel num shredded hardwood bark num shredded wood num stone num wood cellulose fiber num wood chip num mulching num fiber num plants num straw num multihead breaker num n new jersey contractual liability act num new work num night operations num illuminance levels num lighting requirements num visibility requirements equipment num workers num nonbinding mediation num conditions num decision num mediator num meeting num nonexcusable delays num nonthird party beneficiary clause num nonvegetative surfaces num notice num contractual claim resolution process num nuclear density guage num o oil spill remediation num num oilonly emergency spill kit num oilwater separator num opengraded friction course compacting num composition num delivery num grading num mix design num opening to traffic num paving plan num ride quality requirements num sampling and testing num spreading num test strip num xvi thickness requirementsnum transportation num weather limitations num opening to traffic after applying traffic stripes or markingsnum after applying traffic stripes or markingsnum concrete surface coursenum hma num others cooperation withnum owners and contractors protective liability insurancenum p padfoot rollernum paint aluminum finish coatnum coal tar epoxy num epoxy bonding compoundnum epoxy waterproofingnum sampling and testing num shipping requirements num structural steelnum painting bridges existingnum painting existing bridgesnum applying paintnum cleaning num blast num hand or power tool num cleanup num coating thickness num epoxy masticnum organic zincnum conditions num curingnum mixing paintnum pollution control systemnum containment plan num equipment storage plannum lead health and safety planlhaspnum waste disposal plannum prime coatnum protection of environmentnum personsnum propertynum structures num repairnum spot coatnum stencilingnum stripingnum surface preparationnum waste disposalnum parapet numbar open steelnum bridgenum fixed formnum slipformnum partial acceptance num partial depth concrete pavement repairnum patch hma num patented devices num materials num processes num pavement removing num pavement markers temporary num pavement marking tape temporary num pavement repair mixes class v and e num pavement saw num paver hma num slipform num ultrathin num paving plan asphaltstabilized drainage course num hma num modified opengraded friction course num opengraded friction course num stone matrix asphalt sma num ultrathin friction course num payment delay damages num final num force account num materials for num scope of num payment bond num pedestals num pedestrian bridge num performance bond num permanent sheeting construction num dewatering num plan num photoelectric controls num pier shafts stone facing num piles capping num cutoff num damaged correcting num defective correcting num driving accuracy num methods num penetration num rock bearing num vibratory num furnishing pile driving equipment num load bearing num prebored holes num steel num order lengths num pipe shells num production pile lengths num shoes num splices num steel painting num xvii test piles num dynamic load testnum static load test num wave equation analysis program weapnum pipenum backfillingnum bedding num cleaning existingnum concrete num reinforcednum corrugated aluminum alloy culvertnum culvert archesnum underdrain num corrugated steel culvertnum deflection inspection ofnum ductile iron waternum end sectionsnum excavatingnum for stream diversionnum hdpe num installingnum num alternate methods usingnum joiningnum joints circular pipenum gasket num mortar num plastic drainagenum removal of existingnum steel alloynum num storing and handlingnum underdrains num video inspection ofnum waternum bridgenum pipe bedding class a num class b num class c num class d num pipe liningnum plan blastingnum demolition safetynum materials handlingnum pollution prevention and control num preexcavationnum sitespecific health and safety num plans conformity with num plant establishment periodnum plant inspectionnum plant materials landscapenum plantingnum acceptance num backfillingnum balled and burlapped plantsnum bedsnum containerized plants num deliveringnum excavation num furnishing num location num maintaining num mulching num optimal seasons num protecting num pruning num restoration num setting plants num staking and guying num watering num plants mulching num plugging pipe num pneumatically applied mortar num application num cleaning of surfaces num curing num repair limits num test panels num pneumatictired compactors num poles num police num policies insurance num pollution insurance num pollution prevention and control plan num polyethylene sheeting num polyethylene sheeting white num polymer slurry num polymerized joint adhesive num portable variable message sign num controller num power source num diesel num solar num sign panel num structural support system num portable variable message sign num posts channelizing guide num posttensioning reinforcement num bars num strands num pozzolan grout drilling holes num repairing cracks num testing num void filling num weather limitations num precast arch structures num culverts num num headwalls num precast plant num prefabricated modular walls num working drawings num preparation of bid num xviii preparing existing pavementnum milling concrete num milling hmanum repairing hma pavement num sealing cracksnum presplittingnum pressure injection sealing num crack repair survey num finishing surface num injecting epoxy resin adhesive num repair preparationnum sealing surface cracks num prestressed concrete structures num prestressed plant num casting beds num certificationnum forms num grouting equipmentnum jacksnum load cells num mes officenum prestressed structural concretenum prestressing reinforcementnum price adjustment asphalt num fuelnum prime coatnum application temperaturesnum production blastingnum progress schedule num project limits examination ofnum maintenance withinnum property damagenum proposal bond num return ofnum proposal documents downloadingnum revisions tonum proprietary items substitutesnum proprietary retaining walls backfillingnum compacting backfill num drainagenum foundationnum handlingnum installingnum shipping num storingnum working drawingsnum protection of enviornmentnum markers and monuments num push buttonnum q qualification to bid num quantities asbuiltnum measurementnum quantity increases and decreasesnum majornum minor num quicksetting patch materials num type num num type numa num type numb num type num num r railing bridge num anchors num railroad insurance num raised pavement marker rpm num re authority num rebar coupling devices num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap drum mixing plant num in hma num recovery of monies by the state num regulated material disposal of num excavating num reinforcement steelnum num bars num coatings num dowels num field bending num field cutting num handling num high tensile strength alloy bars num hightensilestrength numwire prestressing strand num placing num plates num posttensioning num prestressing num protecting num shapes num spiral num splicing num storing num welded wire num remediation oil spill num schedule num removal of asbestos num bridges num concrete base course and surface course num electrical material and equipment num pavement num pipe inlets and manholes num sidewalk driveways curbs and gutters num structures num traffic stripes num underground storage tanks num repair of concrete deck num cleaning reinforcement steel num deck condition survey num patching num class a concrete num quick setting patch num xix sawcut and removal num splicing reinforcement steel num type bnum type cnum reset beam guide railnum reset granite curb num resin splicing kitsnum resonant breaker num responsibilities of contractornum num equipmentnum fabricatorsnum labornum subcontracted worknum suppliers num inspectors num re num retaining walls prefabricated modular walls num retrofit dowel bars num capsnum placingnum preparation num retroreflective sheeting num rigid metallic conduit earthnum backfillingnum excavationnum installationnum exposednum opencutnum roadwaynum rigid nonmetallic conduitnum backfillingnum cuttingnum excavationnum field bends num installationnum riprap stones num risks assumed by the contractor num claims on account of injury loss or damagenum damage to constructionnum loss of propertynum road weather information systemnum equipment trainingnum final documentationnum maintenance num roadway devicesnum testingnum weather stationnum rock backfillnum rock socketing num rodent control num roller padfoot num steelwheelnum rolling and vibrating method num rowofway restrictionsnum rpmsnum rub railnum num rubblizing concrete pavementnum dga area patching num existing subsurface facility investigation num final subsurface facility survey num installing drainage system num multihead method num protecting num removing existing hma surfaces num removing reinforcement steel num removing transverse joint assemblies num repairing subsurface facilities num resonant method num restrictions num rubblization plan num sawcutting joints num seating num test strip num rumble strip cutting machine num rumble strips num s safety program num certification num description num elements num identification of personnel num responsibility num sanitary provisions num sanitary sewers num backfilling num bridge num excavating num gravity and force mains num handling pipe and accessories num installing num manhole num reconstruct num reset num pipe lining num scheduling num service connection num testing num force main num gravity main num exfiltration num infiltration num thrust blocks num video inspection num scarification bridge deck rehabilitation num equipment num schedule alternate staging num bar chart num requirements num updates num baseline submission num constraints num cpm num liquidated damages num milestones num missed updates num preliminary submission num xx progressnum submission requirementsnum updatesnum gantt chartnum progress narrativenum remediation num sorts num tabular reportsnum value engineeringnum schedulingnum scope of payment num scuppers num num sealer application system num sealing abandoned wellsnum cracks in hma surface coursenum joints in concrete pavementnum seating multihead method num resonant methodnum sediment control bagnum num sediment control tanknum sediment traps temporary inletnum temporary stone outletnum seed mixtures num seeding wildflowersnum selective clearingnum selective thinning num service connection gas num sanitary sewer num waternum sesc absorbent boom num caution fencenum concrete washout system num construction drivewaynum construction requirements num dewatering basinnum enviornmental managernum floating turbidity barrier num haybale num haybale check dams with temporary stone outletsnum heavyduty silt fencenum inlet filters num maintenance num num measures num oilonly emergency spill kitnum oilwater separatornum removal num sediment control bagnum sediment control tanknum silt fencenum temporary inlet sediment traps num temporary slope drainsnum temporary stone check dams num temporary stone outlet sediment trapsnum sewers see sanitary sewers shear connectorsnum sheeting permanent num temporary num timber num shielding temporary num sidewalk num bridge num concrete num hma num sign structures acceptance num fabrication num quality control num shipping and handling num sign support structures num erecting posts num erecting trusses num erection plan num excavation for num installing electrical material num placing concrete num storage and handling num tower structures num working drawings num signs num construction num fabrication num applying retroreflective sheeting num legends and borders num panels num flashing arrow board num lighting num materials aluminum components num retroreflective sheeting num packing storing and shipping num portable variable message sign num support structures num supports breakaway num flexible delineators num nonbreakaway num steel num timber num types ga breakaway num go num gox num nonbreakaway num regulatory num warning num silt fence num site clearing num sitespecific health and safety plan num slack cable and wire num slag num sleeves num slipform extrusion machine num slipform paver num slipform paving num slope protection num xxi slope drains temporary num slope protection concrete num concrete slope gutters num riprap stonenum rock backfill num smallbatch mixernum snow fence num sodnum soddingnum deliverynum installingnum mowing num soil aggregate num combining and mixingnum composition num gradationnum soil erosion and sediment controlnum soil preparationnum source materialsnum specifications conformity withnum spill kit num spreading hma num subbasenum spreading and finishing machinenum spreading and finishing machine bridge decksnum stainless steel boltingnum standards num static pile load testnum stayinplace formsnum steel alloy pipenum anchor bolts num bolts num castingsnum grid flooringnum nuts num posts for beam guide rail num rail element for beam guide rail num railing bridgenum reinforcement num sign supportsnum washersnum steelwheel rollernum stockpiles num stone facing for pier shaftsnum mulch num paving blocknum stone check dams temporary num stone matrix asphalt sma num air void requirementsnum compacting num composition num deliverynum gradingnum mix designnum opening to traffic num paving plannum ride quality requirementsnum sampling and testing num spreading num test strip num thickness requirements num transportation num weather limitations num straightedge num straw num num striping removable black line masking num temporary num stripping num structural concrete num bridge decks num consolidating concrete num curing num curing compound num wet burlap and sheeting num white polyethylene sheeting num curing and protecting cold weather conditions num heating and housing num decks num placing num surface texture finish num epoxy waterproofing num falsework num removal of num finishing concrete surface num class num surface finish num class num rubbed finish num forms num removal of num limitations of placing num cold weather concreting num hot weather concreting num loading num mass concrete num placing concrete num chutes and troughs num pumped num placing mass concrete num precast arches num backfilling num erecting num erection plan num joints num shipping num storing num working drawings num precast culverts num backfilling num erecting num erection plan num grouting num posttensioning num shipping num storing num working drawings num prestressed num num erecting num erection plan num xxii groutingnum posttensioningnum shippingnum storingnum working drawingsnum protecting num waterstopsnum structural steelnum num acceptance num bearingsnum casings for drilled shaftsnum cleaning num coatingnum erecting num erection plan num fabricationnum flooring gridnum handlingnum highstrength steel bolts installing num rotational capacity test num tighteningnum paint num painting num acceptancenum applicationnum coatings num conditionsnum film thickness num handling requirementsnum quality control num stenciling num surface preparation num pedestrian bridgenum pilesnum quality controlnum repairing damaged coating num shear connectorsnum shipping num shipping and handlingnum weldingnum working drawingsnum structures bulkheadsnum demolitionnum removal of bridgesnum temporarynum timbernum stump removalnum subbasenum compacting num preparing subgradenum spreading and gradingnum subbase outlet drainsnum backfillingnum excavating for num subcontractingnum federal aid projects num limits and restrictionsnum quantities num requirementsnum values num wholly state funded projects num subgrade preparing num substantial completion num superintendent alternate num responsibilities num surface course num concrete num hma courses num hma friction courses num stone matrix asphalt num ultrathin friction course num suspension of work num contractor fault num convenience of the department num unsuitable weather num synthetic plastic emulsion num t tack coat num tack coat num num tackifiers num fiber mulch num synthetic plastic emulsion num vegetable based gels num tape removable black line masking num temporary pavement marking num taxes num temperaturevolume correction factors num temporarily storing unclassified excavation num temporary cofferdam construction num dewatering num dewatering plan num removal num working drawings num crash cushion num inlet sediment traps num pavement markers num num pavement marking tape num sheeting num construction num dewatering num removal num working drawings num shielding num slope drains num stone check dams num stone outlet sediment traps num structures num erection plan num working drawings num traffic stripes num termination num num cause num convenience num terms num xxiii acceptance num acceptance testingnum actual costnum addendum num approvalnum asbuilt quantitynum authorized funding amountnum bridgenum change order num completionnum construction operationsnum contractnum contract timenum contractornum daynum departmentnum department laboratorynum estimatenum extra work num field order num highwaynum holidaynum inspector num interim completion num item num land surveyornum manufacturers recommendationsnum menum new work num others num pavement structurenum plannum plans num professional engineernum project num project limits num proposalnum qualified products list qpl num re num rightofway rownum rightofway plansnum roadnum specifications num statenum streetnum subcontractor num subgrade num substantial completion num superintendentnum surety num testing agencynum total adjusted contract price num total contract pricenum traveled way num utility num utility num worknum worknum working daynum working drawingsnum test method anum determining percent of mica in fine aggregatenum anum mortar making properties of fine aggregate num anum petrographic analysis to determine lithological composition of coarse aggregate num anum determining percent of adherent fines present in coarse aggregate num anum scratch hardness test for coarse aggregate particles .. num anum determining gradation of densegraded aggregate containing rap num bnum falling head permeability test for asphaltstabilized drainage course num bnum sampling hma mixtures num bnum selecting cores for maximum specific gravity testing in air voids determination num bnum measuring thickness of hma cores num bnum determining composition of hma mixture using hot bin sample analysis num bnum determining percent of air voids in opengraded hmanum bnum determining optimum asphalt content for opengraded friction course num bnum determining the job mix formula for modified open graded friction course num bnum determining asphalt content for mogfc courses by aggregate surface area num cnum determining yield of concrete produced by continuous mixing type truck mixers num cnum operating inertial profiler systems for evaluation pavement profiles num cnum quicksetting patch materials num cnum calcium presence in plastic concrete num cnum slump flow test and visual stability index num cnum static segregation of hardened selfconsolidating concrete cylinders num snum rotationalcapacity test on long bolts in tension calibrator num snum rotationalcapacity test on bolts too short to fit tension calibrator num snum verifying direct tension indicators dti num test pits num testing if and where directed num thermoplastic applicator num thermoplastic traffic markings num num thrust blocks sanitary sewers num water pipe num tie bars num tie bolts num timber num bearing piles num connectors num for structures num hardware for num sheet piling num sheeting num sign supports num structures num treatment num wales num time impact evaluation num topsoil num num borrow num placing num stabilization matting num num xxiv installing num type num num type num num type num num type num num storingnum topsoil stabilization num tower poles num towing service emergencynum tracking costs of changesnum trafficnum controlnum directorsnum flagger num police num markings num num longlife thermoplasticnum extrudednum marking plannum preformed num replacingnum surface preparationnum removal ofnum rpmsnum lens removalnum lens replacement num removal ofnum rumble stripsnum stripesnum longlife applyingnum replacingnum striping plannum surface preparationnum test strip num longlife thermoplasticnum opening to trafficnum num removable black line maskingnum removable black line masking tapenum removalnum removal ofnum temporarynum traffic control changes to traffic control plannum coordinator num dutiesnum devicesnum flashing arrow boardnum interferencenum plannum portable variable message signnum truck with mounted crash cushions num traffic control devices channelizing guide postsnum construction barrier curbnum construction signsnum flashing arrow boardnum portable variable message signnum temporary crash cushionnum traffic control truck wmounted crash cushions num traffic control truck with mounted crash cushionsnum traffic signal num cable num circuits num controllers num head num image detector num interim num loop detector num loop detector cable num mast arm num pedestrian num push button num standards num pedestrian signal num traffic signal num temporary num traffic stripe and marking removal equipment num traffic volume system num controller num equipment training num final documentation num maintenance num roadway devices num testing num transformer bases num travel time systems num controller num detector num detector standard num equipment training num final documentation num foundation num maintenance num testing num trees num protectors num removal num trimming num turbidity barrier absorbent boom num floating num turf mowing num repair strip num turf seeding num application num establishment num fertilizer application num dry method num hydraulic method num maintenance num mulching num optimum seeding seasons num seed application num dry method num hydraulic method num soil preparation num u ultrathin friction course num compacting num delivery of num grading num xxv joints num opening to traffic num paving plannum ride quality requirementsnum spreadingnum test stripnum thickness requirementsnum transportation of num weather limitations num ultrathin hma composition num mix designnum sampling and testing num ultrathin pavernum unacceptable cost calculation methods num eichleay formula num modified total cost methodnum productivity factors num total cost method num unacceptable materialsnum unclassified excavation num underdeck inspection num underdrains num backfillingnum excavating for num underground storage tanks disposing of contaminated soilnum permits and approvalsnum recycling contaminated soil num removal of num storing excavated soilnum transporting contaminated soilnum underlayer preparation num uniform hazardous waste manifestnum unrecoverable costsnum update bar chartnum schedule num utilities cooperation with num gasnum locating existing facilitiesnum one call system num protection of num providing accessnum providing notice num sanitary sewersnum test pits num waternum fire hydrantnum service connection num water pipe num backfillingnum bacteriological testingnum bridgenum disinfectingnum excavatingnum installing num leakage testingnum schedulingnum service interruptionnum thrust blocksnum work performed by num v value engineering num conditions num final documents num final proposal num initial proposal num payment num purpose num savings num schedule num scope num submittals num vegetablebased gels num vibrator num vibratory drum compactor num vibratory hammer num vibratory roller num video inspection pipe num sanitary sewers num w wales timber num warranties num plants num washed gravel num waste manifest num water num water valve box reset num waterproofing asphalt num epoxy num waterstops num num wave equation analysis program weap num weigh in motion system num controller num equipment training num final documentation num maintenance num roadway devices num testing num wells abandoned num monitoring num sealing num wildflower seeding num num application num bed layout num establishment num maintenance num mulching num preparing seed mixtures num seasons num seed mixtures num soil preparation num wire bonding and grounding num connecting to utilities num installing num slack num xxvi testingnum wood guy stakesnum work commencement of num work site and storage num workers compensation num working drawings num approvednum bearingsnum bridge decks joint assembliesnum bulkhead system num certifiednum composite pilesnum fccpnum frpp num dolphin systemnum fender systemnum format num frpl num precast concrete arch structures num precast culverts num prefabricated modular walls num prestressed structural concrete num sheet piling num concrete num steel num sign support structures num structural steel num submission category num submission requirements num temporary structures num title block format num z zgrid roller num
