state of ohio department of transportation columbus ohio construction and material specifications online version num an equal opportunity employer be advised the page numbers in this online only document will not match the page numbers in the official printed specification due to page size and formatting differences .
copies of the construction and material specifications may be purchased by contacting ohio department of transportation office of contracts p.o .
box num columbus ohio num telephone num num num table of contents table of contents num num general provisions num num definitions and terms num num bidding requirements and conditions num num award and execution of contract num num scope of work num num control of work num num control of material num num legal relations and responsibility to public num num prosecution and progress num num acceptance measurement and payment num num earthwork num item num clearing and grubbing num item num removal of structures and obstructions num item num roadway excavation and embankment num item num subgrade compaction and proof rolling num item num chemically stabilized embankment num item num chemically stabilized subgrade num item num rock blasting num item num linear grading num num pavement repairs num item num partial depth pavement repair num item num full depth rigid pavement removal and flexible replacement num item num pavement repair num item num pavement planing num item num full depth pavement removal and rigid replacement num item num bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavement num item num diamond grinding portland cement concrete pavement num item num load transfer retrofit num num bases num item num asphalt concrete base num item num asphalt concrete base num item num aggregate base num item num portland cement concrete base num item num rubblize and roll num item num cracking and seating non reinforced concrete pavement num num flexible pavement num item num asphalt concrete pavementsgeneral num item num asphalt concrete mixing plants num item num asphalt concrete quality control and acceptance num item num tack coat num item num prime coat num item num sawing and sealing asphalt concrete pavement joints num item num traffic compacted surface num item num stabilized crushed aggregate num item num microsurfacing num item num chip seal num item num crack sealing hot applied num item num fine graded polymer asphalt concrete num item num asphalt concrete mix design and quality control num item num superpave asphalt concrete num item num stone matrix asphalt concrete num item num asphalt concrete core density acceptance num item num asphalt concrete acceptance num num rigid pavement num item num reinforced portland cement concrete pavement num item num nonreinforced portland cement concrete pavement num item num quality control plan testing and assurance for qcqa concrete num item num concretegeneral num num structures num item num structuresgeneral num item num structures for maintaining traffic num item num excavation for structures num item num sheet piling left in place num item num pile driving equipment mobilization num item num static load test num item num bearing piles num item num falsework and forms num item num reinforcing steel num item num dowel holes num item num concrete for structures num item num treating concrete num item num structural steel members num item num painting of structural steel num item num prestressed concrete bridge members num item num expansion and contraction joints joint sealers and bearing devices num item num railings num item num drainage of structures num item num patching concrete structures num item num pneumatically placed mortar num item num structural plate corrugated metal structures on footings num item num dynamic load test num item num drilled shafts num item num approach slabs num num incidentals num item num slope and channel protection num item num masonry num item num underdrains num item num guardrail num item num fence num item num walks curb ramps and steps num item num curbing concrete medians and traffic islands num item num cellular retaining walls num item num pipe culverts sewers drains and drainage structures num item num low strength mortar backfill num item num maintaining traffic num item num roads and pavements for maintaining traffic num item num dust control num item num reconditioning shoulders num item num rumble strips on shoulders num item num field office num item num delineators num item num raised pavement markers rpm num item num concrete barrier num item num construction layout stakes and survey monuments num item num mobilization num item num highway lighting num item num barrier reflectors num item num traffic signs and sign supports num item num sign lighting and electrical signs num item num traffic signal equipment num item num traffic signal controllers num item num water mains and service branches num num pavement marking num item num pavement markinggeneral num item num traffic paint num item num polyester pavement marking num item num thermoplastic pavement marking num item num preformed pavement marking num item num epoxy pavement marking num item num heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking num item num spray thermoplastic pavement marking num num roadsides num item num topsoil stockpiled num item num placing stockpiled topsoil num item num topsoil furnished and placed num item num renovating existing soil num item num roadside cleanup num item num riprap for tree protection num item num tree root aeration num item num seeding and mulching num item num sodding num item num planting trees shrubs perennials and vines num item num landscape watering num item num pruning existing trees num item num erosion protection num item num erosion control mats num num material details num num minimum requirements for sampling materials num num cementitious materials and carbonate microfines num num asphalt material num num aggregate num num masonry units num num concrete incidentals num num concrete and clay pipe num num steel aluminum and plastic pipe num num paint num num reinforcing steel num num fence and guardrail num num structural steel and structure incidentals num num miscellaneous num num delineator materials num num raised pavement marker materials num num highway lighting materials num num barrier reflector materials num num traffic sign and support material num num sign lighting and electrical signs material num num traffic signal material num num traffic signal controller material num num pavement marking material num num water main and service branch material num num general provisions num definitions and terms num general .
these construction and material specifications are written to the bidder before award of the contract and to the contractor after award of the contract .
the sentences that direct the contractor to perform work are written as commands .
for example a requirement to provide coldweather protection would be expressed as provide coldweather protection for concrete rather than the contractor shall provide coldweather protection for concrete .
in the imperative mood the subject the bidder or the contractor is understood .
all requirements to be performed by others have been written in the active voice .
sentences written in the active voice identify the party responsible for performing the action .
for example the engineer will determine the density of the compacted material .
certain requirements of the contractor may also be written in the active voice rather than the active voice and imperative mood if the sentence includes requirements for others in addition to the contractor .
for example after the contractor provides initial written notice the engineer will revise the contract as specified in num .
sentences that define terms describe a product or desired result or describe a condition that may exist are written in indicative mood .
these types of sentences use verbs requiring no action .
for example the characteristics of the soils actually encountered in the subgrade may affect the quality of the cement and depth of treatment necessary .
num abbreviations .
the following abbreviations when used in the contract documents represent the full text shown .
aan american association of nurserymen aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials ac asphalt cement pavement alternating current traffic acbfs air cooled blast furnace slag aggregate aci american concrete institute acia asynchronous communications interface adapter traffic controller adt average daily traffic adtt average daily truck traffic aic amps interrupting capacity aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute anfo ammonium nitrate and fuel oil ansi american national standards institute aos apparent opening size fabric area american railway engineering association amrl aashto material reference library asce american society of civil engineers asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials awg american wire gauge awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association bbr bending beam rheometer asphalt binder test bmp best management practice erosion bof basic oxygen furnace aggregate bsg bulk specific gravity btex benzene toluene ethyl benzene and xylene a soil test bustr bureau of underground storage tank regulations division of fire marshal cms construction and material specifications capwap case pile wave analysis program cbae cut back asphalt emulsion ccrl cement and concrete reference laboratory ccs crushed carbonate stone ceci contactors erosion control inspector cfr code of federal regulations cie commission internationale declairage illumination cpesc certified professional in erosion and sediment control crs cationic rapid set asphalt emulsion crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute css cationic slow set asphalt emulsion cvn charpy vnotch steel test cwt hundred weight num lbs dc direct current dca district construction administrator dce district construction engineer ddd district deputy director det district engineer of tests dge district geotechnical engineer dls data logging system traffic markings dnr department of natural resources drc dry rodded condition asphalt aggregate test dsr dynamic shear rheometer asphalt binder test dza deficient zone average concrete test eaf electric arc furnace eda earth disturbing activity eei edison electric institute eia electronic industries alliance epa environmental protection agency eqs exceptional quality solids compost faa fine aggregate angularity asphalt aggregate fcm fracture critical member steel test fema federal emergency management agency fhwa federal highway administration department of transportation frp fiber reinforced polymer fss federal specifications and standards general services administration ggbfs ground granulated blast furnace slag gs granulated slag hdpe high density polyethylene hmwm high molecular weight methacrylate icea insulated cable engineers association ieee institute of electrical and electronic engineers ies illuminating engineering society imsa international municipal signal association ipcea insulated power cable engineers association ips international pipe standard issa international slurry seal association ite institute of transportation engineers izeu inorganic zinc epoxy urethane jmf job mix formula led light emitting diode lwt loaded wheel test asphalt test mbf thousand board feet wood mc medium cure asphalt emulsion mcb microchannel bus traffic controller mov metal oxide varistor traffic controller mpi magnetic particle inspection steel test msg maximum specific gravity asphalt mtd maximum theoretical density asphalt nace national association of corrosion engineers nchrp national cooperative highway research program nema national electrical manufacturers association nhi national highway institute nist national institute of standards and technology noi notice of intent npdes national pollutant discharge elimination system oac ohio administrative code odot ohio department of transportation oepa ohio environmental protection agency oh open hearth aggregate ohwm ordinary high water mark omm office of materials management the central office laboratory omutcd ohio manual of uniform traffic control devices orc ohio revised code ordc ohio rail development commission osha occupational safety and health administration ote office of traffic engineering owpca ohio water pollution control act ozeu organic zinc epoxy urethane pat project average thickness concrete test pav pressure aging vessel asphalt binder test pb polybutylene conduit pcc portland cement concrete pcs petroleum contaminated soil pda pile dynamic analysis steel piling pe polyethylene conduit pg performance grade asphalt binder grading system ph potential of hydrogen pls pure live seed pvc polyvinyl chloride qa quality assurance qc quality control qcfs quality control fabricator specialist structures qcp quality control program or plan or points steel test qcqc quality control qualification committee qpl qualified products list rap reclaimed asphalt pavement ras reclaimed asphalt shingles rc rapid cure asphalt emulsion rea rural electrification administration rfi radio frequency interference traffic controller rh relative humidity rms root mean square traffic controller rpcc recycled portland cement concrete rpm raised pavement marker traffic rs rapid set asphalt emulsion rtfo rolling thinfilm oven asphalt binder test rus rural utilities service sae society of automotive engineers sba styrene butadiene amine sbr styrene butadiene rubber sbs styrene butadiene styrene scd standard construction drawing sds safety data sheets sf standard fabricated members structures si international system of units metric sm aashtoware project sitemanager sma stone matrix asphalt spd surge protection device traffic controller spst single pole single throw traffic controller ss slow set asphalt emulsion ssd saturated surface dry aggregate sspc society for protective coatings swppp storm water pollution prevention plan tap traffic authorized product tce trichloroethylene tmpta trimethyolpropane triacrylate paint tnp total neutralizing power tods touristoriented directional signs tsec temporary sediment and erosion control tsr tensile strength ratio asphalt mix test uf unique fabricated members structures ul underwriters laboratories inc. usace united states army corps of engineers usc united states code va verification acceptance vac volts alternating current vca volume of coarse aggregate asphalt mix test vecp value engineering change proposal vma voids in the mineral aggregate vme versamodule eurocard traffic controller wdt watchdog timer weap wave equation analysis steel piling wps welding procedure specification steel test wzrpm work zone raised pavement marker traffic xcu explosion collapse and underground num definitions .
the following terms or pronouns when used in the contract documents are defined as follows advertisement .
the public announcement as required by law inviting bids for work to be performed or materials to be furnished .
award .
the written acceptance by the director of a bid .
bid .
the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form properly signed and guaranteed to perform the work and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted .
bid documents .
the bid documents include the invitation for bids addenda proposal expedite file contract form and required bonds specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans plan notes standard construction drawings identified in the plans notice to contractor and any other document designated by the department as a bid document all of which constitute one instrument .
bidder .
an individual firm or corporation submitting a bid for the advertised work acting directly or through the duly authorized representative and qualified as provided in orc num to num .
bridge .
a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length measured along the center of roadway of num feet num m or more between undercopings of abutments or extreme limits of openings for multiple boxes .
a .
length .
the length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the centerline of the roadway surface .
b. roadway width .
the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or in the case of multiple heights of curbs between the bottoms of the lower risers .
for curb widths of num foot num m or less the roadway width is measured between parapets or railings .
calendar day or day .
every day shown on the calendar .
certified test data .
a test report from a manufacturers or an independent laboratory approved by the director listing actual test results of samples tested for compliance with specified department requirements .
the department will accept certified test data from manufacturers laboratories if their products have been used satisfactorily on prior department contracts and their test data has been confirmed .
include a statement that the test data furnished is representative of the material furnished to a department project or to a supplier .
the report is identified by number or date and identifies the department project or supplier to which the material is shipped .
submit reports signed by a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer or independent laboratory .
change order .
a written order issued by the director to the contractor covering changes to the terms and conditions plans andor quantities within or beyond the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
claims .
disputes that are not settled through steps num and num of the dispute resolution and administrative claim process .
the dispute becomes a claim when the contractor submits a notice of intent to file a claim .
completion date .
the date as shown in the contract documents on which the work contemplated shall be completed .
construction limits .
these limits must encompass all work .
this includes removals room for construction equipment to complete work site access etc .
contract .
the written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties including but not limited to the performance of the work and the basis of payment .
contract bond .
the approved forms of security executed by the contractor and its sureties guaranteeing complete execution of the work as required by the contract documents and the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project which security shall comply with and be subject to orc num and num and related provisions .
contract documents .
the contract documents include the invitation for bids addenda proposal contract form and required bonds specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans plan notes standard construction drawings identified in the plans notice to contractor change orders supplemental agreements extra work contracts accepted and accepted as noted working drawings and any other document designated by the department as a contract document all of which constitute one instrument .
contract item pay item .
a specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
contract price .
the amount of compensation bid by the contractor for a contract item in the proposal or the amount of compensation established for a contract item added or modified pursuant to the contract documents .
contract time .
the number of workdays or calendar days including authorized adjustments allowed for completion of the project .
when a specified completion date is shown in the contract documents instead of the number of workdays or calendar days completion of the project shall occur on or before that date .
specified completion date and calendar day contracts shall be completed on or before the day indicated even when that date is a saturday sunday or holiday .
contractor .
the individual firm or corporation contracting with the department for performance of prescribed work acting directly or through a duly authorized representative and qualified under the provisions of orc num to num inclusive and any amendments thereto .
county .
the designated county in which the work specified is to be done .
culvert .
any structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under the roadway .
department .
the department of transportation state of ohio .
director .
administrative head of the department appointed by the governor .
disputes .
disagreements matters in question and differences of opinion between the departments personnel and the contractor .
district testing .
the departments district testing laboratories .
engineer .
duly authorized agent of the department acting within the scope of its authority for purposes of engineering and administration of the contract .
engineered drawings .
a type of working drawing that requires the practice of engineering as defined in orc nume .
examples of engineered drawings include excavation bracing plans demolition plans erection plans falsework plans cofferdam plans causeway plans jacking and temporary support plans plans for heavy equipment on structures plans for structures for maintaining traffic and corrective work plans .
equipment .
all machinery and equipment together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance and also tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
extra work .
an item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope .
extra work contract .
a contract concerning the performance of work or furnishing of materials involving extra work .
such extra work may be performed at agreed prices or on a force account basis as provided in orc num .
fabricator .
the individual firm or corporation that fabricates structural metals or prestressed concrete members as an agent of the contractor .
final inspector .
an engineer appointed by the ddd who inspects the completed work and accepts it if it complies with the contract documents .
inspector .
the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of contract performance .
invitation for bids .
the invitation for proposals for all work on which bids are required .
such proposal will indicate with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the work to be done or the character and quality of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of proposals .
laboratory .
the testing laboratories of the department including the office of materials management omm located at num west broad street columbus ohio and the district testing facilities .
materials .
any materials or products specified for use in the construction of the project and its appurtenances .
partnering .
a collaborative process for project cooperation and communication meant to achieve effective and efficient contract performance and completion of the project within budget on schedule safely and with requisite quality in accordance with the contract .
plans .
the drawings standard construction drawings and supplemental drawings provided by the department that show the location character dimensions and details of the work .
prebid question .
a written inquiry submitted by a prospective bidder .
profile grade .
the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
project limits .
project limits are points on the mainline centerline of construction where the proposed improvement as described in the project description on the title sheet excluding incidental construction begins and ends project rightofway .
that portion of the rightofway between the beginning and end of the project .
project .
the specific section of the highway together with all appurtenances and work to be performed thereon under the contract .
proposal .
the approved form on which the department requires bids to be prepared and submitted for the work .
proposal guaranty .
the security furnished with a bid to guarantee that the bidder will enter into the contract if its bid is accepted .
questionnaire .
the specified forms on which the contractor shall furnish required information as to its ability to perform and finance the work required under orc num .
reasonably close conformity .
reasonably close conformity means compliance with reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction tolerances where working tolerances are not specified .
where working tolerances are specified reasonably close conformity means compliance with such working tolerances .
without detracting from the complete and absolute discretion of the engineer to insist upon such tolerances as establishing reasonably close conformity the engineer may accept variations beyond such tolerances as reasonably close conformity where they will not materially affect the value or utility of the work and the interests of the department .
registered engineer .
an engineer registered with the ohio state board of registration for professional engineers and surveyors to practice professional engineering in the state of ohio registered surveyor .
a surveyor registered with the ohio state board of registration for professional engineers and surveyors to practice professional surveying in the state of ohio .
rightofway .
a general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway .
road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway as defined in orc num .
roadbed .
the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
roadside .
the areas between the outside edges of the shoulders and the rightofway boundaries .
unpaved median areas between inside shoulders of divided highways and infield areas of interchanges are included .
roadside development .
those items necessary to the highway that provide for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
roadway .
the portion of a highway within limits of construction .
shop drawings .
drawings accepted by the contractor and submitted to the department that describe portions of the work fabricated off site that are incorporated permanently with the project .
department acceptance is not required .
shoulder .
the portion of the roadway contiguous to the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
signatures on contract documents .
all signatures on contract documents must meet the requirements of num .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications covering conditions peculiar to an individual project .
specifications .
the directions provisions and requirements contained herein as supplemented by the supplemental specifications and special provisions .
state .
the state of ohio acting through its authorized representative .
street .
a general term denoting a public way for purpose of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
structures .
bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features that may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classed herein .
subcontractor .
an individual firm or corporation to whom the contractor sublets part of the contract to be performed on the job site who prior to such undertaking receives the written consent of the director and who is qualified under orc num through num inclusive .
subgrade .
the portion of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
substructure .
all of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with backwalls and wings .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
superstructure .
the entire structure except the substructure .
supplement .
a list of requirements for fabrication plants methods of test or other miscellaneous requirements that are maintained on file in the office of the director .
supplemental agreement .
a written agreement executed by the contractor and by the director covering necessary alterations .
supplemental specifications .
detailed specifications supplemental to or superseding these specifications .
surety .
the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
titles or headings .
the titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on their interpretation .
waters of the united states .
waters that are under the jurisdiction of the corps of engineers under the clean water act as defined by num cfr ch .
ii part num which as applied to ohio means the ohio river and lake erie and any other river stream creek lake pond or wetland that drains directly or indirectly into the ohio river or lake erie .
work .
all labor materials equipment tools transportation supplies and other incidentals and all tasks that comprise the project or any portion thereof as described by the contract documents .
work limits .
work limits are the extreme limits of the contractors responsibility on a project including all temporary and incidental construction with the exception of work zone traffic control devices required for maintenance of traffic .
workday .
a calendar day that the contractor normally works .
working drawings .
contractor submitted drawings for work not otherwise defined in the bid documents and require department acceptance .
examples of working drawings include engineered drawings installation plans certified drawings and any other supplementary plans or similar data that the contractor is required to submit for acceptance .
num interpretations .
in order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these specifications it is provided that whenever anything is or is to be done if as or when or where contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned it shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer .
num bidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders .
a bidder must be prequalified by the department according to orc chapter num and the rules and regulations governing prequalification in order to submit a bid .
upon request the department will provide a prequalification application applicable rules and regulations and other relevant information .
for prospective bidders that are not yet prequalified furnish the department with a properly completed prequalification application at least num days before the date specified for the receipt of bids .
the prequalification certificate is the bidders license to bid and perform construction for the department .
for foreign contractors refer to orc num and ohio administrative rule num .
the department will perform contractor performance evaluations for each contractor and subcontractor on every odotlet construction project .
evaluations shall be well documented objective and performed in a timely manner in accordance with supplement num .
the contractors average scores for the previous calendar year will be used in the calculation of the contractors bidding capacity .
the contractor has the right to appeal an evaluation .
num contents of bid documents .
use the proposal to prepare and submit bids for the work .
upon request the department will provide bid documents that include or reference the following a .
location and description of the project .
b .
estimate of quantities and description of the work .
c. time to complete the work .
d. amount of the proposal guaranty .
e. departments deadline for receiving a completed bid .
f. schedule of contract items .
g. standard specifications special provisions supplemental specifications and the plans .
h. proposal .
num issuance of proposals .
a .
general .
upon request the department will provide applicable rates and other relevant information for obtaining bidding information and submitting a bid .
b .
department will not issue .
the department may refuse to sell or issue bid documents to a prospective bidder for any of the following reasons num .
the prospective bidder owes the department for previously issued plans .
num .
the prospective bidder has defaulted on previous contracts .
num .
the prospective bidder is debarred from bidding on and receiving department contracts .
num .
the prospective bidder is currently in the debarment process .
num interpretation of quantities in proposal .
the quantities in the bid documents are approximate and the department uses them for the comparison of bids only .
the department will only pay the contractor for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted according to the contract documents .
the department may increase decrease or omit the scheduled quantities of work as provided in num without invalidating the bid prices .
num examination of bid documents and project site and submission of prebid questions .
carefully examine the bid documents and perform a reasonable site investigation before submitting a bid .
submitting a bid is an affirmative statement that the bidder has investigated the project site and is satisfied as to the character quality quantities and the conditions to be encountered in performing the work .
a reasonable site investigation includes investigating the project site borrow sites hauling routes and all other locations related to the performance of the work .
when available the department will include in the contract documents or provide for the bidders review at the departments offices or website one or more of the following a .
record drawings .
b .
available information relative to subsurface exploration borings soundings water levels elevations or profiles .
c. the results of other preliminary investigations .
a reasonable site investigation includes a review of these documents .
should a question arise at any time during the examination of bid documents or investigation of the site the bidder may seek clarification by submitting a prebid question .
submit all prebid questions in writing via the departments website .
the department will post a response on its website to all questions submitted before a deadline of num am four working days prior to the public opening of bids .
responses to prebid questions posted on the departments website are not revisions to the bidding documents and are not binding .
the department is not obligated to respond to or otherwise act upon a prebid question submitted after this deadline but reserves the right to act upon any information received .
num preparation of bids .
prepare a bid according to this subsection and the requirements found in the bid documents .
properly complete the expedite file and submit it using the software specified in the bid documents rather than completing it by handwriting typing or using unauthorized computergenerated forms .
provide a unit price for each item listed in the proposal .
calculate and place the products for the respective unit prices and quantities in the bid amount column .
for a lump sum item place the same price in the unit price column and in the bid amount column pertaining to that item .
indicate the total bid amount by adding the values entered in the bid amount column for the listed items .
submit the expedite file using the software specified in the bid documents .
properly execute the proposal by completing the miscellaneous section and attaching the required signatures in the space provided in the expedite file .
entity submitting proposal required signature individual the individual or a duly authorized agent .
partnership a partner or a duly authorized agent .
joint venture a member or a duly authorized agent of at least one of the joint venture firms .
corporation an authorized officer or duly authorized agent of the corporation .
also show the name of the state chartering the corporation and affix the corporate seal .
limited liability company a manager a member or a duly authorized agent .
num duty to notify of errors in bid documents .
notify the department of errors and omissions in the bid documents .
make notification by submitting a question in the manner described in num .
the contractors duty to disclose errors and omissions is not only a bidding requirement but is also a legal requirement that can not be ignored .
failure to provide the required notification prior to the opening of bids shall constitute a waiver by the contractor and does not obligate the department for any costs based upon any apparent or patent ambiguity arising from insufficient data or obvious errors in the bid documents .
knowingly withholding information regarding an error or omission in the bid documents or intentionally misrepresenting an item of work for financial or competitive gain may result in civil or criminal penalties in excess of the value of the item bid .
num unbalanced bidding .
bid all items correctly and price each quantity as indicated in the bid documents .
the department will reject a mathematically unbalanced bid if the bid is also materially unbalanced .
a mathematically unbalanced bid is a bid containing lump sum or unit price items that do not include reasonable labor equipment and material costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders overhead costs other indirect costs and anticipated profit .
a materially unbalanced bid is when the department determines that an award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will not result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
num proposal guaranty .
the department will reject a bid submitted without a proposal guaranty in the amount designated and payable to the director .
submit the required proposal guaranty in one of the following forms a .
properly executed project bid bond submitted on the departments form .
b .
properly executed electronic bid transfer to the departments account .
c. certified check drawn on the account of the bidder submitting the bid .
d. cashiers check .
e. properly executed electronic project bid bond submitted using the software specified in the bid documents .
when submitting a bid bond ensure that the surety is licensed to do business in the state .
if the department invites alternate bids and the bidder elects to bid more than one alternate the bidder may submit one proposal guaranty in the amount required for a single alternate .
the proposal guaranty covers each individual bid .
if the department invites combined bids and the bidder elects to bid only on one package then the bidder must submit only one proposal guaranty .
if the bidder bids on the combined bid package the bidder must submit a proposal guaranty in the amount required for the combined bid .
the combined proposal guaranty covers each individual bid .
num delivery of bid .
unless otherwise indicated in the proposal all bids must be submitted using the electronic bid submission software specified in the proposal .
the department will accept bids until the time and date designated in the notice to bidders .
the department will return bids received after the designated time to the bidders unopened .
the department will return all bids not prepared and submitted in accordance with the proposal .
num withdrawal of bids .
after bids are opened orc num requires that a bidder identify a mistake in its bid within num hours of the bid opening .
after bids are opened the bidder must provide a written request to withdraw a bid already filed with the department .
any bidder for whom a request to withdraw its bid is approved by the department will not be permitted to participate in any manner in a contract awarded for that project for which the bid was withdrawn .
num combination proposals .
the department may elect to issue bid documents for projects in combination or separately so that bids may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of the combination .
the department reserves the right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the best advantage of the department .
the department will not consider combination bids other than those it specifically identifies in the bid documents .
the department will write separate contracts for each individual project included in the combination .
num public opening of bids .
the department will publicly open bids at the time and place indicated in the notice to contractors .
the department will announce the total bid amount for each bid .
bidders or their authorized agent and other interested persons are invited to the opening .
the department may postpone the receipt of bid time or the opening of bids time .
if the department changes the hour or the date of the receipt of bids or the opening of bids it will issue an addendum or public notice to notify prospective bidders .
num disqualification of bidders .
the department will declare a bid nonresponsive and ineligible for award when any of the following occur a .
the bidder lacks sufficient prequalification work types or dollars to be eligible for award .
b .
the bidder fails to furnish the required proposal guaranty in the proper form and amount .
c. the bid contains unauthorized alterations or omissions .
d. the bid contains conditions or qualifications not provided for in the bid documents .
e. the proposal is not prepared as specified .
f. a single entity under the same name or different names or affiliated entities submits more than one bid for the same project .
g. the bidder fails to submit a unit price for each contract item listed except for lump sum items where the bidder may show a price in the bid amount column for that item .
h. the bidder fails to submit a lump sum price where required .
i .
the bidder fails to submit a complete expedite file using the software specified in the proposal .
j .
the bidder is debarred from submitting bids .
k. the bidder has defaulted has had a contract terminated for cause by the department has either agreed not to bid or has had debarment proceedings initiated against the bidders company andor its key personnel .
l. the bidder submits its bid or proposal guaranty on forms other than those provided by the department .
m. the bidder fails to properly complete the supplemental questionnaire section of the expedite file .
n. the bidder submits a materially unbalanced bid as defined by num .
o .
the bidder fails to acknowledge addenda .
p. the department finds evidence of collusion .
q .
any other omission error or act that in the judgment of the department renders the bidders bid non responsive .
num material guaranty .
before any contract is awarded the department may require the bidder to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples .
the department may test the samples as specified in these specifications to determine their quality and fitness for the work .
num certificate of compliance with affirmative action programs .
before any contract is awarded the department will require the bidder to furnish a valid certificate of compliance with affirmative action programs issued by the state eeo coordinator dated prior to the date fixed for the opening of bids .
num drugfree safety program .
during the life of this project the contractor and all its subcontractors that provide labor on the project site must be enrolled in and remain in good standing in the ohio bureau of workers compensation obwc drugfree safety program dfsp or a comparable program approved by the obwc .
in addition to being enrolled in and in good standing in an obwcapproved dfsp or a comparable program approved by the obwc the department requires each contractor and subcontractor that provides labor to subject its employees who perform labor on the project site to random drug testing of num percent of its employees .
the random drug testing percentage must also include the onsite supervisors of the contractors and subcontractors .
upon request the contractor and subcontractor shall provide evidence of required testing to the department .
each subcontractor shall require all lowertier subcontractors that provides labor on the project site with whom the subcontractor is in contract for the work to be enrolled in and be in good standing in the obwcapproved dfsp prior to a lowertier subcontractor providing labor at the site .
the department will declare a bid nonresponsive and ineligible for award if the contractor is not enrolled and in good standing in the ohio bureau of workers compensations drugfree safety program dfsp discount program or a similar program approved by the bureau of workers compensation within num days of the bid opening .
furthermore the department will deny all requests to sublet when the subcontractor does not comply with the provisions of this section .
failure of the contractor to require a subcontractor to be enrolled in and be in good standing in the an obwc approved dfsp prior to the time that the subcontractor provides labor at the site shall result in the contractor being found in breach of the contract and that breach shall be used in the responsibility analysis of that contractor or the subcontractor who was not enrolled in a program for future contracts with the state for five years after the date of the breach .
num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals .
after opening and announcing the bids the department will compare the bidders proposed prices .
the proposed price is the summation of the products of the estimated quantities shown in the proposal and the unit bid prices .
if the amount shown for the proposed product differs from the actual product of the unit bid price and the estimated quantity then the actual product will govern .
the department may reject any or all bids waive technicalities or advertise for new bids without liability to the department .
num award of contract .
the department will award a contract or reject bids within num days after bid opening .
the department will mail a letter to the address on the bid notifying the successful bidder of bid acceptance and contract award .
the department will award to the lowest competent and responsible bidder .
the department will not award a contract until it completes an investigation of the apparent low bidder .
if the departments estimate for the cost of the improvement is not confidential the department will not award a contract for an amount greater than num percent more than the departments estimate .
if the departments estimate is confidential the department may award the contract according to orc num .
num cancellation of award .
the department may cancel a contract award at any time before all parties sign the contract without liability to the department .
num return of proposal guaranty .
immediately after the opening and checking of bids the department will return all proposal guaranties provided in the form of a certified check or cashiers check except to the three lowest bidders .
within num days after opening bids the department will return the proposal guaranties of the two remaining unsuccessful bidders .
after the successful bidder submits the signed contract contract bonds and other contract documents and after the department signs the contract the department will return the proposal guaranty to the successful bidder .
the department will not return bid bonds .
num requirement of contract bond .
furnish contract bonds within num days after receiving notice of award .
furnish contract bonds to the director on the prescribed form in the amount of the contract and according to orc num .
num execution of contract .
sign and return the contract along with the certificate of compliance contract bonds and other required contract documents within num days after notice of award .
the state does not consider a proposal binding until the director signs the contract .
if the director does not sign the contract within num days after receiving the successful bidders signed contract certificates contract bonds and other contract documents the successful bidder may withdraw the bid without prejudice .
num failure to execute contract .
if the successful bidder fails to sign the contract and furnish the contract bonds the department will have just cause to cancel the award .
the successful bidder shall forfeit the proposal guaranty to the department not as a penalty but as liquidated damages .
the department may award the contract to the next lowest responsive bidder readvertise the work or take any other action decided by the director .
num scope of work num intent of the contract documents .
the intent of the contract documents is to provide for the construction and completion of the work .
perform the work according to the contract documents .
num revisions to the contract documents .
a .
general .
the department reserves the right to revise the contract documents at any time .
such revisions do not invalidate the contract or release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as revised .
the provisions of this section are subject to the limitation of orc num .
b .
differing site conditions .
during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract documents or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract documents are encountered at the site notify the engineer as specified in num.f of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed or the affected work is performed .
upon notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract the department will make an adjustment and modify the contract as specified in num and num .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
c. suspension of work .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation or time is due as a result of such suspension or delay notify the engineer as specified in num .
upon receipt of notice the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost or time required for the performance of the work has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an equitable adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract as specified in num and num .
the engineer will notify the contractor of its determination whether or not an adjustment to the contract documents is warranted .
failure of the engineer to suspend or delay the work in writing does not bar the contractor from receiving a time extension or added compensation according to num or num .
the department will not make an adjustment under this subsection in the event that performance is suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
d. significant changes in character of the work .
the engineer may increase or decrease quantities and alter the work as necessary to complete the project .
the engineer will make appropriate adjustments according to num and num if such alterations significantly change the character of the work .
if the contractor disagrees as to whether an alteration constitutes a significant change use the notification procedures specified in num.g .
the term significant change is defined as follows num. when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num. when the product of the quantity in excess of the estimated quantity of a contract item and the unit price exceeds the limits set forth in table num .
table num contract price contract limits up to num num num to num num of total contract price over num num a quantity underrun is defined as follows num. the estimated quantity of a contract item exceeds four units and num. the decrease in quantity of any unit price contract item exceeds num percent of the estimated quantity and num. the total of all such adjustments for all contract items is more than num .
then after the determination of final quantities according to num.c the engineer will adjust the unit prices for the affected contract item by multiplying the bid unit price by the factor obtained from table num .
table num decrease factor decrease factor num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num and over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when the increase in quantity or decrease in quantity of any unit price contract item does not exceed the limits set forth in tables num and num the change is considered a minor change .
the department will pay for minor changes in the work at the unit bid price .
e. eliminated items .
the department may partially or completely eliminate contract items .
the department will only make an adjustment to compensate the contractor for the reasonable cost incurred in preparation to perform significantly changed work as set forth in num.d or work completely eliminated prior to the date of the engineers written order to significantly change or completely eliminate the work .
the adjustment will be determined according to num and num .
such payment will not exceed the price of the contract item .
the department will not seek a savings for maintaining traffic mobilization and construction layout stakes items for eliminated items of work unless there is a significant change .
f. extra work .
perform extra work as directed by the engineer .
the department will pay for extra work as specified in num .
time extensions if warranted will be determined according to num .
g. unilateral authority to pay .
the department has unilateral authority to pay the contractor sums it determines to be due to the contractor for work performed on the project .
this unilateral authority to pay by the department does not preclude or limit the rights of the department and the contractor to negotiate and agree to the amounts to be paid to the contractor .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
upon obtaining the engineers approval the contractor may use material such as stone gravel or sand found in the plan excavation for another contract item .
the department will pay for both the excavation of the material under the corresponding contract item and for the placement of the excavated material under the contract items for which the excavated material is used .
excavate or remove material only from within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines .
obtain written permission from the engineer according to num.a .
num cleaning up .
maintain the project in a presentable condition .
remove all rubbish layout stakes sediment control devices as directed by the engineer excess material temporary structures and equipment including stream channels and banks within the rightofway at drainage structures and all borrow and waste areas storage sites temporary plant sites haul roads and other ground occupied by the contractor in connection with the work .
establish suitable vegetative cover in these areas by seeding and mulching according to item num except for cultivated fields .
leave the project site in an acceptable condition as determined by the engineer .
the cost of cleanup is incidental to all contract items .
the department may withhold num percent of the bid amount for the mobilization contract item if included until performance under this section is complete .
see num .
num control of work num authority of the engineer .
the engineer will decide questions concerning all of the following a .
the quality and acceptability of materials furnished .
b .
the quantity of work performed .
c. the contractors rate of progress .
d. the interpretation of the contract documents .
e. acceptable fulfillment of the contract .
f. contractor compensation .
the engineer may suspend all or part of the work when the contractor fails to correct conditions that are unsafe for the workers or the general public fails to comply with the contract documents or fails to comply with the engineers orders .
the engineer may suspend the work due to adverse weather conditions conditions considered adverse to the prosecution of the work or other conditions or reasons in the public interest .
the engineers acceptance does not constitute a waiver of the departments right to pursue any and all legal remedies for defective work or work performed by the contractor in an unworkmanlike manner .
num plans and working drawings .
the plans show details of structures the lines and grades typical crosssections of the roadway and the location and design of structures .
keep at least one set of plans at the project at all times .
prepare working drawings when required by the contract documents and after verifying applicable field and plan elevations dimensions and geometries .
where work consists of repairs extension or alteration of existing structures take measurements of existing structures to accurately join old and new work .
unless otherwise indicated the department will review working drawing submittals to ensure conformance with the contract and to provide the contractor a written response to document the results of its review as follows a .
accepted .
the department accepts the submittal for construction fabrication or manufacture .
b .
accepted as noted .
the department accepts the submittal for construction fabrication or manufacture subject to the contractors compliance with all department comments or corrections to the submittal .
if also marked resubmit the department still accepts the submittal but requires the contractor to provide a corrected submittal to the department .
c. not accepted .
the department does not accept the submittal .
the submittal does not conform to contract requirements .
do not begin construction fabrication or manufacture of work included in the submittal .
revise the submittal to comply with department comments or corrections and contract requirements and provide the revised submittal to the department for another review .
accepted and accepted as noted working drawings are contract documents as defined in num .
the departments acceptance will not relieve the contractor of responsibility to complete the work according to the contract nor relieve a signatory engineers responsibility as defined by oac num .
include the cost of furnishing working drawings in the cost of the work they cover .
num conformity with contract documents .
perform all work and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades crosssections dimensions and material requirements as shown on the plans and as specified .
if the dca determines the work is not in reasonably close conformity with the contract documents and determines the contractor produced reasonably acceptable work the dca may accept the work based on engineering judgment .
the dca will document the basis of acceptance in a change order that provides for an appropriate adjustment to the contract price of the accepted work or materials .
if the dca determines the work is not in reasonably close conformity with the contract documents and determines the work is inferior or unsatisfactory remove replace or otherwise correct the work at no expense to the department .
num coordination of the contract documents .
the contract documents are those defined in num .
a requirement appearing in one of these documents is as binding as though it occurs in all .
the engineer will resolve discrepancies using the following descending order of precedence a. addenda .
b .
proposal and special provisions .
c. plans .
d. supplemental specifications .
e. standard construction drawings .
f. standard specifications .
immediately notify the engineer upon discovering any latent error or omission in the contract documents .
num cooperation by contractor .
the department will supply the contractor with two sets of the contract documents except for the standard construction drawings which will only be supplied if requested .
the department will provide only one copy of these specifications .
provide the constant attention necessary to progress the work according to the contract documents .
cooperate with the engineer inspectors and all other contractors on or adjacent to the project .
num superintendent .
provide a superintendent for the project that is available and responsive at all times and is responsible for all aspects of the work irrespective of the amount of subcontract work .
the superintendent must be capable of reading and understanding the contract documents and experienced in the type of work being performed .
the superintendent shall receive instructions from the engineer or the engineers authorized representatives .
the superintendent shall promptly execute the engineers orders or directions and promptly supply the required materials equipment tools labor and incidentals .
num cooperation with utilities .
unless otherwise provided for by the contract documents the department will direct the utility owners to relocate or adjust water lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light standards cableways signals and all other utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction at no cost to the contractor .
if the contractor is directed by a utility company to perform any work not specifically contained in this note the department will not compensate the contractor for this work unless the department approves the request in writing before the work begins .
if the work is not preapproved by the department the contractor will be responsible for obtaining reimbursement for its work from the utility company which directed the contractor to perform the work .
in the event that the contractor requests that additional work not specifically contained in this note be performed by a utility company the contractor will be responsible for reimbursing the utility company for the additional work unless the department has agreed in writing to pay for the additional work before the work begins .
the contract documents will indicate various utility items and indicate a time frame or date when the department expects the owners to complete utility relocation or adjustment .
provide utility owners adjusting facilities during construction with adequate notification of the scheduled work to prevent conflict with the contractors schedule of operations .
when bidding consider all permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in present and relocated positions as shown in the contract documents .
according to orc num and at least num workdays prior to commencing construction operations in an area that may affect underground utilities shown on the plans notify the engineer the registered utility protection service and the owners that are not members of the registered utility protection service .
the owner of the underground utility shall within num hours excluding saturdays sundays and legal holidays after notice is received start staking marking or otherwise designating the location course num feet num m together with the approximate depth of the underground utilities in the construction area .
if the utility owners fail to relocate or adjust utilities as provided for in the contract documents and the contractor sustains losses that could not have been avoided by the judicious handling of forces equipment and plant or by reasonable revisions to the schedule of operations then the engineer will adjust the contract according to num and num .
num cooperation between contractors .
at any time the department may contract for other work on or near the project .
separate contractors working within the limits of the project shall conduct their work without interfering with or hindering the progress or completion of work being performed by other contractors and shall cooperate with each other as directed by the engineer .
num authority and duties of the inspector .
inspectors are authorized to inspect the work and the preparation fabrication or manufacture of materials .
inspectors are not authorized to alter or waive requirements of the contract documents .
inspectors are authorized to notify the contractor of work that does not conform to the contract reject materials that do not conform to specification requirements and until the issue is decided by the engineer suspend portions of the work if there is a question regarding the contract documents use of unapproved material or safety .
inspectors are not obligated or authorized to provide direction superintendence or guidance to the contractor its crew its subcontractors or suppliers to accomplish the work .
any action or inaction of the inspector does not constitute a waiver of the departments right to pursue any and all legal remedies for defective work or work performed by the contractor in an unworkmanlike manner .
num inspection of work .
the engineer may inspect materials and the work .
provide the engineer or the engineers representative access to the work information and assistance necessary to conduct a complete inspection .
notify the engineer at least num hours prior to all required inspections .
when directed by the engineer remove or uncover completed work to allow inspection .
after the engineers inspection restore the work according to the requirements of the contract documents .
if the inspected work conformed to the requirements of the contract documents the department will pay for uncovering or removing and restoring the work as extra work according to num .
if the inspected work did not conform to the contract documents the department will not pay for uncovering or removing and restoring the work .
the department shall have the discretion to dictate the level of inspection for any item of work .
the contractor bears sole responsibility for the quality of work and compliance with the contract regardless of the departments level of inspection .
the departments failure to identify defective work or material shall not in any way prevent later rejection when defective work or material is discovered or obligate the department to grant acceptance under num or num .
inspection of work may include inspection by representatives of other government agencies or railroad corporations that pay a portion of the cost of the work .
this inspection will not make other government agencies or railroad corporations a party to the contract and will not interfere with the rights of the contractor or department .
num removal of defective and unauthorized work .
work that does not conform to the requirements of the contract is defective .
unless the department formally accepts defective work according to num immediately remove and replace defective work .
unauthorized work is work done contrary to the instructions of the engineer beyond the plan lines or any extra work done without the departments permission .
the department will not pay for unauthorized work .
the engineer may order the contractor to remove or replace unauthorized work at no expense to the department .
if the contractor fails to comply with the engineers orders under the provisions of this subsection the dca may correct or remove and replace defective or unauthorized work and deduct the costs from the contract price .
num load restrictions .
comply with all legal load restrictions when hauling materials on public roads .
operate equipment of a weight or so loaded as to not cause damage to structures to the roadway or to other types of construction .
comply with subsection num.b.num for allowed loads on bridges .
do not use off road vehicles on bases or pavements unless permitted by the dca in writing .
do not haul on concrete pavement base or structures before the expiration of the curing period .
do not exceed the legal load limits in this section unless permitted by the director in writing .
num haul roads .
prior to hauling equipment or materials provide written notification to the engineer of the specific roads or streets on the haul route .
if the haul route includes roads and streets that are not under the jurisdiction and control of the state and the dca determines that state controlled roads are not available or practical for a haul route the contractor may use local roads and streets that are not restricted by local authorities .
if the dca determines that state controlled roads are available and practical for a haul route revise the proposed haul route provided in the original written notification and resubmit to the dca .
if the engineer determines that haul route roads were properly used during construction to haul equipment and materials and that the haul route roads were damaged then the engineer may order the contractor to perform immediate and practical repairs to ensure reasonably normal traveling conditions .
the engineer will pay for repairs according to applicable provisions of num and num .
the contractor shall not file a claim for delays or other impacts to the work caused by disputes with the local authorities regarding the use of local roads or streets as haul routes .
the contractor shall save the state harmless for any closures or hauling restrictions outside the project limits beyond the control of the department .
num maintenance during construction .
maintain the work during construction and until final inspector accepts the work under num except for portions of the work accepted under num .
the contractor is responsible for damage done by its equipment .
maintain the previous courses or subgrade during all construction operations when placing a course upon other courses of embankment base subgrade concrete or asphalt pavement or other similar items previously constructed .
this maintenance includes but is not limited to draining recompacting regrading or if destroyed the removal of work previously accepted by the department .
maintain the post construction storm water best management practice bmp features .
prevent sediment laden surface water from coming in contact with the bmp features during construction .
maintain the work during construction and before acceptance of the work under num except for portions of the work accepted under num .
the department will not provide additional compensation for maintenance work .
num failure to maintain roadway or structure .
if the contractor at any time fails to comply with the provisions of num the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the project and deduct the entire cost of this maintenance from monies due or to become due the contractor on the contract .
num borrow and waste areas .
prior to beginning borrow or wasting operations obtain the engineers written approval of a detailed operation plan that addresses the following concerns a .
control of drainage water .
b. cleanup shaping and restoration of disturbed areas .
c. disposal of regulated materials .
d. avoidance of regulated areas .
e. excavation and filling of waste and borrow areas .
f. saving of topsoil .
g. temporary sediment and erosion control bmps required for compliance under the clean water act ohio water pollution control act owpca orc chapter num and the npdes permit .
perform all engineering necessary to ensure long term stability of all side slopes and foundations of all borrow and waste areas .
furnish a certification by a registered engineer attesting to the stability of all borrow and waste areas .
all damage resulting from the instability of borrow and waste areas the removal of borrow materials the placement of waste materials or the hauling of material to and from these areas is the sole responsibility of the contractor .
repairs to approved haul roads will be made in accordance with num .
perform all engineering including any field investigation necessary to ensure long term stability of all side slopes and foundations of all borrow and waste areas .
ensure that all side slopes of all waste areas do not reduce horizontal sight distance as defined by the current version of the departments location and design manual .
have the proposed borrow and waste areas reviewed by an environmental consultant that is prequalified by the department for ecological work .
have the environmental consultant certify that the proposed borrow and waste operations will not impact the waters of the united states or an isolated wetland .
if consultant certification is not provided obtain the num permits necessary to perform the operations as proposed .
have the environmental consultant certify that the work conforms to the requirements of the permits .
provide all documentation submitted to obtain the appropriate permits and a copy of the permits to the departments office of environmental services .
if burning is permitted under the oacnum and orc num submit a copy of the ohio epa permit and the ohio dnr permit to the engineer and copies of all information used to obtain the permit .
prior to the disposal of waste materials submit to the department an executed copy of the contract or permission statement from the property owner .
the contract or permission statement must indicate that the waste materials are not the property of the department .
further it must expressly state that the department is not a party to the contract or permission statement and that the contractor and property owner will hold the department harmless from claims that may arise from their contract or permission statement .
restoration of all borrow or waste areas includes cleanup shaping replacement of topsoil and establishment of vegetative cover by seeding and mulching according to num and item num .
ensure the restored area is well drained unless approval is given by the engineer to convert a pit area into a pond or lake in which case confine restoration measures to the disturbed areas above the anticipated normal water level .
for waste sites shown on the plan the plan will indicate if the clearances have or have not been obtained for the project rightofway locations .
no extension of time or additional compensation will be paid for any delays due to not having the written permits to waste in a floodplain .
the allowed use of project rightofway and other department property for borrow and waste is detailed in num and num .
borrow and waste area shall adhere to num .
the cost of work described herein is incidental to the contract unless included under another item of work .
num construction and demolition debris .
oacnum oacnum and orc chapter num regulates the use and disposal of construction and demolition debris .
notify the local board of health or the local ohio epa office num days before placing clean hard fill off the rightofway .
submit copies of this notification to the engineer .
legally dispose of debris containing wood road metal or plaster at a licensed construction and demolition debris site .
under the regulations cited above the disposal of brush trees stumps tree trimmings branches weeds leaves grass shrubbery yard trimmings crop residue and other plant matter is restricted .
if allowed by the contract documents the contractor may waste brush trees stumps tree trimming branches weeds leaves grass shrubbery yard trimmings crop residue and other plant matter within the rightofway .
otherwise submit a plan and any required permits to legally dispose of these materials off the rightofway to the engineer .
provide all documents submitted to obtain this permit to the engineer .
if the project contains garbage or solid and hazardous waste the contract documents will detail the removal of these items .
when wasting pcc mix the pcc with at least num percent natural soil to construct an inner core in the waste area .
cover this inner core with num feet num m of natural soil on the top and num feet num m on the side slopes .
place and compact the material according to num.d to prevent future settlement and sliding .
clean hard fill consisting of reinforced or nonreinforced concrete asphalt concrete brick block tile or stone that is free of all steel as per num shall be managed in one or more of the following ways num .
recycled into a usable construction material .
num .
disposed in licensed construction and demolition debris facility .
num .
used in legitimate fill operations on the site of generation according to num .
num .
used in legitimate fill operations on a site other than the site of generation to bring a site up to grade .
a beneficial reuse certification form needs to be properly executed by the recipient prior to any material leaving the project .
num acceptance .
the department will accept work according to num or completed sections of the project according to num .
num value engineering change proposals .
the department will partner with the contractor by considering the contractors submission of a value engineering change proposal vecp which will reduce construction costs and possibly time on projects that do not contain design build provisions or incentive provisions based on time .
the purpose of this provision is to encourage the use of the ingenuity and expertise of the contractor in arriving at alternate plans specifications or other requirements of the contract .
savings in construction costs and possibly time will be shared equally between the contractor and the department .
the contractors costs for development design and implementation of the vecp are not eligible for reimbursement .
the vecp must not impair any of the essential functions and characteristics of the project such as service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance safety and necessary standardized features .
the submission of the value engineering change proposal shall conform to supplement num .
acceptance of a vecp is at the sole discretion of the director .
the department will not approve vecps with any of the following characteristics a .
consist only of nonperforming items of work contained in the plans .
b .
include plan errors identified by the contractor as part of the cost reduction .
c. the vecp designerconsultant for the contractor is also the designer of record for odot .
d. changes to any special architectural or aesthetic treatments .
e. requires concrete beams to be installed with less than num vertical clearance over a state highway .
f. changes the type or buildup of permanent pavement .
g. compromises controlling design criteria or would require a design exception as discussed in volume i section num of the location and design manual .
h. proposes a time savings for any project which has an incentive disincentive clause which was awarded based on ab bidding or lane rental .
engineering and drawing development and implementation costs for the vecp are not recoverable .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for any costs or delays due to the departments review or rejection of the vecp .
if the department already is considering revisions to the contract which are subsequently proposed as a vecp the department may reject the contractors initial vecp or portions thereof and may proceed with such revisions without any obligations to the contractor .
num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements .
notify the engineer of the proposed sources of supply before the delivery of materials .
the engineer may approve materials at the source of supply before delivery .
if the proposed sources of supply can not produce the specified material then furnish materials from alternate sources without adjustment to the contract price or completion date .
num samples tests and cited specifications .
the engineer will inspect and determine whether the materials comply with the specified requirements before they are incorporated into the work .
the department may sample and test materials or require certifications .
unless specified the department will pay for and test materials according to aashto astm or the methods on file in the office of the engineer .
a qualified representative of the department will take test samples according to departmental procedures .
read any reference to other specifications or testing methods to mean the version in effect at the pertinent project advertisement date .
all materials being used are subject to inspection test or rejection at any time before their incorporation into the work .
the department will furnish copies of the tests to the contractors representative upon request .
furnish the required samples and specified material certifications at no expense to the department other than provided in num .
equip all transports and distributors hauling asphalt material with an approved submerged asphalt material sampling device .
num small quantities and materials for temporary application .
the engineer may accept small quantities and materials for temporary application that are not intended for permanent incorporation in the work .
the engineer may accept these small quantities and materials for temporary application in either of the following cases a .
where similar materials from the same source have recently been approved .
b .
where the materials in the judgment of the engineer will serve the intended purpose .
num plant sampling and testing plan .
the engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
in the event plant sampling and testing is undertaken the contractor and its material provider shall meet the following conditions a .
cooperate and assist the engineer with the inspection of materials .
provide full entry to the engineer at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
agree to all documentation and inspection requirements of the tenum plant sampling and testing plan .
b .
if required by the engineer arrange for the inspector to use an approved building on site .
the building should be located near the plant and independent of any building used by the material producer .
c. maintain and provide adequate safety measures at the plant at all times .
the department reserves the right to retest all materials that have been tested and accepted at the source of supply before their incorporation into the work .
after the approved materials have been delivered to the site the department may reject all materials that when retested do not meet the requirements of the contract documents .
num storage of materials .
properly store all materials to ensure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
the engineer may reinspect stored materials before their incorporation into the work even though they were approved before storage .
locate stored materials to facilitate their prompt inspection .
the contractor may use approved portions of the project rightofway for storage however if any additional space is required the contractor must provide it at the contractors expense .
do not use private property for storage purposes without written permission from the owner or lessee .
if requested by the engineer furnish copies of the written permission .
restore all storage sites to their original condition at no expense to the department .
the contractor and property owner will hold the department harmless from claims that may arise from their contract or permission statement .
this subsection does not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil or to other materials salvaged from the work .
areas used to store materials shall conform to num .
num handling materials .
handle all materials in such manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
transport aggregates from the storage site to the project site in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring .
ensure that there are no inconsistencies in the quantities of materials loaded for delivery and the quantities actually received at the place of operations .
num unacceptable materials .
unacceptable materials are all materials not conforming to the requirements of these specifications at the time they are used .
immediately remove all unacceptable materials from the project site unless otherwise instructed by the dca .
the dca will determine if unacceptance materials may remain conforming to supplement num .
the dca must approve the use of previously identified unacceptable materials that have been corrected or repaired .
if the contractor fails to comply immediately with any order of the dca made under the provisions of this subsection the dca will have authority to remove and replace defective materials and to deduct the cost of removal and replacement from any monies due or to become due to the contractor .
num departmentfurnished material .
furnish all materials required to complete the work except when otherwise provided in the proposal .
the department will deliver the departmentfurnished materials to the contractor at the points specified in the contract documents .
include the cost of handling and placing of all departmentfurnished materials in the contract price for the contract item for which they are used .
the department will hold the contractor responsible for all material upon delivery of the materials to the project site .
the department will make deductions from any monies due the contractor to make good any shortages and deficiencies for any cause whatsoever and for any damage that may occur after such delivery and for any demurrage charges .
num steel and iron products made in the united states .
furnish steel and iron products that are made in the united states according to the applicable provisions of federal regulations stated in num cfr num and state of ohio laws and orc num and num .
united states means the united states of america and includes all territory continental or insular subject to the jurisdiction of the united states .
a .
federal requirements .
all steel or iron products incorporated permanently into the work must be made of steel or iron produced in the united states and all subsequent manufacturing must be performed in the united states .
manufacturing is any process that modifies the chemical content physical shape or size or final finish of a product .
manufacturing begins with the initial melting and mixing and continues through the bending and coating stages .
if a domestic product is taken out of the united states for any process it becomes a foreign source material .
b .
state requirements .
all steel products used in the work for loadbearing structural purposes must be made from steel produced in the united states .
state requirements do not apply to iron .
c. applications .
num .
when the work is federally funded both the federal and state requirements apply .
this includes all portions of the work including portions that are not federally funded .
num .
when the work has no federal funds only the state requirements apply .
d. exceptions .
the director may grant specific written permission to use foreign steel or iron products in bridge construction and foreign iron products in any type of construction .
the director may grant such exceptions under either of the following conditions num .
the cost of products to be used does not exceed num percent of the total contract cost or num whichever is greater .
the cost is the value of the product as delivered to the project .
num .
the specified products are not produced in the united states in sufficient quantity or otherwise are not reasonably available to meet the requirements of the contract documents .
the director may require the contractor to obtain letters from three different suppliers documenting the unavailability of a product from a domestic source if the shortage is not previously established .
e. proof of domestic origin .
furnish documentation to the engineer showing the domestic origin of all steel and iron products covered by this section before they are incorporated into the work .
products without a traceable domestic origin will be treated as a nondomestic product .
num qualified products list .
the department may use qualified product lists qpl for approval of manufactured materials .
the office of materials management omm will maintain the qpl and the standard procedure for the qpl process .
inclusion of a material onto the qpl will be determined by omm with support from other department offices .
to be kept on the qpl manufacturers must recertify their material according to the departments standard procedure by january num of each year .
when a material requires qpl acceptance only provide materials listed on the qpl at the time of delivery of the material to the project .
provide the engineer documentation according to the departments standard procedure that at the time of delivery the material provided is on the qpl .
num maritime transportation .
on federalaid projects ensure that projectspecific materials or equipment transported by ocean vessel are in compliance with num cfr num and the cargo preference act .
transport at least num of any equipment or materials on privately owned united statesflag commercial vessels if available .
num legal relations and responsibility to public num laws to be observed .
stay fully informed of all federal and state laws all local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of authorities having any jurisdiction or authority that affect those engaged or employed on the work or that affect the conduct of the work .
observe and comply with all such laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees .
the contractor shall protect and indemnify the state and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor or the contractors employees subcontractors or agents .
the contractor under title vi of the civil rights act and related statutes agrees that in the hiring of employees for the performance of work under this contract or any subcontract hereunder neither the contractor the subcontractor nor any person acting on behalf of such contractor or subcontractor shall by reasons of race religion color sex national origin disability or age discriminate against any citizen of the united states in the employment of labor or workers who is qualified and available to perform the work to which the employment relates .
neither the contractor the subcontractor nor any person on their behalf shall in any manner discriminate against or intimidate any employee hired for the performance of work under this contract on account of race religion color sex national origin disability or age .
comply with oacnum entitled specific safety requirements of the industrial commission of ohio relating to construction as amended and with the federal occupational safety and health act of num and code of federal regulations title num chapter xvii part num and as amended .
num permits licenses and taxes .
procure all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and provide all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices materials and processes .
before employing any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright provide for its use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the state any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement of patented design device material process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the state for any costs expenses and damages that it may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
the director may grant to the municipality in which the work is performed a reservation of rights to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street or to grant permits for same at any time .
any individual firm or corporation wishing to make an opening in the highway must secure a permit .
allow parties bearing such permits and only those parties to make openings in the highway .
when ordered by the engineer make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings .
the necessary repairs will be paid for as extra work or as provided in the contract documents and will be subject to the same conditions as the original work performed .
num federalaid provisions .
when the united states government pays for all or any portion of the projects cost the work is subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
such inspections will not make the federal government a party to this contract .
the inspections will in no way interfere with the rights of either party to the contract .
num sanitary provisions .
provide and maintain sanitary accommodations in a neat condition for the use of employees and department representatives that comply with the requirements of the state and local boards of health or of other authorities having jurisdiction over the project .
num public convenience and safety .
at all times ensure that the work interferes as little as possible with the traffic .
provide for the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway and the protection of persons and property .
do not close any highways or streets unless specifically allowed by the contract .
num bridges over navigable waters .
conduct all work on navigable waters so that it does not interfere with free navigation of the waterways and that it does not alter the existing navigable depths except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard .
work within the flood plain of a navigable stream may require a permit from the u.s. army corps of engineers .
if an u.s. army corps of engineers permit is required provide all documentation submitted to obtain the permits and a copy of the permits to the department .
num use of explosives .
when the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property including new work .
the contractor is responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
obtain written permission to perform instream blasting from the chief of the division of wildlife ohio dnr according to orc num .
provide the engineer with all documentation submitted to obtain this permit and with a copy of the permit .
the contractor agrees warrants and certifies that it will observe state laws and local ordinances and regulations relative to the use and storing of explosives kept on the project site .
perform all blasting operations according to item num .
num protection and restoration of property .
the contractor is responsible for the preservation of all public and private property impacted by the contractors operations .
the contractor is responsible for all damage or injury to property during the prosecution of the work resulting from any act omission neglect defective work or materials or misconduct in the manner or method of executing the work .
the contractor will remain responsible for all damage and injury to property until the project is accepted under num except for portions of the work accepted under num .
if the contractor causes any direct or indirect damage or injury to public or private property by any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution or the nonexecution of the work then it must restore at its own expense the property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage or injury .
if mail boxes road or street name signs and supports interfere with the work then remove and erect them in a temporary location during construction in a manner satisfactory to and as directed by the engineer .
after completion of the work and before final acceptance of the project erect the mailboxes road or street name signs and supports in their permanent locations according to the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
consider the cost of this work as incidental to the affected items .
cooperate with the engineer in protecting and preserving survey monuments that are affected by the work as required by orc num .
at the beginning of the work verify the position of all survey monuments in the area to be improved according to num .
if survey monuments not shown in the contract documents are unexpectedly encountered then protect reference and preserve them in the same manner as survey monuments that are shown in the contract documents .
do not create staging areas store materials and equipment or borrow or waste materials in areas labeled as an environmental resources areas in the contract documents .
all properties to be utilized by the contractor outside the project work limits must be cleared for all environmental resource impacts prior to the beginning of work .
environmental resources include but may not be limited to num .
cultural resources a .
buildings structures objects and sites eligible for or listed on the national register of historic places b .
historic or prehistoric human remains cemeteries andor burial sites pursuant with orc num and num num .
ecological resources a. wetlands b .
streams c. wooded areas with trees to be removed in excess of num inches diameter at breast height num .
public lands a. lands meeting the criteria of num u.s.c .
num num cfr num.inum numf .
b. lands meeting the criteria of num u.s.c .
num num cfrnum numf .
num .
fema mapped num year floodplains num .
hazardous waste areas except for locations utilized specifically for num .
parking of equipment between workdays for maintenance type projects num .
reuse of clean hard fill as described in caewnum odot beneficial reuse form .
prior to transferring clean hard fill from the project fully execute form caewnum and provide appropriate documentation to the engineer as described for each reuse option .
all areas proposed to be utilized by the contractor outside the project construction limits and not described above shall be reviewed by environmental contractors that are prequalified by the department for each environmental resource .
exception num. noted above only applies to projects with maintenance in the project description .
have the consultants certify that the proposed site to be utilized for the contractor will not impact num .
cultural resources num .
ecological resources num .
public lands num .
fema mapped num year floodplains num .
hazardous waste areas provide all documentation and the consultant certification to the office of environmental services with a copy to the engineer .
should the areas proposed for use by the contractor outside the project right of way limits contain environmental resources the contractor is responsible to the department for all environmental clearances and permits prior to the beginning of work .
num contractors use of the project rightofway or other departmentowned property .
a .
disposal of waste material and construction debris and excavation of borrow on the project right ofway or on other departmentowned property .
dispose of waste material according to num and dispose of construction debris according to num .
in addition to the rights granted in num the contractors use of the project rightofway or other departmentowned property for the disposal of waste material and construction debris and excavation of borrow material is restricted as follows num .
if the contract documents identify locations for the disposal of waste material and construction debris or excavation of borrow material within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property then only perform these operations in these designated locations .
num .
if the contract documents do not identify locations for the disposal of waste material and construction debris or excavation of borrow material within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property then do not bid assuming that the department will make such locations available .
if the contractors request to use locations within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property is approved by the engineer then the department may allow the contractor to dispose of waste material and construction debris or excavate borrow material for a fee of num per cubic yard .
b .
contractors use of portable plants within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property .
the contractors use of portable plants within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property is limited as follows num .
if the contract documents identify locations within the project rightofway or on other department owned property to place a portable plant then only place a portable plant in these designated locations subject to the requirements of num.c .
num .
if the contract documents do not identify locations within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property to place a portable plant then do not bid assuming that the department will make such locations available .
however the department will consider a value engineering change proposal vecp for the placement of a portable plant within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property and if accepted may allow the use of a particular site on its property subject to the requirements of num.c .
c. placement of a portable plant within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property .
to place a portable plant within the project rightofway or on other departmentowned property comply with the following requirements num .
local noise ordinances .
num .
obtain any necessary epa permits for the operation of the plant .
provide the department with a copy of the information submitted to obtain the permit and a copy of the permit .
num .
provide the engineer written certification that the plant will supply material only for the project for which it was approved .
do not use the plant to supply any other project or to sell materials commercially .
num .
submit a traffic control plan to the engineer for approval that details the anticipated truck movements and provides acceptable protection warning and guidance to motorists pedestrians and the workers .
d. equipment storage and staging .
the contractor may use feefree any portion of the project within the project rightofway for staging equipment storage or an office site with the approval of the engineer provided such usages do not interfere with the work and are not prohibited by the contract documents .
do not bid in anticipation of using any properties within the project rightofway or departmentowned property outside the project rightofway for equipment storage or staging .
e. equipment removal and site restoration .
remove all contractor equipment and completely restore all utilized sites used as required by num before final acceptance as provided in num .
num responsibility for damage claims and liability insurance .
the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the state and all of its representatives municipalities counties public utilities any affected railroad or railway company and any fee owner from whom a temporary rightofway was acquired for the project from all suits actions claims damages or costs of any character brought on account of any injuries or damages sustained by any person or property on account of any negligent act or omission by the contractor or its subcontractors or agents in the prosecution or safeguarding of the work .
the contractor shall procure and maintain insurance for liability for damages imposed by law and assumed under this contract of the kinds and in the amounts hereinafter provided from insurance companies authorized to do business in the state by the ohio department of insurance .
the cost of insurance is incidental to all contract items .
before the execution of the contract by the director furnish to the department a certificate or certificates of insurance in the form satisfactory to the department demonstrating compliance with this subsection .
provide an insurance certificate or certificates that show that the contractors liability and auto policies coverage are not reduced restricted or canceled until num days written notice has been given to the department by the insurer .
mail all certificates and notices to administrator office of contracts ohio department of transportation num west broad street columbus ohio num .
upon request the contractor shall furnish the department with a certified copy of each policy including the provisions establishing premiums .
the types and minimum limits of insurance are as follows a .
workers compensation insurance .
comply with all provisions of the laws and rules of the ohio bureau of workers compensation covering all operations under contract with the department whether performed by it or its subcontractors .
in addition if a portion of the work is performed from a barge or ship or requires unloading material from a barge or ship on a navigable waterway of the united states it is the responsibility of the contractor to arrange coverage for that portion of the work under the longshore and harborworkers compensation act num usc section num et seq .
and the jones act num usc section num et seq .
and provide proof of coverage to the department .
b .
commercial general liability insurance .
the minimum limits for liability insurance are as follows general aggregate limit num products completed operations aggregate limit num personal and advertising injury limit num each occurrence limit num obtain the above minimum coverages through primary insurance or any combination of primary and umbrella insurance .
in addition the department will require the general aggregate limit on a per project basis .
ensure that the commercial general liability insurance policy names the state of ohio department of transportation its officers agents and employees as additional insureds with all rights to due notices in the manner set out above .
obtain explosion collapse and underground xcu coverage at the same limits as the commercial general liability insurance policy .
in addition if blasting is to be performed obtain xcu coverage providing a minimum aggregate limit of num and each occurrence limit of num .
submit proof of insurance endorsements and attachments to the engineer prior to starting the work .
c. comprehensive automobile liability insurance .
the comprehensive automobile liability policy shall cover owned nonowned and hired vehicles with minimum limits as follows bodily injury and property damage liability limit each occurrence num insurance coverage in the minimum amounts set forth neither relieves the contractor from liability in excess of such coverage nor precludes the department from taking such other actions as are available to it under any other provisions of this contract or otherwise in law .
clearly set forth all exclusions and deductible clauses in all proof of insurance submitted to the department .
the contractor is responsible for the deductible limit of the policy and all exclusions consistent with the risks it assumes under this contract and as imposed by law .
if the contractor provides evidence of insurance in the form of certificates of insurance valid for a period of time less than the period during which the contractor is required by terms of this contract then the department will accept the certificates but the contractor is obligated to renew its insurance policies as necessary .
provide new certificates of insurance from time to time so that the department is continuously in possession of evidence that the contractors insurance is according to the foregoing provisions .
if the contractor fails or refuses to renew its insurance policies or the policies are canceled or terminated or if aggregate limits have been impaired by claims so that the amount available is under the minimum aggregate required or modified so that the insurance does not meet the requirements of num.c the department may refuse to make payment of any further monies due under this contract or refuse to make payment of monies due or coming due under other contracts between the contractor and the department .
the department in its sole discretion may use monies retained pursuant to this subsection to renew or increase the contractors insurance as necessary for the periods and amounts referred to above .
alternatively should the contractor fail to comply with these requirements the department may default the contractor and call upon the contractors surety to remedy any deficiencies .
during any period when the required insurance is not in effect the engineer may suspend performance of the contract .
if the contract is so suspended the contractor is not entitled to additional compensation or an extension of time on account thereof .
nothing in the contract documents and insurance requirements is intended to create in the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary hereunder nor is any term and condition or other provision of the contract intended to establish a standard of care owed to the public or any member thereof .
num reporting investigating and resolving motorist damage claims .
the contractor and the department are required to report investigate and resolve motorist damage claims according to num and num and as follows .
when a motorist reports damage to its vehicle either verbally or in writing to the contractor the contractor shall within num days make and file a written report to the districts construction office in the event that the department directly receives the motorists claim the department shall within num days send the claim report to the contractor .
in the event the contractor has not agreed to resolve the motorist claim the districts construction office shall forward the report to the departments court of claims coordinator who as a coinsured party may then contact the contractors insurance company and request that the insurance company investigate and resolve the claim .
if the contractor or their insurance company does not resolve the claim in a timely manner the department may advise the motorist of the option of pursuing the claim in the ohio court of claims .
in the event of a lawsuit filed against the department in the ohio court of claims by the motorist the department as coinsured party may request the contractors insurance company to defend this lawsuit and hold the department harmless according to num .
if the lawsuit claim amount is num or less and the court of claims coordinator determines that the contractor is responsible for the claimed damages then the departments court of claims coordinator may after notifying the contractor determine that it would be in the best interest of the department to settle the claim .
any settlement amount including court costs may be assessed to the contractor and deducted from the project .
the engineer will notify the contractor prior to executing the deduction .
the contractor or the contractors insurance company may within num days appeal the assessment decision of the court of claims coordinator to the district construction engineer .
the decision of the dca will be made within num days and will be administratively final .
num opening sections of project to traffic .
the engineer may order the contractor to open a section of the work to the safe use of traffic at any time .
the department will make an adjustment according num and num to compensate the contractor for the added costs and delay if any resulting from such an opening .
num contractors responsibility for work .
until the final inspector accepts the work during the final inspection according to num.a the contractor is responsible for the project and will take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance .
bear the expense of the repairs except when damage to the work was due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor .
unforeseeable causes include but are not restricted to a earthquake floods tornados high winds lightning or other catastrophes proclaimed a disaster or emergency b slides c civil disturbances or d governmental acts .
in the event that the engineer determines that damage to completed permanent items of work results from traffic using a substantially completed section of roadway the department may compensate the contractor for repair of the damage as authorized by change order .
to receive compensation for the damage the contractor must meet the following requirements .
a .
notify the engineer of each occurrence of damage in writing within num calendar days .
b .
contact the local law enforcement agency to determine if the accident was investigated and a report filed .
if an accident report was filed obtain the report and notify the motorist and copy their insurance company via registered mail that the motorist is responsible for the cost of damage repairs .
if the motorist does not respond within num days make a second attempt to contact the motorist and copy the insurance company via registered mail .
c. if no response is received from the motorist or insurance company within num days send a letter to the engineer within eighteen months of the event and include documentation of good faith effort to seek recovery from responsible parties .
d. the department will make an adjustment according to num and num to compensate the contractor for the added costs and delays if any resulting from repairing damaged work .
if there is no accident report on file and no means of identifying the guilty motorist the contractor will likewise be compensated to repair the damaged work .
in case of suspension of work by the contractor or under the provisions of num the contractor is responsible for the project and shall take necessary precautions to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at its expense .
during such period of suspension of work properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under the contract and take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
the engineer may direct the contractor to remove graffiti any time during the work .
the department will make an adjustment according to num and num to compensate the contractor for the added costs and delays if any resulting from all ordered graffiti removal .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services .
at points where the contractors operations are adjacent to properties of railway cable telephone and power companies or are adjacent to other property and any damage to their property may result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience do not commence with the operation until all arrangements necessary for the protection of the property have been made .
cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility lines in their removal and rearrangement operations to ensure these operations progress in a reasonable manner that duplication of rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by those parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
in the event interruption to underground or overhead utility services results from an accidental breakage or from being exposed or unsupported immediately alert the occupants of nearby premises as to any emergency that the accidental breakage may create at or near such premises .
then notify the engineer and the owner or operator of the utility facility of the disruption and cooperate with the said utility owner or operator in the restoration of service .
if water service is interrupted perform the repair work continuously until the service is restored unless the repair work is performed by the local governmental authority .
do not begin work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority approves provisions for continued service .
num furnishing rightofway .
the department is responsible for securing all necessary rightofway in advance of construction .
the bid documents will indicate any exceptions .
the department will notify all prospective bidders in writing before the date scheduled for receipt of bids regarding the specific dates certain parcels will be made available to the contractor .
num no waiver of legal rights .
the following department actions do not waive the departments rights or powers under the contract or any right to damages herein provided a .
inspection by the engineer or by any of engineers duly authorized representatives .
b .
any order measurements or certificate by the director or department representatives .
c. any order by the director or department representatives for the payments of money or the withholding of money .
d. acceptance of any work .
e. any extension of time .
f. any possession taken by the state or its duly authorized representatives .
the department will not consider any waiver of a breach of this contract to be a waiver of any other subsequent breach .
num environmental protection .
comply with all federal state and local laws and regulations controlling pollution of the environment .
avoid polluting streams lakes ponds and reservoirs with fuels oils bitumens chemicals sediments or other harmful materials and avoid polluting the atmosphere with particulate and gaseous matter .
by execution of this contract the contractor will be deemed to have stipulated as follows a .
that any facility that is or will be utilized in the performance of this contract unless such contract is exempt under the clean air act as amended num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended by pub.l .
num and under the federal water pollution control act as amended num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended by pub.l .
num executive order num and regulations in implementation thereof num cfr num is not listed on the date of contract award on the u.s. environmental protection agency epa list of violating facilities pursuant to num cfr num .
b .
that the firm agrees to comply and remain in compliance with all the requirements of section num of the clean air act and section num of the federal water pollution control act and all regulations and guidelines listed thereunder .
c. that the firm shall promptly notify the department of the receipt of any communication from the director office of federal activities epa indicating that a facility that is or will be utilized for the contract is under consideration to be listed on the epa list of violating facilities .
d. that the firm agrees to include or cause to be included the requirements of paragraph num through num of this section in every nonexempt subcontract and further agrees to take such action as the government may direct as a means of enforcing such requirements .
fording of streams is prohibited .
causeways for stream and river crossings or for work below a bridge are permitted provided a .
the causeway complies with the requirements of the num permit the department obtained for the project .
b .
the contractor obtains a num permit from the u.s. army corps of engineers if the department has not obtained such a permit .
obtain the num permit prior to beginning construction of the causeway .
the department does not guarantee that the contractor will be able to obtain a num permit .
comply with all current provisions of the ohio water pollution control act owpca orc chapter num .
the department will obtain a storm water permit under the owpca provisions when the plan work acreage requires a permit .
apply for a permit to cover operations outside the project limits shown on the plans as required by the owpca provisions .
when the department has not applied for a permit on the project and a permit is required under the provisions of the owpca because of the total area of the contractors work apply for obtain and comply with the required permit for both the work within project limits and the contractors work .
the department has obtained the required permits from the u.s. army corps of engineers and ohio epa for work in the waters of the united states and isolated wetlands under orc chapter num .
comply with the requirements of these permits .
when equipment is working next to a stream lake pond or reservoir appropriate spill response equipment is required .
do not stockpile fine material next to a stream lake pond or reservoir .
take precautions to avoid demolition debris and discharges associated with the excavation and hauling of material from entering the stream .
remove any material that does fall into the stream as soon as possible .
when excavating in or adjacent to streams separate such areas from the main stream by a dike or barrier to keep sediment from entering the stream .
take care during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize sediment entering the stream .
contain collect characterize and legally dispose of all liquid waste and sludge generated during the work .
do not mix wastes with storm water .
do not discharge any liquid waste without the appropriate regulatory permits .
manage liquid waste and sludge in accordance with orc chapter num and all other laws regulations permits and local ordinances relating to this waste .
liquid waste management is incidental to the work unless otherwise specified in the contract .
control the fugitive dust generated by the work according to oacnumb oacnum oac num and oacnum and local ordinances and regulations .
prior to the initiation of abrasive coating removal pavement cutting or any other construction operation that generates dust demonstrate to the engineer that construction related dust will be controlled with appropriate reasonable available control measures racm as described in oepa engineering guide num .
in addition use dust control measures when fugitive dust creates unsafe conditions as determined by the engineer .
perform this work without additional compensation except for item num .
perform open burning according to num .
num civil rights .
comply with federal state and local laws rules and regulations that prohibit unlawful employment practices including that of discrimination because of race religion color sex national origin disability or age and that define actions required for affirmative action and disadvantaged business enterprise dbe programs .
num prompt payment .
in accordance with orc num make payment to each subcontractor and supplier within num calendar days after receipt of payment from the department for work performed or materials delivered or incorporated into the project provided that the pay estimate prepared by the engineer includes work performed or materials delivered or incorporated into the public improvement by the subcontractor or supplier .
contractors are prohibited from holding retainage from bonded subcontractors .
for unbonded subcontractors promptly release any retainage held as set forth in any subcontractor or supplier agreement within num days of departments acceptance of the work involving the subcontractor or supplier from whom retainage has been held .
for the sole purpose of establishing a time frame for the release of the subcontractor or supplier retainage acceptance of subcontractor or supplier work will occur when the subcontractor or supplier has complied with the requirements of num.a and b .
no subcontract provision shall permit the contractor to delay subcontractors retainage payments until the projects final payment .
also require that this contractual obligation be placed in all subcontractor and supplier contracts that it enters into and further require that all subcontractor and suppliers place the same payment obligation in each of their lower tier contracts .
if the contractor subcontractors or supplier subject to this provision fail to comply with the num calendar day requirement the offending party shall pay in addition to the payment due interest in the amount of num percent per annum of the payment due beginning on the eleventh calendar day following the receipt of payment from the department and ending on the date of full payment of the payment due plus interest .
repeated failures to pay subcontractors and suppliers timely pursuant to this subsection will result in a finding by the department that the contractor is in breach of contract and subject to all legal consequences that such a finding entails .
further repeated failures to pay timely pursuant to this subsection will result in a lower evaluation score for the contractor and those subcontractors who are subject to evaluation by the department .
num unmanned aircraft systems .
if the project requires or anticipates the use of unmanned aircraft systems within odot right of way the contractor will follow proper risk assessment and federal regulations in accordance with supplement num .
num prosecution and progress num subletting of the contract .
perform work amounting to not less than num percent of the contract price with its own organization unless otherwise approved by the director .
the phrase its own organization includes only workers employed and paid directly inclusive of employees who are employed by a lease agreement acceptable to the department and equipment owned or rented with or without operators by the contractor .
the phrase does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor assignee or agent of the contractor .
obtain the directors written consent to subcontract sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise relinquish rights title or interest in the work .
provide the director with a copy of all disadvantaged business enterprise subcontracts .
the contractors percentage of the total contract price includes the cost of materials and manufactured products purchased by the contractor but not the cost of materials and manufactured products purchased by subcontractors .
the director will calculate the contractors percentage based on the quantities shown in the proposal and the unit prices of the contract items to be performed by the contractors organization .
if the contractor performs only a portion of a contract item then the director will determine the proportional value administratively on the same basis .
the director will follow this procedure even when the part not subcontracted consists only of the procurement of materials .
however if a firm both sells the materials to the contractor and performs the work of incorporating the materials into the project then the department will consider these two phases in combination and as a single subcontract .
if an affiliate of the firm either sells the materials or performs the work the department may refuse approval .
an affiliate is one who has some common ownership or other close relation to said firm .
use actual subcontract prices for calculating compliance with any disadvantaged business enterprise dbe percentage subcontracting obligations .
if only a part of a contract item is sublet then determine its proportional value administratively on the same basis .
the director will follow this procedure even when the part not sublet consists only of procuring materials .
however if a firm both sells the materials to the contractor and performs the work of incorporating the materials into the project then the department will consider these two phases in combination and as a single subcontract .
if an affiliate of the firm either sells the materials or performs the work the department may refuse approval .
num partnering .
it is the intent of the department to partner every project .
the purpose of partnering is to develop a proactive effort and spirit of trust respect and cooperation among all stakeholders in a project .
partnering does not affect the terms and conditions of the contract .
the partnering process in this section is self facilitated partnering performed by the project personnel .
costs associated with the selffacilitated partnering process are incidental to the contract .
a. preconstruction meeting .
meet with the engineer for a preconstruction meeting before beginning the work .
at or before the meeting submit the initial progress schedule to the dce .
prepare the schedule according to num .
furnish a list of proposed subcontractors and material suppliers at or before the preconstruction meeting .
if the contractor fails to provide the required submissions at or before the preconstruction meeting the engineer may order the meeting suspended until they are furnished .
do not begin the work until the meeting is reconvened and concluded or the engineer gives specific written permission to proceed .
b .
initial partnering session .
in conjunction with the engineer determine whether the initial partnering session will be conducted as part of the preconstruction meeting or as a separate meeting .
partnering shall have its own agenda with specific time set aside to develop the necessary partnering protocols .
develop the partnering agenda with the engineer .
identify and invite all stakeholders necessary to make the project successful including utility companies other transportation entities i.e .
railroads community leaders all project participants including subcontractors .
during the initial partnering session consider developing partnering teams consisting of department and contractor senior personnel and project personnel .
consider the following items for discussion num .
identifying and developing a consensus on project goals consistent with the contractual obligations including specific goals concerning safety quality schedule and budget .
num .
deciding how the teams will measure progress on project goals .
num .
identifying any potential risks to the projects success mitigation strategies and an implementation plan for the appropriate strategies .
num .
defining key issues project concerns joint expectations roles of key partnership leaders lines of decision making authority and share relevant information to help determine the scope of the partnering efforts .
num .
identifying any opportunities for project enhancement enhancement strategies and a specific action plan for implementing strategies .
num .
developing a communication protocol to enhance communication on the project num .
developing an issue identification and resolution process that identifies and attempts to resolve issues at the level closest to the work .
the issue identification and resolution process will develop all the necessary steps for issue elevation including notice and mitigation defined in num.f and the dispute resolution and administrative claims process defined in num.g .
c. progress meetings .
hold monthly progress meetings unless the frequency is otherwise determined at the preconstruction meeting .
coordinate with the engineer to determine agenda topics prior to each meeting .
the purpose of progress meetings is to keep open communication between the contractor and the engineer .
the senior personnel team is encouraged to participate in all progress meetings .
include partnering as an agenda item at the progress meetings .
d. postmilestone meeting .
in conjunction with the engineer determine whether the postmilestone meeting will be conducted as part of the progress meeting or as a separate meeting for multiyear multiphase or projects with critical items of work or milestone dates .
consider discussing and updating items from the initial partnering session in addition to items specific to the project .
all stakeholders should be invited to attend .
e. partnering monitoring .
monitor the progress of the partnering relationship based on the goals decided during the initial partnering session .
online surveys of project participants may be used to monitor progress on project goals and help identify issues as they arise .
the online surveys are consistent with the departments partnering project rating form which is located on the division of construction managements partnering website httpwww.dot.state.oh.usdivisionsconstructionmgtpagespartnering.aspx f. mitigation and notice .
mitigation of any issue whether caused by the department contractor thirdparty or an intervening event is a shared contract and legal requirement .
mitigation efforts include but are not limited to resequencing work activities acceleration and substitution of materials .
the contractor and engineer must explore and discuss potential mitigation efforts in a timely manner .
num .
contractor initial oral notification .
provide immediate oral notification to the engineer upon discovering a circumstance that may require a revision to the contract documents or may result in a dispute .
upon notification the engineer will attempt to resolve the identified issue as quickly as possible .
num .
contractor written early notice .
if the engineer has not resolved the identified issue within two num working days after receipt of oral notification provide written notice to the engineer of any circumstance that may require a revision to the contract documents or may result in a dispute .
this early notice must be given by the end of the second working day following the occurrence of the circumstance .
the engineer and contractor shall maintain records of labor equipment and materials used on the disputed work or made necessary by the circumstance .
such records will begin when early notice is received by the engineer .
tracking such information is not an acknowledgement that the department accepts responsibility for payment for this disputed work .
if an issue is not resolved through the initial mitigation efforts either abandon or escalate to the dispute and administrative claims process defined in num.g .
g. dispute resolution and administrative claims process .
whenever an issue is elevated to a dispute the parties shall exhaust the departments dispute resolution and administrative claim process set forth below as a condition precedent to filing an action in the ohio court of claims .
the following procedures do not otherwise compromise the contractors right to seek relief in any ohio court with legal jurisdiction .
all parties to the dispute must adhere to the dispute resolution and administrative claim process .
do not contact department personnel who are to be involved in a step num or step num review until a decision has been issued by the previous tier .
department personnel involved in step num or step num reviews will not consider a dispute until the previous tier has properly reviewed the dispute and issued a decision .
failure to meet any of the timeframes outlined below or to request an extension will terminate further review of the dispute and serve as a waiver of the contractors right to file a claim .
disputes and claims by subcontractors and suppliers may be pursued by the contractor on behalf of subcontractors or suppliers .
disputes and claims by subcontractors and suppliers against the department but not supported by the contractor will not be reviewed by the department .
disputes and claims of subcontractors and suppliers against the contractor will not be reviewed by the department .
continue with all work during the dispute resolution and administrative claims process including that which is in dispute .
the department will continue to pay for work .
the department will not make the adjustments allowed by num.b num.c and num.d if the contractor did not give notice as specified in num.f.num and num.f.num .
this provision does not apply to adjustments provided in table num .
num .
step num onsite determination .
the engineer will meet with the contractors superintendent within two num working days of receipt of the contractor written early notice set forth in num.f.num .
they will jointly review all pertinent information and contract provisions and negotiate in an effort to reach a resolution .
the engineer will issue a written step num decision within fourteen num calendar days of the meeting .
if the dispute is not resolved either abandon or escalate the dispute to step num .
num .
step num district dispute resolution committee .
each district will establish a district dispute resolution committee ddrc which will be responsible for hearing and deciding disputes at the step num level .
the ddrc will consist of the district deputy director district construction engineer and the planning and engineering administrator or designees other than the project personnel involved in the dispute .
within seven num calendar days of receipt of the step num decision either abandon the dispute or submit a written request for a step num meeting to the district construction engineer dce .
the dce will assign the dispute a dispute number .
within fourteen num calendar days of submitting the request for a step num meeting submit three num complete copies of the dispute documentation to the dca as follows a identify the dispute on a cover page by county project number contractor name subcontractor or supplier if involved in the dispute and the dispute number .
b clearly identify each item for which additional compensation andor time is requested .
c provide a detailed narrative of the disputed work or project circumstance at issue .
include the dates of the disputed work and the date of early notice .
d reference the applicable provisions of the plans specifications proposal or other contract documents in dispute .
include copies of the cited provisions in the dispute documentation .
e include the dollar amount of additional compensation and length of contract time extension requested .
f include supporting documents for the requested compensation stated above .
g provide a detailed schedule analysis for any dispute involving additional contract time actual or constructive acceleration or delay damages .
at a minimum this schedule analysis must include the schedule update immediately preceding the occurrence of the circumstance alleged to have caused delay and must comply with accepted industry practices .
failure to submit the required schedule analysis will result in the denial of that portion of the contractors request .
h include copies of relevant correspondence and other pertinent documents .
within fourteen num calendar days of receipt of the contractors dispute documentation the engineer will provide the contractor with all documentation it intends to rely on at the ddrc meeting to rebut the contractors dispute .
after allowing at least fourteen num calendar days for the contractor to review the engineers dispute documentation the ddrc will conduct the step num meeting with contractor personnel who are authorized to resolve the dispute .
the ddrc will issue a written step num decision to the contractor and the dispute resolution coordinator within fourteen num calendar days of the meeting .
if the dispute is not resolved either abandon or escalate the dispute to step num .
num .
step num directors claims board hearing or alternative dispute resolution .
submit a written notice of intent to file a claim to the dispute resolution coordinator in the division of construction management within fourteen num calendar days of receipt of the step num decision .
the dispute becomes a claim when the dispute resolution coordinator receives the notice of intent to file a claim .
include the contractors request for either num a directors claim board hearing on the claim or num alternative dispute resolution adr .
a directors claims board hearing .
the directors claims board the board will consist of the deputy director of the division of construction management deputy director of engineering and a district construction engineer from a district not involved in the claim or their designees .
a representative from the division of chief legal counsel and equal opportunity may be present to observe the hearing .
the director or designee will be responsible for deciding claims .
num submit six num complete copies of the claim documentation to the dispute resolution coordinator within thirty num calendar days of receipt of the notice of intent to file a claim .
this timeframe may be extended with approval of the dispute resolution coordinator .
in addition to the documentation submitted at step num a enhance the narrative to include sufficient description and information to enable understanding by a third party who has no knowledge of the dispute or familiarity with the project .
b certify the claim in writing and under oath using the following certification i name and title of an officer of the contractor certify that this claim is made in good faith that all supporting data is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief and that the claim amount accurately reflects the contract amendment for which contractor company name believes the department is liable .
sign and date this claim certification and have the signature notarized pursuant to the laws of the state of ohio .
the date the dispute resolution coordinator receives the certified claim documentation is the date of the departments receipt of the certified claim for the purpose of the calculation of interest as defined in num.g.num .
the dispute resolution coordinator will forward one num complete copy of this documentation to the district .
num within thirty num calendar days of the districts receipt of the contractors claim documentation the district will submit six num complete copies of its claim documentation to the dispute resolution coordinator .
this timeframe may be extended with approval from the dispute resolution coordinator .
at a minimum the districts claim documentation should include a an overview of the project b a narrative of the disputed work or project circumstance at issue with sufficient description and information to enable understanding by a thirdparty who has no knowledge of the dispute or familiarity with the project c the dates of the disputed work and the date of early notice d references to the applicable provisions of the plans specifications proposal or other contract documents .
copies of the cited provisions shall be included in the claim document e response to each argument set forth by the contractor f any counterclaims accompanied by supporting documentation the district wishes to assert g the status of the negotiations of the claim that have occurred todate including the amount of any offers and counteroffers made by the parties h copies of relevant correspondence and other pertinent documents num within fourteen num calendar days of receipt of the districts claim documentation the dispute resolution coordinator will forward one num complete copy to the contractor and will schedule a hearing on the dispute .
once a hearing date has been established both the contractor and district shall provide the dispute resolution coordinator with a list of names of persons who may be presenting information at the hearing .
unless otherwise permitted by the board the exchange of documentation and all disclosures specified in this step of the process shall be completed at least fourteen num calendar days prior to the hearing .
upon request or at the boards discretion the board may delay the hearing to allow more time for preparation and review or to fulfill requests for more documentation .
the board will hear the entire claim on behalf of the director .
the board may have its own technical advisors at the hearing for consultation and assistance in reviewing the claim .
the contractor and district will each be allowed adequate time to present their respective positions before the board .
the contractor and district will also each be allowed adequate time for rebuttal limited to the scope of the opposing partys presentation .
the board may suspend any portion of a presentation or rebuttal it deems to be argumentative repetitive or irrelevant to the claim .
the contractors position will be presented by one or more of the contractors employees who are thoroughly knowledgeable of the claim .
the contractor may have legal counsel present during the hearing to observe or for private consultation .
similarly the districts position will be presented by one or more district representatives who are thoroughly knowledgeable of the claim .
the board may on its own initiative request information in addition to that submitted for the hearing .
if the contractor fails to reasonably comply with such request the board may render its decision without such information .
upon completion of the hearing and following consideration of any additional information submitted upon request the board will submit a written recommendation on the disposition of the claim to the director .
the director or designee will ratify modify or reject the recommendation of the board and render a decision within sixty num calendar days of the hearing .
within thirty num calendar days of receipt of the boards decision either accept or reject the decision in writing .
in the event the contractor fails to do so the board may revoke any offers of settlement contained in the decision .
the decision of the director is the final step of the departments dispute resolution process and may not be appealed within the department .
the director is not bound by any offers of settlement or findings of entitlement made during steps num and num of the dispute resolution process .
b alternative dispute resolution adr .
in lieu of the directors claim board hearing the parties may opt to proceed through an alternative dispute resolution adr process .
the parties will then choose either arbitration or mediation in the manner in which those methods are practiced by the department and allowed by law .
the dispute resolution coordinator will coordinate the agreement of the parties to the adr method and the selection of a neutral thirdparty or technical expert .
the fees of the neutral thirdparty or technical expert will be shared equally between the department and the contractor .
the dispute resolution coordinator will obtain a written agreement signed by both parties that establishes the adr process .
the neutral thirdparty or technical expert will have complete control of the claim upon execution of the adr agreement .
prior to any adr meeting certify the claim in writing and under oath using the following certification i name and title of an officer of the contractor certify that this claim is made in good faith that all supporting data is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief and that the claim amount accurately reflects the contract amendment for which contractor company name believes the department is liable .
num .
interest on claims .
the department will pay interest in accordance with orc section num on any amount ultimately found due on a claim which is not paid within num days of the dispute resolution coordinators receipt of the certified claim .
however interest will not be paid on the amount of any agreed settlement unless specifically itemized and included in the total settlement prior to agreement .
h. post construction meeting .
the district will conduct a post construction meeting with the contractor prior to the project finalization .
the district will invite the design agency and any other stakeholders deem necessary including utility companies other transportation entities i.e .
railroads community leaders all project participants including subcontractors performing critical work to attend this meeting .
consider the following items for discussion num project safety .
num .
how were the goals evaluated or measured num .
how were foremen workers involved in the partnering process num .
how were the subcontractors involved in the partnering process num .
how were relationships with key stakeholders managed num .
teambuilding activities or unique motivational activities .
i. partnering closeout survey .
complete the final partnering evaluation to get participants feedback and improve the partnering process .
the partnering closeout survey is located on the division of construction managements partnering website httpwww.dot.state.oh.usdivisionsconstructionmgtpagespartnering.aspx num prosecution and progress .
start the work according to num .
notify the engineer at least num hours before starting the work .
if the prosecution of the work is suspended notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of resuming operations .
pursue the work diligently and continuously as to complete the project by the completion date .
a .
progress schedule .
num .
general .
furnish a bar chart progress schedule to the district construction engineer for review at or before the preconstruction meeting .
the engineer will review the schedule and within num calendar days of receipt will either accept the schedule or provide the contractor with comments .
acceptance of the schedule does not revise the contract documents .
provide clarification or any needed additional information within num days of a written request by the engineer .
the department will withhold estimates until the engineer accepts the schedule .
the engineer will not measure or pay for the preparation of the schedule and schedule updates directly but the cost of preparing and updating the schedule is incidental to all contract items .
a .
include the following administrative identifier information num project number num county num route number num fhwa number num pid number num contract number num date of contract num completion date num contractors name num contractors dated signature num odots dated acceptance signature provide a working day schedule that shows the various activities of work in sufficient detail to demonstrate a reasonable and workable plan to complete the project by the completion date .
show the order and the sequence for accomplishing the work .
describe all activities in sufficient detail so that the engineer can readily identify the work and measure the progress of each activity .
the bar chart schedule must reflect the scope of work required phasing maintenance of traffic requirements interim completion dates the completion date and other project milestones established in the contract documents .
include activities for submittals working and shop drawing preparation submittal review time for the department material procurement and fabrication and the delivery of materials plant and equipment and other similar activities .
the schedule must be detailed on letter or legal sized paper .
b .
activity requirements are discussed in further detail as follows num activity description .
assign each activity an unambiguous descriptive word or phrase .
for example use excavate area a not start excavation .
num activity original duration .
indicate a planned duration in calendar days for each activity .
do not exceed a duration of num working days for any activity unless approved by the engineer .
do not represent the maintenance of traffic erosion control and other similar items as single activities extending to the completion date .
break these contract items into component activities in order to meet the duration requirements of this paragraph .
num .
early completion schedule .
an early completion schedule is defined as a baseline schedule or update schedule which anticipates completion of all work prior to the completion date established by the contract documents and the contractor submits as an early completion schedule .
in the event that an early completion schedule is accepted the engineer will initiate a change order amending the completion date to the finish date shown on the accepted early completion schedule .
the amended completion date will be effective upon execution of that change order and all contract provisions concerning the completion date such as incentives disincentives excusable delays compensable delays and liquidated damages will be measured against the amended completion date .
the contractor may elect not to execute the change order amending the completion date however in so doing the contractor waives its rights to delay damages in meeting the projected early completion date .
num .
updated progress schedule .
submit an updated progress schedule when ordered by the engineer .
the engineer may request an updated progress schedule when progress on the work has fallen more than num calendar days behind the latest accepted progress schedule .
information in the updated schedule must include a work completed value for each activity .
num .
recovery schedule .
if the progress schedule projects a finish date for the project more than num calendar days later than the completion date submit a revised schedule showing a plan to finish by the completion date .
the department will withhold estimates until the engineer accepts the revised schedule .
the engineer will use the schedule to evaluate time extensions and associated costs requested by the contractor .
num limitation of operations .
limit operations to prevent unnecessary inconvenience to the traveling public .
if the engineer concludes that the extent of the contractors work unnecessarily inconveniences the public or concludes limiting operations are necessary to protect the existing or new construction from damage the engineer will require the contractor to finish portions of work in progress before starting new work .
num character of workers methods and equipment .
provide personnel with sufficient skills and experience to perform assigned tasks .
ensure that no debarred individuals listed on the federal website www.epls.gov or state debarment list at the website www.dot.state.oh.usdivisionscontractadmin act in any ownership leadership managerial or other similar position that could influence the operations of an entity doing business with the department .
if the engineer gives written notification that specific contractor or subcontractor personnel are improperly performing the work intemperate disorderly or creating a hostile work environment remove the identified personnel from the project .
do not allow removed personnel to return to the project without the engineers approval .
the engineer may suspend the work by written notice under this subsection for the following reasons a .
the contractor does not furnish sufficient skilled and experienced personnel to complete the project by the completion date .
b .
the contractor does not remove personnel from the project as directed in writing by the engineer .
use equipment of sufficient size and mechanical condition to complete the project by the completion date .
ensure that the equipment does not harm the roadway adjacent property other highways workers or the public .
if the contract documents do not prescribe the methods and equipment required to accomplish the work determine the methods or equipment necessary to complete the work according to the contract .
if the contract documents specify methods and equipment to perform the work use such methods and equipment unless others are authorized by the engineer .
obtain the engineers written approval before substituting alternate methods or equipment .
to obtain the engineers approval submit a written description of the alternate methods and equipment proposed and an explanation of the reasons for making the change .
the engineers approval of the substitute methods and equipment does not relieve the contractor of the obligation to produce work according to num .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer determines that the work does not conform to the contract documents then complete the remaining work using the specified methods and equipment .
remove all deficient work and replace it according to the contract documents or take such other corrective action as directed by the engineer .
the engineers authorization to substitute alternate methods and equipment will not change the basis of payment for the construction items involved or the contract time .
num determining a time extension to the completion date and payment for excusable delays .
a .
general .
the department will only extend the completion date if an excusable delay as specified in num.b or num.d delays work on the critical path shown on the accepted progress schedule and impacts the completion date .
the critical path is defined as the longest path of activities in the project that determines the project schedule completion date .
the activities that makeup the critical path of activities are the critical activities .
any extension of the completion date will be executed by a change order .
mitigation of any delay whether caused by the department contractor thirdparty or an intervening event is a shared contract and legal requirement .
mitigation efforts include but are not limited to resequencing work activities acceleration and continuation of work through an otherwise planned shutdown period .
the contractor and engineer must explore and discuss potential mitigation efforts in a timely manner .
the department will not evaluate a request for extension of the completion date unless the contractor notifies the engineer as specified in num.f .
notification shall be in writing to the engineer within num days following the termination of the event giving rise to the request and shall be accompanied by supporting analysis and documentation .
the engineer will evaluate the contractors analysis and determine the time extension due if any .
the engineer will measure all time extensions in calendar days .
for delays measured in workdays the engineer will convert workdays to calendar days by multiplying by num for a numday work week or less num for a numday work week and num for a numday work week and extend the completion date by the resulting number of calendar days plus any holidays the contractor does not normally work that occur in the extension period .
when the conversion of workdays to calendar days results in a decimal of num or greater the engineer will round the number of calendar days to the next highest whole number .
when the conversion results in a decimal less than num the engineer will delete the decimal portion of the calendar days .
the engineer will not grant an extension of time for delays incurred from december num to april num unless the contractors accepted progress schedule depicts work on the critical path occurring during this period .
the engineer may order the contractor to continue work after november num and compensate the contractor for costs incurred due to cold weather work .
the contractors plea that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for an extension of time .
the department will relieve the contractor from associated liquidated damages as specified in num if the engineer extends the completion date under num.a .
the extended completion date shall then have the same standing and effect as though it was the original completion date .
if the contractor contends that an excusable delay is also compensable as specified in num.d submit a detailed cost analysis of the requested additional compensation along with the request for extension of completion date .
b. excusable noncompensable delays .
excusable noncompensable delays are delays that are not the contractors or the departments fault or responsibility .
the engineer will not grant additional payment for excusable noncompensable delays .
the following are excusable noncompensable delays num .
delays due to floods tornadoes lightning strikes earthquakes or other cataclysmic phenomena of nature .
num .
delays due to weather as specified in num.c .
num .
extraordinary delays in material deliveries the contractor or its suppliers can not foresee or avoid resulting from freight embargoes government acts or areawide material shortages .
delays due to the contractors subcontractors or suppliers insolvency or mismanagement are not excusable .
num .
delays due to civil disturbances .
num .
delays from fires or epidemics .
num .
delays from labor strikes that are beyond the contractors subcontractors or suppliers power to settle and are not caused by improper acts or omissions of the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
num .
added quantities that delay an activity on the critical path .
num .
all other delays not the contractors and departments fault or responsibility .
c. extension to the completion date for weather or seasonal conditions .
a weather day is defined as a workday that weather or seasonal conditions reduced production by more than num percent on items of work on the critical path .
submit the dates and number of weather days in writing to the engineer at the end of each month .
in the event the contractor fails to submit weather days at the end of each month the engineer will determine the dates and number of weather days from project records .
delays caused by weather and seasonal conditions should be anticipated and will be considered as the basis for an extension of time when the contractors accepted progress schedule depicts work on the critical path and the actual workdays lost exceeds the number of work days lost each month as determined by table num .
table num month number of workdays lost due to weather january num february num march num april num may num june num july num august num september num october num november num december num this table applies to the duration between contract execution and original completion date .
extensions for weather days beyond the original completion date will be for the actual workdays lost each month .
the engineer will not consider weekends and holidays as lost workdays unless the contractor normally works those days or unless the engineer directs the contractor to work those days .
d. excusable compensable delays .
excusable compensable delays are delays that are not the contractors fault or responsibility and are the departments fault or responsibility or are determined by judicial proceeding to be the departments sole responsibility or are the fault and responsibility of a local government .
for the following excusable compensable delays the engineer will extend the completion date if the conditions specified in num.a are met num .
delays due to revised work as specified in num.b num.d or num.f .
num .
delays due to utility or railroad interference within the project limits .
num .
delays due to an engineerordered suspension as specified in num.c .
num .
delays due to acts of the government or a political subdivision other than the department however these compensable delay costs are limited to escalated labor and material costs only as allowed in num.d.num.b and num.d.num.d .
num .
delays due to the neglect of the department or its failure to act in a timely manner .
compensation for excusable compensable delays will be determined by the engineer according to num.d .
e. nonexcusable delays .
nonexcusable delays are delays that are the contractors fault or responsibility .
all nonexcusable delays are noncompensable .
f. concurrent delays .
concurrent delays are separate critical delays that occur at the same time .
when a non compensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay the contractor is entitled to additional time but not entitled to additional compensation .
num failure to complete on time .
if the contractor fails to complete the work by the completion date then the director if satisfied that the contractor is making reasonable progress and deems it in the best interest of the public may allow the contractor to continue in control of the work .
the department will pay the contractor for work performed on the project less any liquidated damages incurred .
if the work is not completed by the completion date and the director permits the contractor to remain in control prosecute the work at as many different places at such times and with such forces as the director requests .
provide a written plan for the completion of the work .
for each calendar day that work remains uncompleted after the completion date the department will deduct the sum specified herein from any money due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages .
the director will adjust the completion date or other contractually mandated dates for delays specified in num.b.num and num.d .
permitting the contractor to continue and complete the work or any part of the work after the completion date or after extensions to the completion date will in no way operate as a waiver on the part of the department of any of its rights under the contract .
the director may stop deducting liquidated damages when a .
the work is substantially complete and the project is available for use as intended by the contract .
b .
the contractor is diligently pursuing the remaining work .
c. the work remaining will not interfere with the intended use of the project and will not impact traffic .
for the limited purposes of assessing liquidate damages the closing of a shoulder is not considered an impact upon traffic .
d. all contract safety items are complete and operational .
these safety items include but are not limited to signs pavement markings guardrail attenuators and signals .
raised pavement markers rpm are required safety items if the roadway section involved had rpms before the project started .
e. deemed reasonable and appropriate by the district deputy director .
table num schedule of liquidated damages original contract amount total amount of the bid amount of liquidated damages to be deducted for each calendar day of overrun in time from more than to and including num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num unsatisfactory progress and default of contractor .
the director will notify the contractor in writing of unsatisfactory progress for any of the following reasons a .
the contractor has not commenced the work by the dates established in the schedule .
b .
the contractor does not proceed with the work in a manner necessary for completion of the project by the completion date .
c. the contractor is performing the work improperly .
d. the contractor abandons fails or refuses to complete the work .
e. any other reason the director believes jeopardizes completion of the work by the completion date .
if the contractor does not respond to the satisfaction of the director the director may declare the contractor in default and may notify the contractor and surety that the responsibility to complete the work is transferred to the surety .
upon receipt of this notification the contractors right to control and supervise the work will immediately cease .
in such a case the director will proceed as specified in orc num .
the defaulted contractor will not be compensated for costs resulting from the default and is not eligible to be retained by the surety to complete the work .
if it is determined that the departments default of the contractor according to num is wrongful then the default will revert to a termination of the contract according to num .
num termination of the contract for convenience of the department .
the director may terminate the contract at any time for the convenience of the department .
the department will compensate the contractor according to num and num for termination of the contract for the convenience of the department .
this subsection is subject to the provisions of orc num .
num payroll records .
keep payroll records as specified in orc num or as required by federal law .
authorized representatives of the director may inspect the certified payroll and other payroll records .
upon completion of the work and before receiving the final estimate and when required by orc num submit an affidavit stating that wages have been paid according to the minimum rates specified in the contract documents .
num acceptance measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
the department will measure the quantities of work and calculate payments based on the method of measurement and basis of payment provisions provided in these specifications .
when the following units of measure are specified the department will measure quantities as described below unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
the accuracy of individual pay item estimate payments will be one decimal more accurate than the unit of measure denoted for the pay item .
lump sum .
not measured .
describes payment as reimbursement for all resources necessary to complete the work .
when a complete structure or structural unit is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will include all necessary fittings and accessories .
each .
measured by the number of individual items of work completed .
foot meter .
measured parallel to the longitudinal base or foundation upon which items are placed or along the longitudinal surface of the item .
measured vertically to the nearest num foot num m with a minimum vertical measurement of num foot num m at each unit .
square yard or square foot square meter .
measured by a twodimensional area method on the surface of the item .
m square feet .
one thousand square feet .
cubic yard cubic meter .
measured by a threedimensional volume method .
measure all loose material or material measured in the vehicle by the cubic yard cubic meter .
haul material measured in the vehicle in approved vehicles and measure in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
for this purpose use approved vehicles of any type or size satisfactory to the engineer provided the vehicles bed is of such type that the actual contents are readily and accurately determined .
unless all approved vehicles on a job are of uniform capacity each approved vehicle must bear a legible identification mark indicating the specific approved capacity .
the inspector may reject all loads not hauled in such approved vehicles .
cubic yard cubic meter for asphalt concrete .
measure as specified in num .
acre hectare .
measured by a twodimensional area method on the surface to the nearest num acre num ha .
pound kilogram .
measured by actual item net weight avoirdupois mass .
ton metric ton .
the term ton means the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
the term metric ton means num kilograms .
weigh all materials that are proportioned by weight on accurate and approved scales that are operated by competent qualified personnel at locations approved by the engineer .
however car weights will not be acceptable for materials to be passed through mixing plants .
if trucks are used to haul material being paid for by weight weigh the empty truck at least once daily and as the engineer directs and only if the weight of the truck is used in determining the ticket weight .
place a plainly legible identification mark on each truck bearing the weight of the truck .
for work on a tonnage basis file with the engineer receipted freight bills for railroad shipments and certified weightbills when materials are received by any other method showing the actual tonnage used .
for work on a volume basis itemize evidence of the volume used .
gallon liter .
measured by actual item liquid volume .
the department will measure the following materials by the gallon liter at the following temperatures temperatures items num f num c creosote for priming coat creosote oil creosote solutions for timber preservatives asphalt primer for waterproofing and liquefier num f num c rc mc asphalt emulsions cbae primer num and primer num num f num c asphalt binder measure tank car outage of asphalt material at its destination before any material has been removed from the tank car according to supplement num .
convert the net weight of asphalt material shipments to gallons liters at the specified pay temperature according to supplement num .
convert the gallons liters at the measured temperature to gallons liters of asphalt material at the specified pay temperature according to supplement num .
m gallon .
one thousand gallons .
thousand board feet mbf cubic meter .
measure timber by mbf cubic meter actually incorporated in the structure .
base the measurement on nominal widths thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece .
standard manufactured items .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by size unit weight section dimensions etc .
such identification will be to nominal weights or dimensions set by the industry .
num measurement units .
the department will measure using either english or metric units as indicated in the contract documents .
use the tables num and num to convert units when required .
if tables num num and num do not provide a required factor then use the appropriate factor provided in the ieeeastm si num .
table num english to si metric conversion factors symbol when you know multiply by to find symbol length mil mils num micrometers m in inches num millimeters mm ft feet num meters m yd yards num meters m mi miles num kilometers km area in square inches num square millimeters mm ft square feet num square meters m yd square yards num square meters m ac acres num hectares ha ac acres num square meters m mi square miles num square kilometers km volume fl oz fluid ounces num milliliters ml gal gallons num liters l ft cubic feet num cubic meters m yd cubic yards num cubic meters m mass oz ounces num grams g lb pounds num kilograms kg t num pounds num metric tons t temperature f fahrenheit c fnum celsius c illumination fc footcandles num lux lx fl footlamberts num candelas per square meter cdm force and pressure or stress lbfft poundsforce foot num newton meter nm lbf pounds force num newtons n lbfft psf pounds force per square foot num pascals pa lbfin psi pounds force per square inch num megapascals mpa table num si metric to english conversion factors symbol when you know multiply by to find symbol length m micrometers num mils mil mm millimeters num inches in m meters num feet ft m meters num yards yd km kilometers num miles mi area mm square millimeters num square inches in m square meters num square feet ft m square meters num square yards yd ha hectares num acres ac m square meters num acres ac km square kilometers num square miles mi volume ml milliliters num fluid ounces fl oz l liters num gallons gal m cubic meters num cubic feet ft m cubic meters num cubic yard yd mass g grams num ounces oz kg kilograms num pounds lb t metric tons num num pounds t temperature c celsius f numc num fahrenheit f illumination lx lux num footcandles fc cdm candelas per square meter num footlamberts fl force and pressure or stress nm newton meters num poundsfoot force lbf ft n newtons num pound force lbf pa pascals num pounds force per square foot lbfft psf mpa megapascals num pounds force per square inch lbfin psi num scope of payment .
payment of the contract price is full compensation for all resources necessary to complete the contract item and maintain the work .
assume liability for risk loss damage or expense resulting from the work .
the contract price and contract time shall only be changed by written change order or as determined by the department in writing in accordance with the contract documents .
num compensation for altered quantities eliminated items or termination of the contract for convenience of the department .
if the agreed quantities of contract items vary from the quantities in the contract the department will make payment at the original contract unit prices for the agreed quantities of work .
a .
if an item is eliminated in accordance with num.e or the contract is terminated in accordance with num the department will pay the following in addition to that provided by num.d num .
restocking charges supported by paid invoices and an additional num percent markup on the compensation for overhead and profit .
num .
the cost of material transferred to the department or a local government agency in lieu of restocking or disposal .
the allowed compensation is the paid invoice cost plus num percent markup but no more than the unit bid price for the reference number involved .
num .
hauling costs if not included in restocking charges for returned material and for material delivered to the department .
b .
if the project is terminated for convenience of the department the department will negotiate compensation with the contractor for actual costs incurred as a result of the termination .
the department will pay for extra work as stipulated in approved extra work change orders or written authorizations subject to the limitations set forth in orc num .
such authorizations for emergencies and to avoid project delays are in advance of an approved extra work change order and commit the department only to the terms of the authorizations .
the department will pay for extra work after the approval of the subsequent change order .
num changes and extra work .
a .
general .
if the department revises the contract under num num num num num num num num num or num the department will pay for changes and extra work with a change order using the sequence specified in num.b through num.e .
in establishing the method of payment for contract changes or extra work orders force account procedures shall only be used when strictly necessary such as when agreement can not be reached with the contractor on the price of a new work item or when the extent of work is unknown or is of such character that a price can not be determined to a reasonable degree of accuracy .
the reason or reasons for using force account procedures shall be documented .
unless otherwise stated in num the compensation provided in num.b through num.e constitutes payment in full for all changes and extra work completed by original contract price agreed unit price agreed lump sum price and for work performed on a force account basis including num .
administration .
num .
superintendence .
num .
project and field office overhead .
num .
home office overhead .
num .
use of tools and equipment for which no rental is allowed .
num .
profit .
num .
taxes other than sales tax .
num .
premiums on insurance including additional premiums for commercial general liability insurance required by num.b and any additional coverage carried by the contractor or subcontractor excluding pollution and railroad general liability insurance .
the department will pay the contractors pollution and railroad liability insurance premiums if required by the contract by a separate change order for the cost of the premium without any markup .
when the contractors or subcontractors basic rate for general commercial liability insurance required by num.b is greater than num percent of payroll the department will pay directly without markup the portion of the premium in excess of num percent and provide copies of paid premiums .
sales tax will not be allowed on any item for which tax exemption was obtained .
b .
negotiated prices .
negotiated prices for changes and extra work shall be comparable to prices that would have resulted from a competitive bid contract .
the engineer and contractor will negotiate agreed unit or lump sum prices using one or more of the following methods num .
original contract prices for similar work but adjusted for a. increased or decreased material costs specified in num.c.num .
b. increased or decreased labor costs specified in num.c.num c. increased or decreased equipment costs specified in num.c.num adjustments of these prices for inflation or markup for subcontractor work is not allowed .
num .
statewide average unit price awarded for the item or items as listed in the departments annual summary of contracts awarded .
these prices may be adjusted for inflation using factors issued by the office of construction administration .
no markup for subcontractor work is allowed .
num .
average price awarded on three different projects of similar work and quantity .
these prices may be adjusted for inflation using factors issued by the office of construction administration .
no markup for subcontractor work is allowed .
num .
prices computed by the office of estimating .
num .
cost analysis of labor material equipment and markups as allowed in num.c .
num .
for the cost of compensable delays as defined in num prepare a cost analysis as allowed by num.d .
provide proposed pricing and cost justification for changes or extra work within num business days after the departments request .
the department will respond within num business days after receipt of the contractors proposal .
the department and the contractor can mutually agree to extend these numday time limits .
if the department negotiates with the contractor but does not agree on a price adjustment the engineer may direct the contractor to perform all or part of the revised work under force account .
c. force account .
num .
general .
the engineer may direct the contractor to perform the revised work under force account .
submit a written proposal and estimated costs for the work including the planned equipment materials labor and a work schedule .
the department will pay the contractor as specified in num.c as full compensation for performing the force account work .
the project and contractor personnel will document the labor and equipment used on the force account work on a daily force account record .
at the end of each workday the project and contractor personnel will compare and sign the daily force account record .
the department will make no force account payment before the contractor submits an itemized statement of the costs for that work .
the engineer will examine and if found to be acceptable approve all rates and costs submitted by the contractor .
provide the following content in itemized statements for all force account work a .
name classification date daily hours total hours rate and amount for all labor .
b .
designation dates daily hours total hours of actual operation and idle time blue book rate with reference or category and amount for each unit of equipment and the applicable blue book hourly operating cost for each unit of equipment and invoices for all rental equipment .
the designation includes the manufacturers name or trademark model number and year of manufacture .
c. quantities of materials and prices .
d. transportation charges on materials free on board f.o.b .
at the job site .
e. cost of workers compensation insurance premiums all applicable insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax and fees or dues required by a collective bargaining agreement .
express each of these items of cost as a percentage of payroll except fees or dues which should be expressed as a cost per hour .
f. documentation showing payment for all surveying professional or similar specialized work not normally a part of a department contract .
g. if materials are taken from contractors stock and original receipted invoices for the materials and transportation charges do not exist provide an affidavit and certify all of the following num the materials were taken from the contractors stock .
num the quantity shown was actually used for the force account work .
num the price and transportation costs represent the actual cost to the contractor .
h. documentation showing payment to trucking firms and owneroperators .
submit documentation showing owneroperations status .
when the trucking is subject to prevailing wage submit payroll and equipment usage records according to num.c.num.a num.c.num.b and num.c.num.e .
i .
provide receipted invoices for all costs substantiated by an invoice .
if only part of the expenditure represented by an invoice is applicable to force account work or if the invoice represents expenditure for more than one item of work clearly indicate the actual amount of expenditure applicable to each item of work .
num .
labor .
the department will pay the wages and fringe benefits currently in effect for each hour the work is performed by all labor employed in the work and all foremen in direct charge of the specific operation .
the department will pay an additional num percent markup on these wages and benefits .
fringe benefits are the actual costs paid to or on behalf of workmen by reason of health and welfare benefits pension fund benefits or other benefits when such amounts are required by prevailing wage laws or by a collective bargaining agreement or other employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the project .
the department will pay the actual itemized cost without markup of the following payroll taxes and legally required insurances a .
social security tax .
b. medicare tax .
c. ohio workers compensation premiums .
d. state and federal unemployment insurance .
e. longshore and harborworkers compensation insurance for work from a barge or ship or unloading material from a barge or ship .
provide itemized statements in addition to the documentation requirements for all labor including the name classification date daily hours total hours rate and amount .
if any person is paid more than the one rate a separate listing shall be made for that person for each rate paid .
provide itemized statements for ohio workers compensation insurance premiums all applicable insurance premiums state and federal unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax and fees or dues required by a collective bargaining agreement .
express each of these items of cost as a percentage of payroll except fees or dues which shall be expressed as a cost per hour .
instead of itemizing the cost of social security tax ohio workers compensation and state and federal unemployment insurance the contractor may elect to receive as compensation for these payroll taxes and premiums an amount equal to num percent of the paid wages .
if the contractor pays fringes directly to the worker in lieu of paying into a fringe benefit program then the department will treat these fringe payments as paid wages when calculating the allowed num percent compensation .
the department will pay without markup the actual itemized cost of fees and dues paid to labor unions or to business associations when they are based on payroll hours and required by a collective bargaining agreement .
the department will not pay for wages or benefits for personnel connected with the contractors forces above the classification of foreman that have only general supervisory responsibility for the force account work .
if the foreman or timekeeper is employed partly on force account work and partly on other work the contractor shall prorate the number of hours between the force and nonforce account work according to the number of people on each task as shown on payrolls .
the department will pay the prevailing wage and fringe rates that apply to the project for the classifications required for extra work .
the contractor must provide payroll records for pay rates higher than the prevailing wages and establish that the higher than prevailing rates are paid for original contract work .
the department will pay for foremen and time keepers not covered by prevailing wages not more than the salaried rate they receive when engaged in original contract work .
the department will pay actual costs for subsistence and travel allowances when such payments are required by the collective bargaining agreement or other employment contracts applicable to the classes of labor employed on the project .
the department will not pay a percent markup on these costs .
num .
materials .
the department will pay the contractors actual invoice costs including applicable taxes and actual freight charges for engineer approved materials the contractor uses in force account work .
the department will pay an additional num percent markup on these costs .
freight or hauling costs charged to the contractor and not included in unit prices shall be itemized and supported by invoices .
the cost of owned or rented equipment used to haul materials to the project is not part of the materials cost .
such equipment when used for hauling materials shall be listed under cost of equipment .
provide itemized statements in addition to the documentation requirements for all equipment including the quantity and price of each material and transportation charges free on board f.o.b .
at the job site .
attach invoices to support the quantities of materials used unit prices paid and transportation charges .
if the contractor uses materials from the contractors stock and original receipted invoices for the materials and transportation charges do not exist the department and the contractor will agree on a price that represents the actual cost to the contractor .
provide an affidavit and certify all of the following a .
the materials were taken from the contractors stock .
b .
the quantity shown was actually used for the force account work .
c. the price and transportation costs represent the actual cost to the contractor .
do not incorporate materials into the work without a price agreement .
num .
equipment .
a .
general .
the department will pay the contractors costs for equipment the engineer deems necessary to perform the force account work for the time directed by the engineer or until the contractor completes the force account work whichever happens first .
the department will pay the contractor the established rates for equipment only during the hours that it is operated except as otherwise allowed elsewhere in these specifications .
the department will pay for nonoperating hours at the idle equipment rate as specified in num.c.num.c .
report equipment hours to the nearest num hour .
the established equipment rates in these specifications include compensation for overhead and profit except as otherwise specified .
the department will pay for use of contractorowned equipment the engineer approves for force account work at established rates .
the department will pay the rates as modified in num.c.num.b given in the equipment watch cost recovery formerly rental rate blue book by equipmentwatch a division of penton business media inc .
provide and the engineer will confirm the manufacturers ratings and manufacturerapproved modifications required to classify equipment for rental rate determination .
for equipment with no direct power unit use a unit of at least the minimum recommended manufacturers rating .
the department will not pay rental for small tools or equipment that show a daily rate less than num or for unlisted equipment that has a value of less than num .
tool trucks will be allowed for compensation if they are used at the force account site .
only the tools used from the tool truck will be allowed for compensation .
tools in the tool truck that are not used in the force account work will not be compensated .
a tool trailer that remains at the contractors office or yard will not be allowed on the force account work .
tool trailers that are taken to the force account site will be allowed for compensation along with the tools used on the force account work that were taken from the trailer .
treat traffic control devices used in maintaining traffic and owned by the contractor as owned equipment .
allowed rates for common traffic control devices and concrete barrier that are not listed in the blue book will be as determined by the department .
use engineer approved equipment in good working condition and providing normal output or production .
the engineer may reject equipment not in good working condition or not properly sized for efficient performance of the work .
for each piece of equipment used whether owned or rented provide the engineer with the following information num manufacturers name or trademark .
num equipment type .
num year of manufacture .
num model number .
num type of fuel used .
num horsepower rating .
num attachments required together with their size or capacity .
num all further information necessary to determine the proper rate .
num dates daily hours total hours of actual operation and idle time num blue book rate with reference or category num amount num applicable blue book hourly operating cost num invoices for all rental equipment .
b .
hourly owned equipment rates .
the base rate for the machine and attachments represent the major cost of equipment ownership such as depreciation interest taxes insurance storage and major repairs .
the hourly operating rate represents the major costs of equipment operation such as fuel and oil lubrication field repairs tires expendable parts and supplies .
for all equipment used on force account work determine and have the department confirm the hourly owned equipment rates as follows hoer raf ara r num hoc where hoer hourly owned equipment rate raf regional adjustment factor shown in the blue book ara age rate adjustment factor shown in the blue book r current blue book monthly rate hoc estimated hourly operating cost shown in the blue book however compensation for equipment normally used on a num hours per day basis will not exceed the monthly rate plus adjustments and operating costs .
the rate adjustment factor assigned to any attachment will be the yearly factor as determined for the base equipment .
when multiple attachments are included with the rental equipment only the attachment having the highest rental rate will be eligible for payment provided that the attachment has been approved by the engineer as being necessary to the force account work .
when a piece of owned equipment is not listed in the blue book use the rate for similar equipment found in the blue book or use num percent of the purchase price as the monthly rate r and add the hourly operating rate found in the blue book for similar equipment of the same horsepower .
for equipment brought to the project exclusively for force account work and on the project for less than a month multiply the monthly rate r by the factor listed below table num working hours factor less than or equal to num num num to num num hoursnum num or greater num the term working hours as used in table num includes only those hours the equipment is actually in operation performing force account work apply the factor as determined above to these actual working hours only .
calculate compensation for any idle time according to num.c.num.c without application of the factor .
the department will pay as working equipment for the entire workday equipment used intermittently during the workday .
the following criteria qualify for intermittently used equipment num equipment dedicated to the force account exclusively all day and not used on bid work .
num equipment works before and after the intermittent idle period and its total working time during the workday is at least num hours .
equipment that is captive to the force account work i.e .
it must remain at the force account site but does not qualify for intermittently used owned equipment is paid as idle equipment according to num.c.num.c .
for the time it is not working .
c. hourly idle equipment rate .
for equipment that is in operational condition on site and necessary for force account work but is idle the department will pay an hourly idle equipment rate .
the procedure to determine the hourly idle equipment rate for contractor owned equipment is as follows hier raf ara r num num where hier hourly idle equipment rate .
raf regional adjustment factor shown in the blue book .
ara age rate adjustment factor shown in the blue book .
r current blue book monthly rate .
if rented equipment necessary for force account work is idle the department will pay the contractor for the actual invoiced rates prorated for the duration of the idle period .
the actual invoiced rates must be reasonably in line with the blue book rates and approved by the engineer .
the department will pay a num percent markup for overhead and profit for the actual invoiced rates during the idle period .
the department will not pay idle owned equipment costs for more than num hours in a numhour day or num hours in a week .
the department will not pay for inoperable equipment .
the engineer may order specific equipment to the site up to num days before its planned usage .
if this equipment is not used for other work the department will pay for it as idle equipment until used .
the department will pay for the cost of idle owned or rented equipment when the work was suspended for the convenience of the state .
the department will not pay the cost of idle equipment when the work was suspended by the contractor for the contractors own reasons .
the department will only pay for the number of calendar days during the existence of the suspension .
the department will not compensate the contractor for days that the engineer determined were lost to weather .
the department will only pay for equipment physically located at the project site that was received to prosecute the scheduled work during the delay .
compensation for idle equipment will stop at the completion of the force account work or at the end of the suspension of work .
d. rented equipment .
the department will pay a num percent markup for overhead and profit for all rented equipment its corresponding blue book hourly operating costs and state and local sales taxes .
num equipment rented solely for force account work .
if the contractor rents or leases equipment from a third party exclusively for force account work the department will pay the actual invoiced amount .
the actual invoiced rates must be reasonably in line with the blue book and approved by the engineer .
the department will pay a num percent markup for overhead and profit for all rented equipment paid for by the actual invoices .
add the blue book hourly operating cost to the marked up actual invoiced rates .
num equipment rented for original contract work but used for force account work .
if the contractor uses rented equipment currently on the project for original contract work to perform force account work then determine the hourly outsiderented equipment rate as follows hrer hri num hoc where hrer hourly rented equipment rate hri hourly rental invoice costs prorated for the actual number of hours that rented equipment is operated solely on force account work .
use a monthly invoice rate divided by num a weekly invoice rate divided by num or a daily invoice rate divided by num .
hoc hourly operating cost shown in the blue book the department will not compensate for rental rates that exceed the blue book rates unless approved in advance of the work by the engineer .
e. moving of equipment .
the department will also pay for the time required to move needed equipment to the location of the force account work and to return it to its original location .
the department will pay for loading and transportation costs instead of moving time if equipment is moved by means other than its own power .
moving time back to the original location or loading and transportation costs will not be allowed if the equipment is used at the site of the force account work on contract items or related work .
the department will consider the actual cost of transferring the equipment to the project and returning it to the original location as an additional expense and pay for it as specified for equipment moved on the project exclusively for force account work .
the engineer will confirm the original location of the equipment before the contractor moves and uses it for force account work .
if the equipment is transported by a common carrier the allowance is the invoiced amount paid for the freight plus num percent .
however if the contractors forces transport the equipment the allowable compensation will be blue book rate of the hauling unit and hourly blue book operating cost plus the drivers wages and the cost of loading and unloading the equipment calculated according to num.c.num .
num .
foremans transportation .
the department will pay the blue book rate for every hour the foremans truck is on the force account site or moving to or from the site .
this rate includes equipment cost fuel and lubricants overhead profit and mobile phone or twoway radios .
num .
subcontract work .
for work performed by an approved subcontractor the department will pay an amount to cover administrative costs of num on the first num of work and num for work in excess of num as provided in num.c.num through num.c.num .
no additional markup is allowed for work of a subsubcontractor or trucking services employed by a subcontractor .
num .
final adjustment to premium for contract bonds .
the final bond premium amount for the payment and performance bonds will be computed based on the actual final contract value .
for the purpose of computing a bond premium adjustment the actual final contract value is defined as the whole sum of money excluding any bond premium adjustment which is passed from the department to the contractor as a result of the completion of the work .
if the actual final contract value is different from the original contract value the premium shall be adjusted accordingly either by refund of part of the original bond premium by the contractor if the original contract value is larger than the actual final contract value or by payment of additional bond premium by the department if the original contract value is smaller than the actual final contract value .
additional payment by the department or refund by the contractor will be based on the difference between the invoiced bond premium for the original contract value and the invoiced bond premium for the actual final contract value without any markup .
a final bond premium adjustment will not be made when the actual final contract value differs from the original contract value by less than num .
num .
trucking .
a .
trucking firms and owner operators not subject to prevailing wage will be paid at the invoiced cost plus num on the first num of trucking and num for trucking in excess of num to cover administrative costs .
b .
trucking that is subject to the prevailing wage law will be compensated according to num.c.num num.c.num num.c.num num.c.num num.c.num and num.c.num .
provide documentation showing payment to trucking firms and owneroperators and owneroperations status .
when the trucking is subject to prevailing wage submit payroll and equipment usage records according to num.c.num and num.c.num .
num .
professional and specialized work .
the following work when performed by a firm hired by the contractor is paid at the reasonable and fair market invoiced cost plus num on the first num of work and num for work in excess of num. a. surveying .
b .
engineering design .
c. specialized work that is not normally part of a department contract and is not normally subject to prevailing wage .
d. installation periodic maintenance and removal of traffic control devices under item num performed by a traffic control service or rental company provided the workers are not on the project fulltime .
maintenance of traffic services performed by leo .
e. other professional or specialized work not contemplated at the time of bid .
provide documentation showing payment for professional and specialized work .
num .
payment for force account work .
submit an analysis of estimated cost prepared in accordance with numc for work that will be performed on a force account basis .
attach an original affidavit to the analysis stating labor rates shown are the actual rates paid for labor unit prices for materials and rates for owned and rented equipment have been estimated on the basis they are not in excess of those charged in the area in which the work will be performed .
the engineer will process an estimated cost of force account ecfa if the amount of the force account work is likely to be greater than num and is expected to take more than two weeks to complete .
the engineer will process an actual cost of force account acfa to make any necessary adjustment between the ecfa and the final itemized costs for the force account work .
for force account work estimated to be less than num and anticipated to require less than two weeks to perform the engineer will process an actual cost of force account acfa at the conclusion of the work .
submit biweekly itemized statement of costs prepared from the daily force account records to the engineer as the work is being performed .
the engineer will process estimates as the force account work is performed .
payment will only be made upon receipt of the contractors itemized statement of costs .
upon conclusion of the work performed by an ecfa or work performed by an acfa submit an itemized statement of the actual costs prepared from the daily force account record and utilizing the departments electronic template titled electronic force account .
submit a compact disk cd labeled with the contractors name and the project number and a hard copy of the electronic force account .
the electronic force account template can be downloaded from the following website www.dot.state.oh.usdivisionsconstructionmgtadminpagesdefault.aspx the engineer may approve an alternative electronic template provided all calculations and printouts are equivalent to those generated by the electronic force account template .
attach an original affidavit to the hard copy stating the name classification total hours worked and rates paid each person listed on the summary of actual cost are substantiated by actual records of persons employed on the force account work .
all unit prices for materials and rates for owned and rented equipment listed on the summary of actual costs are substantiated by actual records of materials and equipment actually used in performance of the force account work and the price of any owned equipment not previously agreed upon does not exceed prices charged for similar equipment in the area in which the work was performed .
daily force account records signed by both the department and contractor will govern over other department and contractor records subject to the following a .
when the contractor is subject to a union contract that requires a minimum number of paid hours the compensation will be for the verified contract minimum hours .
b .
material quantity disagreements will be resolved by field measurements of the installed quantities or the engineers estimate of the amount of temporary or unmeasurable material used .
the engineer may also review and consider the contractors material invoices and material certifications to make the final determination .
in the event the contractor declines to sign the daily force account record the departments records shall govern .
any resulting dispute must be pursued in accordance with num.g .
d. delay costs .
num .
general .
if the department agrees that it has caused a delay the department will pay for the costs specified in num.d as allowed by num.d unless these costs have been previously paid as listed in num.b or num.c .
such payment constitutes full compensation for any and all delay costs the department will make no payment for delays occurring during the period from december num to april num unless the contractors approved progress schedule depicts critical work occurring throughout this period .
the department will not pay for delay costs until the contractor submits an itemized statement of those costs .
provide the content specified in num.c.num for the applicable items in this statement and as follows a .
proof of cost of superintendent or other project staff salaries wages and payroll taxes and insurance .
b .
proof of cost of office rent utilities land rent and office supplies .
c. proof of escalated cost for labor and material .
d. proof of material storage costs .
num .
allowable delay costs a .
extended labor .
compute labor costs during delays as specified in num.c.num for all nonsalaried personnel remaining on the project as required under collective bargaining agreements or for other engineer approved reasons .
b .
escalated labor .
to receive payment for escalated labor costs demonstrate that the department caused delay forced the work to be performed during a period when labor costs were higher than planned at the time of bid .
provide adequate support documentation for the costs allowances and benefits specified in num.c.num .
the department will pay wages and fringes with a num percent markup to cover administrative costs .
c. idle equipment or equipment demobilization .
the department will pay the contractor according to num.c.num.c for idle equipment other than small tools that must remain on the project during the delays .
the department will pay the contractors transportation costs to remove and return equipment not required on the project during the delays .
no other equipment costs are recoverable as a result of delay .
d. material escalation or material storage .
the department will pay the contractor for increased material costs or material storage costs due to the delay .
obtain the engineers approval before storing materials due to a delay .
payment will be based upon the accepted quantity of work performed during the period for which escalated costs have been approved .
the department will pay increased material costs with an num percent markup to cover administrative costs and any material waste inherent to the work .
e. field overhead .
the department will pay any contractor or subcontractor for field overhead costs which include the cost of supervision field office and office supplies and utilities for which payment is not provided for in num.d.num.f during a delay period provided all of the following criteria are met num the contractor or subcontractor has incurred an excusable compensable delay that delays the work at least num calendar days beyond the original completion date .
these days are cumulative throughout the project .
num the delay for which payment of field overhead is sought is only due to delays defined in num.d.num num.d.num num.d.num or for delays due to revised work as specified in num.b or num.f .
the department will pay the salary and fringes plus a num percent markup for field personnel identified in table num .
table num original contract amount field personnel up to num one superintendent num to num one superintendent one assistant superintendent or one engineer one clerk over num one superintendent one assistant superintendent one engineer one clerk superintendents transportation is compensable at the same rate allowed for foremans transportation in num.c.num which includes the cost of mobile communication devices .
the allowed hours are when the superintendent is at the project site .
superintendents subsistence provided this is the companys terms of compensation to such employees as documented by the contractors written company policy or contracts with their employees .
the contractors or subcontractors field office costs include field office trailers tool trailers office equipment rental temporary toilets and other incidental facilities and supplies .
compute these costs on a calendar day basis .
owned trailers are paid at the blue book rate .
rented trailers are paid at the invoiced cost plus a num percent markup .
rented office space toilets and office equipment are allowed a num percent markup .
purchased office supplies are allowed a num percent markup .
office utilities include but are not limited to telephone electric water and natural gas .
compute these costs on a calendar day basis and allow a num percent markup .
f. home office overhead .
the department will pay the contractor for home office overhead unabsorbed home office overhead extended home office overhead and all other overhead costs for which payment is not provided for in num.d.num.e including overhead costs that would otherwise be calculated using the eichleay formula or some other apportionment formula provided all of the following criteria are met num the contractor has incurred an excusable compensable delay that delays the work at least num calendar days beyond the original completion date .
these days are cumulative throughout the project .
num the delay for which payment of home office overhead is sought is only due to delays defined in num.d.num num.d.num and num.d.num .
any subcontractor that has approved cnums for subcontracted work totaling num or more is eligible for reimbursement of home office overhead provided the criteria set forth in num.d.num.f.num and num.d.num.f.num are met .
payment will be made for every eligible day beyond the original contract completion date at the rate determined by num.d.num.f.i .
payment for eligible days occurring during an unanticipated construction period will be calculated in accordance with num.d.num.f.ii .
payment for eligible days occurring during an unanticipated winter period will be calculated in accordance with num.d.num.f.iii .
i home office overhead daily rate calculate the home office overhead daily rate using the following formula daily hoop a cb where a original contract amount b contract duration in calendar days c value from table num table num original contract amount c up to num num num to num num over num num daily hoop home office overhead daily rate contract duration term b includes every calendar day from the execution of the contract unless otherwise specified by the director to the original contract completion date .
when the contractor requests home office overhead compensation for a subcontractor use the above formula to calculate the subcontractors daily hoop however in the subcontractor calculation a is equal to the subcontractors portion of the original contract amount as determined by the sum of all approved cnums issued for the subcontracted work .
ii home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period calculate the home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring between may num and november num using the following formula cp hoop daily hoop d where d sum of all excusable compensable delays in calendar days minus the sum of all delays due to num.d.num and num.d.num in calendar days daily hoop daily home office overhead rate cp hoop home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring between may num and november num the excusable compensable delay term d is the additional unanticipated extended period for work performed between may num and november num in calendar days .
iii home office overhead payment for an unanticipated winter period calculate the payment for home office overhead for an unanticipated winter period occurring between december num and april num using the following formula wp hoop daily hoop f de where d sum of all excusable compensable delays in calendar days minus the sum of all delays due to num.d.num and num.d.num in calendar days e sum of all excusable compensable delays in calendar days plus the sum of all excusable noncompensable delays in calendar days f num for a nonleap year or num for a leap year daily hoop daily home office overhead rate wp hoop home office overhead payment for an unanticipated winter period occurring between december num and april num payment for home office overhead for an unanticipated winter period will not be made when the value of the remaining work is below the lesser of num or num percent of the estimated final contract value .
iv total home office overhead payment calculate the total home office overhead payment using the following formula total hoop cp hoop wp hoop where cp hoop home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring between may num and november num wp hoop home office overhead payment for an unanticipated winter period occurring between december num and april num total hoop total home office overhead payment g. subsistence and travel allowance .
the department will pay costs for subsistence and travel allowances for labor that must remain on the project during the delays when such payments are required by the collective bargaining agreement or other employment contracts applicable to the classes of labor employed on the project .
overnight lodging will be reimbursed if the person is at a location greater than fortyfive miles from their residence up to a maximum of num per day .
meals and incidental expenses will reimbursed up to a maximum of num per day .
the department will not pay a percent markup on these costs .
e. changes in materials .
changes in material specifications that result in increased cost to the contractor are compensated by lump sum adjustment to the reference number .
the allowed compensation is equal to the invoice supported material cost increase plus num percent markup for profit and overhead .
material cost savings resulting from a specification change shall be credited to the project by a lump sum adjustment to the reference number plus a num percent markup if the originally specified material has not been ordered .
if the original material was ordered before the contractor was informed of the change the savings markup allowed is num percent in order to exclude profit on the original bid price and pay only for incurred overhead .
num directed acceleration .
the engineer may order the contractor to accelerate the work to avoid delay costs or to complete the project early .
the director and the contractor will negotiate acceleration costs .
num inefficiency .
the department will compensate the contractor for inefficiency or loss of productivity resulting from num revisions to the contract documents .
use the measured mile analysis comparing the productivity of work impacted by a change to the productivity of similar work performed under unimpacted conditions to prove and quantify the inefficiency .
num unrecoverable costs .
the contractor is not entitled to additional compensation for costs not specifically allowed or provided for in num including but not limited to the following a .
loss of anticipated profit .
b .
consequential damages including loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities insolvency and the effects of force account work on other projects or business interruption .
c. indirect costs .
d. attorneys fees claim preparation expenses and the costs of litigation .
num estimates .
if satisfactory progress is being made the contractor will receive monthly payments equaling the work and materials in place .
the monthly payment is approximate and all partial estimates and payments are subject to correction in the final estimate and payment .
payment for work and materials shall not in any way prevent later rejection when defective work or material is discovered or constitute acceptance under num or num .
except for estimates generated during project finalization the department will not pay an estimate until the contractor certifies to the engineer that the work for which payment is being made was performed in accordance with the contract .
certification will be made on forms provided by the department .
the department may pay estimates twice each month if the engineer concludes the amount of work performed is sufficient .
no estimate or payment shall be construed as acceptance of defective work or improper materials .
the department will not pay the adjusted final estimate until the contractor remedies all defective work and accepted work damaged by the contractors operations .
interest will be paid in accordance with orc num when warranted .
num payment for delivered materials .
the department will pay up to num percent of the applicable contract item for the invoiced cost of the delivered and approved materials before they are incorporated in the work if the approved materials are delivered accepted and properly stored on the project or stored in acceptable storage places in the vicinity of the project .
the department will pay for the cost of approved materials before they are incorporated in the work when asked by the contractor if the engineer determines that it is not practical to deliver the material to the project site .
this provision applies only to bulky materials that are durable in nature and represent a significant portion of the project cost such as aggregates steel and precast concrete .
the department will pay for unfabricated structural steel if the following requirements are met num .
the contractor has provided both the engineer and the office of materials management an itemized invoice from the steel mill for the steel for which reimbursement is requested num .
project structural steel design plans are complete with no forthcoming revisions .
for design build projects contractor accepted show drawings per num will need to be provided .
num .
contractor accepted certified test data for all steel in question along with mill shipping notices have been received by the office of materials management per num .
num .
the steel is properly stored to allow inspection by the office of materials management .
it shall also be properly set apart from other material and identified as belonging to odot .
num .
the contractor will provide the engineer a written statement that under num the contractor is responsible for the steel that has been paid for until the actual steel is erected and accepted in the field .
num .
payment shall only be authorized after all the aforementioned documentation has been received by the office of materials management and the steel has been inspected by the office of materials management to verify that all steel listed in the itemized invoice has been received by the fabricator and properly stored .
the amount to be paid shall be equivalent to the itemized invoice from the steel mill but shall not exceed num of the bid price for the structural steel .
the department will not pay delivered materials on small warehouse items or for plant materials .
num partial acceptance .
upon completion of a portion of the work the contractor may request acceptance of a completed portion of the work .
a .
an inspection may be performed on a completed portion of the project roadway section provided num .
all safety items are in place including permanent pavement markings .
num .
traffic is in its final pattern .
num .
a completed portion of the project constitutes a completed geographic section of the project or a direction of traffic on a divided highway .
num .
is in accordance with other contract provisions .
b .
an inspection may be performed on a completed bridge provided num .
all work on the bridge and approaches are complete including all safety items and permanent pavement markings .
num .
the contractor will not return to the bridge for any work except as allowed in num .
num .
traffic is in its final pattern .
num .
painting of structural steel is either completed or scheduled to be performed .
num .
is in accordance with other contract provisions .
the final inspector will grant written partial acceptance for that portion of the work or reject the contractors request .
such written partial acceptance will designate what portion of the work is accepted the date of acceptance and the warranty provisions started by the partial acceptance .
partial acceptance will relieve the contractor of maintenance responsibility for the designated portion of the work .
this does not relieve the contractor of responsibility to correct defective work or repair damage caused by the contractor or waive any other remedy to which the department is entitled at law or in equity .
num final acceptance .
a .
final inspection .
the department will perform a final inspection for the sole purpose of relieving the contractor of maintenance responsibility for the work .
the final inspection shall be a limited visual review of the work and shall only serve as the departments verification that the work appears substantially complete .
final inspection does not waive any available rights or remedies of the department nor divest the contractor of any responsibility for compliance with the contract or liability for damages .
notify the engineer when the project is complete and all of the engineers punch list items are complete .
if the engineer agrees the project is complete then within num business days the district final inspector will inspect the work and categorize it as one of the following num .
unacceptable or not complete .
num .
substantially complete with punch list items found by the final inspector .
num .
substantially complete .
if the final inspector finds the work substantially complete or substantially complete with punch list items then the contractors maintenance responsibilities end on the day of the final inspection except for any maintenance related to unfinished punch list items .
this does not relieve the contractor of responsibility to correct defective work or repair damage caused by the contractor or waive any other remedy to which the department is entitled at law or in equity .
the final inspector will issue a final inspection report that will document the findings of the inspection and start any warranty period .
b. punch list .
the final inspector will issue to the contractor a written punch list of work required as a condition of acceptance .
the final inspectors punch list will stipulate a reasonable time to complete the required work .
failure of the contractor to complete the punch list items by the stipulated time will result in the assessment of fifty percent of the liquidated damages according to num for each calendar day for every day beyond the stipulated time the punch list work remains incomplete and beyond the revised completion date .
c. finalization .
the contractor shall accept the final quantities as determined by the engineer or provide a written notice indicating the reason for disagreement within num calendar days of receiving the engineers list of final quantities .
the prescribed num calendar day period can be modified by mutual agreement of the contractor and the district construction engineer .
if no notice of disagreement is received then the final payment will be based on the engineers list of final quantities .
supply all documents necessary for project finalization within num calendar days from the date that the work is physically complete .
these documents include num .
delinquent material certifications .
num .
delinquent certified payrolls or required revised payrolls .
num .
wage affidavit required by orc chapter num on projects without any federal funding .
num .
delinquent force account records .
num .
if applicable dbe affidavits .
num .
any other document required to complete finalization of the project .
failure to submit these acceptably completed documents will result in an administrative fee of num per calendar day for every day that any of the required documents remain delinquent starting num calendar days after receipt of written notification from the engineer of a document deficiency .
d. final payment .
final payment is based on num .
the agreed final quantities or as determined by the engineer if agreement is not possible no compensation for unauthorized work is allowed .
num .
finding of substantial completion by the final inspector .
num .
receipt of acceptable finalization documents .
num .
contractor certification that the work was performed in accordance with the contract .
e. completion of contract and continuation of contractors responsibility .
the contract is complete except for items covered by the required bonds when the contractor receives final payment .
the dca will issue a letter confirming completion of the contract noting any exception as provided in items num and num and any warranty .
the date the final payment is approved by the district constitutes acceptance for the purpose of orc num .
neither completion of the contract nor substantial completion relieves the contractor of any responsibilities to properly perform or correct the work or to repair damage or waives any remedies to which the department is entitled at law or in equity .
num earthwork item num clearing and grubbing num description num general num clearing and grubbing num scalping num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of clearing grubbing scalping removing trees and stumps and removing all vegetation and construction debris from the limits shown on the plans except such objects that are to remain or are to be removed according to other items of work .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle burn or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num general a .
remove or save all trees shrubs and plants as designated on the plans .
preserve all vegetation and objects not designated for removal .
paint cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs selected for retention according to num .
b .
in order to retard and prevent the spread of destructive insects limit the movement of regulated articles according to ohio administrative code num .
observe requirements for handling and transporting of regulated articles in quarantined areas as defined by the ohio department of agriculture .
follow all other federal and state destructive insect quarantines .
c. restrictions on when the contractor may perform the clearing and grubbing work are located in other parts of the contract documents .
num clearing and grubbing .
clear and grub all trees and stumps marked for removal and all surface objects brush roots and other protruding obstructions not designated to remain except for special treatments listed below a .
in locations to be seeded remove stumps at least num inches num mm below ground surface .
b .
in unseeded areas to be rounded at the top of backslopes cut the stumps flush with or below the surface of the final slope line .
c. the contractor may leave undisturbed stumps and roots and nonperishable solid objects num inches num mm above the existing ground surface in the plan embankment construction locations when both of the following conditions are true num .
the embankment height is greater than num feet num m as measured vertically from the existing ground surface to the proposed ground surface and num .
the slope of the existing ground is num or flatter .
d. in locations outside of the construction limits of the cut and embankment areas not to be seeded the contractor may leave sound stumps num inches num m above the existing ground surface .
except in areas to be excavated backfill stump holes and other holes created by removing obstructions with item num embankment material .
place and compact according to item num .
remove low hanging unsound or unsightly branches on trees or shrubs designated to remain .
trim branches of trees extending over the roadbed to provide a clear height of num feet num m above the roadbed surface .
dispose of debris contaminated with garbage solid waste or hazardous waste or material according to other contract items .
num scalping .
scalping includes removing surface material such as roots sod grass residue of agricultural crops sawdust and decayed vegetable matter .
the depth of scalping does not include topsoil or other material below the scalping operation .
the engineer will not require areas to be scalped in the plan embankment construction locations when both of the following conditions are true num .
the embankment height is greater than num feet num m as measured vertically from the existing ground surface to the proposed ground surface and num .
the slope of the existing ground is num or flatter .
scalp all other areas where excavation or embankment is required .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure by one of the following methods if clearing and grubbing is specified in the contract the department will not measure the area cleared and grubbed .
if item num tree removed or item num stump removed is specified in the contract the department will measure trees and stumps designated for removal according to the following table .
table num tree or stump diameter pay item designation over num inches to num inches numinch size over num inches to num inches numinch size over num inches to num inches numinch size over num inches numinch size over num m to num m num m size over num m to num m num m size over num m to num m num m size over num m num m size the department will measure the diameter of trees at a height of num inches num m above the ground .
trees num inches num m and less in diameter are classified as brush .
the department will measure stumps by taking the average diameter at the cutoff .
num basis of payment .
if item num clearing and grubbing is specified in the contract the department will pay for all work described including backfilling holes scalping and removing all trees and stumps at the lump sum price bid .
if item num tree removed or item num stump removed is specified in the contract the department will consider the remaining work described incidental and will not pay for performing this work directly .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum clearing and grubbing num each tree removed ___ size num each stump removed ___ size item num removal of structures and obstructions num description num general construction requirements num structures removed num pipe removal num pavement walks curbs steps gutters or traffic dividers removed num buildings demolished num septic tanks and privy vaults removed num underground storage tanks removed num guardrail and fence removed num manhole catch basin and inlet removed num manhole catch basin and inlet abandoned num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of removing entirely or in part and disposing of all buildings fences guardrails structures old pavements abandoned pipe lines storage tanks septic tanks privy vaults and other obstructions not designated or permitted to remain except for utilities and obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other items in the contract .
this work also consists of backfilling the resulting trenches holes and pits and salvaging designated materials .
when specific pay items for removal of structures and obstructions are not listed in the contract documents perform this work under item num .
num general construction requirements .
raze remove and dispose of all buildings and foundations structures fences guardrails old pavements abandoned pipe lines storage tanks septic tanks privy vaults and other obstructions within the rightofway except for utilities and those items where other provisions have been made for removal .
remove and store at the specified locations within the project limits or reuse all designated salvageable materials .
the department will take ownership of all salvageable items specified for storage .
reuse all salvageable items specified for reuse on the project .
when the contract documents do not indicate for storage or for reuse take ownership of the material .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then dispose of the material according to num and num .
do not remove any item in use by traffic until after making arrangements to accommodate traffic .
when backfilling is required backfill the resulting cavities voids or trenches with either item num embankment material or item num structural backfill type num or num .
use item num structural backfill when the removed item is under the proposed pavement or paved shoulder and when the site limits the use of compaction equipment larger than an numton num metric tons roller otherwise the contractor may use item num embankment material .
place and compact the embankment or item num structural backfill according to num .
for backfilled areas outside the plan construction limits provide a final grade that presents a neat welldrained appearance that conforms to the final topography and prevents water from draining onto adjacent properties .
num structures removed .
remove bridges culverts and other structures indicated for removal in the contract documents .
if within a stream remove the substructures of existing structures including piling down to the proposed stream bottom .
for those parts outside the stream remove substructures to a minimum of num foot num m below proposed ground surface .
remove as necessary those portions of existing structures that lie entirely or partially within the limits for a new structure to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure .
where alteration of an existing structure requires removal of portions of the structure remove those portions with sufficient care as to avoid damage to the remaining portion of the structure .
in case of damage to the existing structure repair or replace the structure at no expense to the department .
remove any existing welded form hangers welded attachments two inches or longer measured parallel to the long axis of the top flange of steel beams or girders and welded attachments that interfere with the placement of welded shear connectors .
if removing a bridge or portion of a bridge with an asphalt wearing course remove the wearing course separately before removing the bridge or portion of the bridge .
backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num pipe removal .
remove and reuse store or dispose of pipe or culvert as specified in the contract documents .
if removing an existing concrete waterline pipe that was constructed before num it may be an asbestos pipe .
test the pipe by using a department prequalified environmental consultant to determine if it is an asbestos pipe .
if it is determined that the pipe is asbestos then a certified asbestos contractor must perform the removal .
dispose of all asbestos pipe at a solid waste facility that is licensed by the local health department and permitted by the oepa .
seal openings left in walls of manholes or catch basins that are to remain in place and remove and dispose of pipe headwalls .
if an adjacent existing pipe is encountered during removal operations and the pipe is inactive or is to be abandoned plug or seal the remaining ends of the pipe before proceeding with backfilling operations .
perform plugging by using approved precast stoppers .
perform sealing by using masonry bulkheads .
remove a sufficient section of the pipe to allow the engineer to determine the quality of the pipe and the possibility of its removal without damage to pipe specified for reuse or storage .
if the engineer determines the pipe is salvageable carefully remove the remainder of the pipe to avoid breaking or damaging the pipe .
transport and store the removed pipe as necessary before relaying .
replace sections of pipe lost or damaged by negligence or by use of improper methods at no additional cost to the department .
clean all pipe before reusing .
remove salvageable pipe under item num pipe removed for reuse or storage .
if the engineer determines the pipe is unusable take ownership of the pipe and dispose of or recycle it according to num .
remove unusable pipe under item num pipe removed .
before backfilling the trench excavate the caved material as necessary .
backfill trenches resulting from the removal of pipe according to num except when the trench lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num pavement walks curbs steps gutters or traffic dividers removed .
as designated remove and dispose of the existing wearing course concrete base course concrete pavement asphalt wearing course on brick or concrete base concrete walks concrete steps concrete gutters stone or concrete curbs and concrete traffic dividers .
if removing only a portion of an existing pavement walk step gutter curb or traffic divider saw or otherwise cut a neat joint at the removal limit if it does not occur at an existing joint .
if item num pavement removed is specified in the contract remove all asphalt concrete or brick from the surface to the bottom of the pavement courses as shown on the plans .
if num base removed is specified in the contract remove the specific layer as shown on the plans .
if item num wearing course removed is specified in the contract remove all asphalt from the surface to the top of the concrete or brick or remove the specific layer or layers shown on the plans .
backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num buildings demolished .
do not disturb buildings and appurtenances designated for demolition until the engineer provides a notice of possession and approval to proceed .
immediately after receiving approval schedule and perform the demolition under the engineers direction in order to accommodate utility rearrangements and clearance of structures .
whether the building is located partially or totally on temporary or permanent right ofway perform the demolition the same .
the contractor may use buildings located partially on and off the permanent rightofway for storage office living quarters or other purposes .
the agreement shall allow such use during the period of the contract and save the department harmless from any claims whatsoever by reason of such use .
remove foundations floors floor slabs and basement pit well and cistern walls to a minimum of num foot num m below the grade of the surrounding area .
completely remove all tanks and clear basements of all materials debris appliances wood or metal partitions and wood floors so only masonry walls and concrete basement floors remain .
break up and remove all floor slabs under which a pit well cistern or tank exists .
break up basement floors to be left in place and seal remaining drains with masonry or with precast clay or concrete stoppers .
take ownership of all materials except those belonging to a public or private utility .
notify the owners of water electric or gas meters when the meters are ready for removal .
disconnect all utilities according to local requirements .
after completing demolition work and obtaining the engineers approval immediately backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num septic tanks and privy vaults removed .
empty all septic tanks and privy vaults .
dispose of the removed contents in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the state and local boards of health or other authorities having jurisdiction .
completely remove and dispose of septic tanks and privy vaults located above the subgrade or finished ground surface .
for septic tanks and privy vaults located below the subgrade or finished ground surface remove tops and walls to a minimum depth of num feet num m below subgrade or num foot num m below finished ground surface .
break up floors and seal remaining drains with masonry or with precast clay or concrete stoppers .
backfill the cavity created by the removal partial removal or emptying operation according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num underground storage tank removed .
remove and dispose of underground storage tanks or regulated underground storage tanks as designated in the contract documents and according to the requirements of the authorities having jurisdiction .
if item num regulated underground storage tank removed is specified in the contract remove the tank according to the bureau of underground storage tank regulations of the division of fire marshal bustr ohio epa and all applicable federal state and local regulations .
removal includes obtaining the required permit disposing of the tank and its contents testing the excavated material and preparing the closure report .
provide a certified tank installer to supervise the removal .
provide an independent noncontractor employee bustr inspector or a state certified bustr inspector to perform the bustr required inspections .
for tanks containing hazardous substances other than petroleum use the ohio epa regulations in addition to state fire marshal regulations .
completely remove regulated underground storage tank and contents .
take ownership and dispose of tanks according to num and the above requirements .
if because of leakage from the tank any contaminated water or soil disposal or remediation is required perform the necessary work under other items in the contract or according to num .
if item num underground storage tank removed is specified in the contract completely remove and dispose of the tank .
dispose of the removed contents in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the state and local boards of health or other authorities having jurisdiction .
backfill the cavity created by the removal items according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num guardrail and fence removed .
carefully dismantle and store existing guardrail including anchor assemblies and terminal assemblies and any attached posts signs and delineators and fence when designated for reuse or storage by the department .
dispose of wood posts and other materials not considered salvageable according to num .
when fence is designated for replacement do not remove the existing fence until the replacement material is on site .
begin the new installation within num workdays of beginning the removal process .
when guardrail is designated to be replaced and traffic is being maintained in the adjacent lane do not leave hazards unprotected except for the actual time required to remove the existing guardrail and install the proposed guardrail in a continuous operation .
do not remove the guardrail until the replacement material is on the site and ready for installation .
the engineer will suspend work for failure to comply with this requirement .
backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num manhole catch basin and inlet removed .
remove existing drainage structures of the types designated for removal .
take ownership of castings unless otherwise noted on the plans .
backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to num except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work .
num manhole catch basin and inlet abandoned .
remove existing drainage structures of the types designated to be abandoned to a minimum of num foot num m below the finished subgrade or ground surface .
do not damage pipes that are to remain .
take ownership of castings unless otherwise noted on the plans .
connect existing pipes with new pipe through the structures .
seal the existing inlet and outlet pipes with precast vitrified or concrete stoppers or with masonry of a type and thickness to fill the inlet or outlet pipe .
after connecting or sealing the existing pipes and removing the walls to the required depth backfill the remaining cavities according to num .
if using connecting pipes carefully hand tamp backfill under and around the pipe according to num .
num method of measurement .
if the contract specifies that removal of structures and obstructions is on a lump sum basis the work will include all structures or obstructions encountered at locations or within areas designated in the contract documents .
however the department will measure asphalt wearing course removal on a bridge separate from the lump sum item for structure removal .
if the contract specifies that removal of specific items is on a unit basis the department will measure the quantity of each item by the unit stipulated in the contract .
if removal of steps is measured by the foot meter the department will measure the number of feet meters along the front edge of each tread .
if the steps have an integral wall the department will include the thickness of the integral wall with the tread width measurement .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for all work involved in the removal and storage reuse or disposal of structures and obstructions including excavation and backfill incidental to their removal removing the contents of the underground storage and septic tanks and the custody preservation storage on the rightofway and disposal as provided in this specification .
for pipe removed and reused or stored the department will pay for the accepted work under item num pipe removed for reuse or storage .
for unusable pipe removed the department will pay for the accepted work under item num pipe removed .
if the contract documents do not include a pay item for item num asbestos pipe removed then the department will pay for removal and disposal of asbestos pipe according to num .
when removed pavement is replaced with embankment material the department will pay for the embankment material under the applicable num or num pay item .
when pipe is removed from beneath existing pavement the department will pay for pavement removal under the applicable pay item for pavement removal or excavation and the department will pay for new pavement under the applicable pavement pay item .
include all of the costs and work associated with compliance of the rules or regulations under item num regulated underground storage tank removed .
if the underground storage tank is not regulated the work does not include obtaining inspection services permits testing excavated material or closure reporting and the payment will be under item num underground storage tank removed .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum structure removed num lump sum or portions of structure removed cubic yard or pound cubic meter or kilogram num foot meter pipe removed for reuse or storage num foot meter pipe removed num foot meter asbestos pipe removed num square yard pavement removed square meter num square yard wearing course removed square meter num square yard base removed square meter num square foot walk removed square meter num lump sum or steps removed foot meter num foot meter curb removed num foot meter curb and gutter removed num foot or gutter removed square yard meter or square meter num foot meter curb removed for storage num each precast traffic divider removed for reuse or storage num lump sum building demolished num each underground storage tank removed num each regulated underground storage tank removed num each septic tank removed num each privy vault removed num foot meter guardrail removed num foot meter guardrail removed for reuse or storage num foot meter fence removed for reuse or storage num each manhole removed num each manhole abandoned num each catch basin or inlet removed num each catch basin or inlet abandoned item num roadway excavation and embankment num description num material definitions num restrictions on the use of embankment materials num general num embankment construction methods num spreading and compacting num compaction and moisture requirements num earthwork construction tolerances num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing areas upon which embankments are to be placed excavating for roadways and channels including the removal of all material encountered not being removed under another item constructing embankments with the excavated material and material from other approved sources as necessary to complete the planned embankments furnishing and incorporating all water required for compacting embankment disposing of unsuitable and surplus material and finishing shoulders slopes and ditches .
all excavation is considered unclassified excavation .
if the excavation contains regulated materials such as garbage solid waste and hazardous waste or material the contract documents will detail the removal for these items .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num material definitions .
a. asphalt concrete .
recycled asphalt pavement rap that is blended to meet the requirements in num .
b .
base .
selected material of planned thickness placed on the subgrade as a foundation for other bases or asphalt or concrete pavements .
the base is a part of the pavement structure .
c. borrow .
material obtained from approved sources located outside the construction limits that is required for the construction of the embankment .
when borrow is specified or used use suitable materials that conform to num.r .
d. compaction testing .
the department will perform the compaction testing of embankment and subgrade according to supplement num .
e. embankment .
a structure consisting of suitable materials conforming to num.r and constructed in lifts to a predetermined elevation and cross section .
f. excavation .
the excavation and disposal of all materials required by the contract documents .
g. maximum dry density .
the maximum dry density is determined according to aashto t num aashto t num or supplement num .
the department will use this maximum dry density for compaction acceptance .
h. natural granular materials .
natural granular materials include broken or crushed rock gravel sand durable siltstone and durable sandstone that can be placed in an numinch num mm loose lift .
i .
natural soil .
all natural earth materials organic or inorganic resulting from natural processes such as weathering decay and chemical action .
j. optimum moisture content .
the water content at which the maximum dry density is produced in an embankment material .
the optimum moisture content is determined according to aashto t num aashto t num or supplement num .
k. petroleum contaminated soil pcs .
petroleum contaminated soil pcs that is regulated under oac num .
l. random material .
mixtures of suitable materials that can be placed in numinch num mm loose lifts .
m. recycled portland cement concrete .
recycled portland cement concrete rpcc that is blended to meet the requirements in num .
n. recycled materials .
fly ash bottom ash foundry sand recycled glass tire shreds or other materials or manufacturing biproducts not specifically named as suitable materials in num.r .
o .
rock .
sandstone siltstone limestone dolomite glacial boulders brick and rpcc too large to be placed in an numinch num mm loose lift .
p. shale .
a finegrained sedimentary rock formed from the lithification of clay silt or mud .
shale has a laminated structure which splits easily is fissile .
for the purpose of this specification mudstone and claystone are also considered to be shale .
shale is classified as durable or nondurable according to num.d .
q. slag materials .
slag materials include air cooled blast furnace slag acbfs granulated slag gs open hearth oh slag basic oxygen furnace bof slag and electric arc furnace eaf slag meeting the requirements in num .
r. suitable materials .
all suitable materials are restricted in num .
furnish soil or embankment material conforming to num when item num embankment is specified .
furnish material that conforms to num.b or num.c when item num granular embankment is specified .
furnish material that conforms to num.c when item num granular material types a b c d e or f are specified .
do not use recycled materials unless specifically allowed by the supplemental specifications .
num restrictions on the use of embankment materials .
suitable materials are further restricted as follows a .
use silt identified as odot group classification anumb and rap only if placed at least num feet num m below the surface of the subgrade .
b .
do not place rpcc and rap in any location where it would inhibit the growth of vegetation .
c. do not use any suitable material that can not be incorporated in an numinch num mm lift in the top num feet num m of the embankment .
d. do not use nondurable shale in the top num feet num m of the embankment that is not completely compacted and pulverized into a soil with num percent of the material passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
e. if using rpcc oh slag eaf slag bof slags or blends of these materials place these materials at least num foot num m below the flow line of the underdrains .
f. do not use rpcc oh slag eaf slag bof slags granulated slag or blends of these materials for underwater applications .
g. do not use materials that can not be satisfactory placed and compacted to a stable and durable condition .
h. material excavated in the work that contains excessive moisture is unsuitable for embankment construction unless dried .
dry or aerate such material before incorporating in the work .
the contractor may elect to waste this material instead of drying it .
i .
if granular material type e in num.c is allowed or specified use a geotextile fabric conforming to num type d on the top bottom and around the type e material to prevent piping of the material into the type e material .
j .
if electing to use pcs submit the information stated below in a suitable format at least num workdays before the intended usage .
num .
have an independent odot consultant prequalified in remedial design environmental site assessment review the proposed usage .
the consultant shall provide all documentation used to ensure that the proposed usage obeys all ohio epa regulations .
the consultant shall coordinate all epa required meetings documentation and testing requirements .
the consultant shall randomly monitor the construction to ensure that the environmental requirements are carried out on the project .
the consultant shall report any discrepancies to the department and the contractor .
the consultant shall certify the report or reports to the department .
num .
use pcs that conforms to all current environmental policies rules and regulations and the following a .
use pcs material that does not exceed the petroleum constituent concentrations stated below benzene b num parts per million toluene t num parts per million ethyl benzene e num parts per million total xylenes x num parts per million b .
include test results from btex testing by using u.s. epa test method sw num method num or equivalent method .
c. perform the tests on every num tons num metric tons of pcs used .
num general .
perform the required clearing and grubbing before starting the excavation grading and embankment operations .
coordinate the clearing and grubbing with the installation of sediment and erosion controls .
remove all existing pavement before the embankment construction .
temporarily discontinue operations when the excavating operations encounter remains of prehistoric archaeological sites historical archaeological sites or human remains .
the engineer will contact the departments office of environmental services to determine the disposition thereof .
preserve the artifacts or other archeological items or human remains until a determination as to what the disposition andor removal of such items is made by the office of environmental services .
such excavation is considered extra work .
if the contractor encounters any abnormal material such as but not limited to drums tanks or stained earth or any unusual odors during construction operations the contractor shall temporarily discontinue the work in this area leave equipment in place cordon off the area and notify the engineer .
the area is considered to contain hazardous waste or material and must be handled according to the construction inspection manual of procedures item num removal of structures and obstructions section regulated waste requirements regulated wastes found during construction ..
upon notification by the engineer to resume work the contractor may file for an extension of time according to num .
a. drainage and maintenance of the work .
maintain a welldrained embankment and excavation operation .
if trenching for narrow widening and in other areas of the embankment construction construct ditches of an adequate depth and at frequent intervals across the berm or embankment to maintain drainage .
deepen side ditches when necessary to ensure thorough embankment or subgrade drainage .
construct the embankment with sufficient crossslope to drain in case of rain .
if precipitation saturates the embankment construction stay off the embankment construction until the embankment dries or stabilizes .
expedite the construction by removing the saturated embankment or dry the embankment by scarifying plowing disking and recompacting the embankment .
throughout the embankment construction operation and at the end of each days operation shape to drain compact and recompact the work area to a uniform cross section .
eliminate all ruts and low spots that could hold water .
if using embankment construction or cut areas to haul on continuously move the hauling equipment around on the area to take advantage of the compactive effort .
continually regrade and compact the haul roads and maintain the construction according to num and num .
plug and cover the upstream ends of all pipe lines encountered during earthwork operations .
b .
rock or shale blasting operations .
conform to item num when blasting .
c. slides and breakages .
remove all slides and breakages beyond the limits of the planned finished work when caused by improper excavation methods .
d. shoulders slopes and ditches .
when specified place the topsoil in areas to be seeded or sodded according to item num .
build shoulders to the lines shown on the plans and to the tolerances specified in num .
reshape shoulders slopes and ditches that have been damaged by erosion during construction .
keep new and existing pavement and the paved area of the berm clear of earth stockpiles or other berm materials .
e. pavement widening construction .
locate sound pavement edges and cut and trim pavement to a neat line .
repair and restore damage caused by the equipment or methods .
include the cost of cutting trimming and disposal under item num excavation .
f. borrow .
unless otherwise designated in the contract make arrangements for obtaining borrow and pay all costs involved .
if borrow is specified use all suitable excavated material in the work prior to using the borrow material .
place borrow used as embankment according to all the requirements for constructing embankment .
blade and leave all borrow areas in such shape as to allow accurate measurements after the excavation has been completed .
notify the engineer sufficiently in advance of opening any borrow areas so that cross section elevations and measurements of the ground surface after stripping may be taken .
construct borrow areas that conform to num clean up the borrow areas according to num .
g. staged construction and waiting periods .
if specified in the contract documents control the rate of fill accordingly .
adhere to the rate of fill and to the waiting periods during the work .
num embankment construction methods .
embankment construction includes preparing areas upon which embankments are to be placed placing and compacting approved material within roadway areas where unsuitable material has been removed and placing and compacting approved material in holes pits and other depressions within the roadway .
if scalping is required scarify plow disk and compact the existing embankment foundation .
compact the top num inches num mm of the foundation to num percent of the maximum dry density or to a maximum test section dry density according to supplement num .
if the foundation can not be compacted the department will design replacement material or the engineer may increase the lift thickness of the next layer of embankment .
the engineer may increase the lift thickness of the next embankment layer to bridge the soft or wet foundation areas that will not support the weight of the trucks or hauling equipment .
dump successive loads of rock durable shale or granular material in a uniform lift .
do not exceed the thickness required to support the equipment placing the material .
manipulate blade distribute level and doze the material in place until the area is stabilized and material is above the normal water elevation .
once the bridging has been accomplished construct the remaining lifts according to num .
if the existing slope is steeper than num bench into the existing slope as follows a. scalp the existing slope according to item num .
b .
cut horizontal benches in the existing slope to a sufficient width to blend the new embankment with the existing embankment and to accommodate the placement and compaction operations and equipment .
c. bench the slope as the embankment is placed and compact into layers .
d. begin each bench at the intersection of the existing slope and the vertical cut of the previous bench .
recompact the cut materials along with the new embankment .
if constructing embankment on only one side of abutments wing walls piers or culvert headwalls construct the embankment so that the area immediately adjacent to the structure is not compacted in a manner that causes overturning of or excessive pressure against the structure .
if constructing embankment on both sides of a concrete wall pipe or box type structure construct the embankment so that the elevation on both sides of the structure is always approximately the same .
num spreading and compacting .
do not construct frozen embankment material or place embankment material on frozen ground .
spread all embankment material except for rock in num.c .
and rpcc in num.d in successive horizontal loose lifts not to exceed num inches num mm in thickness .
compact all embankment material lifts except for type d granular material type e granular material rock and durable shale to the specified density and moisture controls in num .
when a minimum effective weight requirement is specified in num or num the contractor may use a vibratory roller which meets the requirement using a combination of weight and equivalent centrifugal force from vibration .
in all cases submit documentation from the manufacturer that shows the roller meets the minimum effective weight requirements .
the engineer may reduce the minimum number of passes if additional passes are detrimental to compaction or stability .
a .
soil and granular embankment .
for soil or granular material when a test section is used use a minimum compactive effort of eight passes with a steel drum roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons .
compact type d and type e granular material using at least ten passes of a smooth drum vibratory roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons .
add water to type d granular material as needed or directed by the engineer .
b. shale .
the engineer will test shale for durability according to num.d to determine if compaction testing is required .
for nondurable shale when a test section is used use a minimum compactive effort of ten passes with a footed drum roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons or with rollers meeting the requirements of num.d .
use water to aid in breaking down large particles and to bring the shale to at least num percent above optimum moisture content .
compact durable shale as defined in num.d with a minimum compactive effort of ten passes of a footed drum roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons or with rollers meeting the requirements of num.d .
when durable shale is mixed with fine material use fine material that is at least num percent above optimum moisture content .
no density testing will be required .
if shale mixtures contain large particles of shale break down the particles during placement until the voids are filled .
place and compact shale and rock mixtures using the same procedure as for shale .
reduce rock size in a shale rock mixture to less than or equal to num inches num mm or separate rock greater than num inches num mm from the mixture and use as rock fill .
use the construction methods for rock when the shalerock mixture contains less than num percent shale .
c. rock .
reduce the rock until it is small enough to be incorporated into the following horizontal lift thickness place rock in a maximum loose lift thickness num inches larger than the largest diameter of the rock pieces or num feet num m which ever results in the smaller lift thickness .
when placing rock fill within a length of six times the height of the fill at an abutment place rock fill in loose lifts not to exceed num inches num m. for example if the fill height is num feet num m then the rock fill within num feet num m of the abutment is placed in less than numinch num m loose lifts .
do not dump the rock but distribute and place the full width of the lift by blading or dozing to ensure proper placement .
evenly distribute the larger rocks and reduce the voids pockets and bridging to ensure minimum deformation .
incorporate smaller rock pieces in the upper portions of each rock lift to fill the voids during this manipulation .
when placing embankment material other than rock on top of the rock lift level and smooth the rock surface using suitable leveling equipment and evenly distribute the smaller rock rock spalls or finer rock fragments .
roll all rock lift surfaces with eight passes of a vibratory footed drum roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons .
when constructing rock and other embankment materials at approximately the same time perform the following num .
use the rock at the base of the embankment .
num .
use rock in the outer portions of the embankment .
num .
use the larger rocks on the outside side slopes .
num .
use the other embankment material in the inner portion of the fill .
num .
keep the top of the other embankment materials higher than the rock .
num .
construct the other embankment materials to a sufficient width to allow the specified compaction .
num .
when rock is placed on top of other embankment material construct the other embankment material at a centertoside slope grade of approximately num percent .
d. random materials .
reduce the random material until it is small enough to incorporate into an numinch num mm lift except for rpcc in num.d.num through num.d.num .
when using a uniformly graded mixture use material with a moisture content less than num percent below optimum to obtain compaction .
when large pieces are incorporated in the lifts use fine material with a moisture content less than num percent below optimum to obtain compaction .
compact natural soil and natural granular material blends with rap or rpcc to the same requirements as a granular embankment in num .
when using rpcc slabs or large rpcc pieces in the embankment construction conform to the following num .
use natural soil or natural granular material that is less than num percent below optimum moisture content in the blend .
reduce the slabs or pieces to less than num num feet num num m in size and place the blend in a maximum loose lift thickness of num inches num mm .
num .
manipulate level and distribute the mixture by blading or dozing to fill the voids and pockets and reduce bridging .
num .
compact the natural soil or natural granular embankment to the compaction and moisture requirements in num .
num .
when the rpcc slabs or large rpcc pieces consists of more than num percent of the embankment lift place the blended material in maximum loose lifts of num inches num m. do not place one slab directly on the other .
compact manipulate level and distribute as stated in num.d.num through num.d.num .
e. areas inaccessible to rollers .
for areas inaccessible to rollers such as adjacent to culverts retaining walls or other structures construct the embankment in numinch num mm horizontal loose lifts .
num compaction and moisture requirements .
construct all embankments except rock and durable shale using moisture and density controls .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the engineer will perform all compaction tests according to supplement num .
a. moisture controls .
sprinkle enough water on embankment material that contains too little moisture to wet it to a moisture content needed to meet the density requirements .
apply the water using tank trucks equipped with suitable sprinkling devices .
thoroughly incorporate the water into the material by using discs plows or other approved equipment .
continue to water and to manipulate until the required moisture is uniformly distributed throughout the lift .
before or during compaction allow the embankment material that contains excess moisture to dry to a moisture content needed to meet the density requirements .
continue drying until the required moisture is uniform throughout the lift .
however for material that displays pronounced elasticity or deformation under the action of loaded rubber tire construction equipment or other equipment reduce the moisture content to secure stability .
expedite and manipulate the embankment material by drying the wet embankment material by using plows or discs by adding dry material lime lime kiln dust or cement or by other methods .
do not mix shale in the lifts to reduce the moisture content of the embankment material .
b. compaction requirements .
compact all embankment materials except for rock and durable shale in horizontal lifts to a dry density greater than the percentage of maximum dry density in table num or to num percent of the maximum dry density determined by the test section methods specified in supplement num .
table num embankment compaction requirements maximum dry density lbft kgm minimum compaction requirements in percent of maximum dry density num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num and more num and more num if needed for compaction acceptance construct a test section using the following num .
use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to construct the test section to construct the production embankment areas .
num .
construct a new test section when the material supporting foundation or embankment changes .
num .
reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable .
num earthwork construction tolerances .
finish the completed excavation and embankment to the cross sections shown on the plans .
check the excavation and embankment work with templates slope boards electronic methods or other methods specified in item num .
the engineer will allow occasional deviations in the work within the following tolerances a .
when topsoil is specified use the following num .
in fill areas construct the embankment to the bottom of the topsoil depth .
num .
in cut areas excavate additional depth to allow for the topsoil .
num .
for cuts or fills the cross sections show the finished grade which is the top of the topsoil .
b .
for the backslopes cut slopes from the back of the ditch to the existing ground and for the foreslopes fill slopes from the edge of the graded shoulder to the bottom of the ditch do not allow deviations greater than num foot num m as measured in the horizontal plane .
c. do not construct shoulders and ditches less than the horizontal measurement from the centerline or to a higher elevation than shown on the plans .
however the cross section may vary below the plan grades by less than num inch num mm at the pavement edge and by less than num inches num mm elsewhere .
d. construct or fine grade the subgrade to within num inch num mm of the plan elevation at any location .
construct or fine grade the subgrade to within num inch num mm of the plan grade as measured with a numfoot num m straightedge applied to the surface parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
e. for all rock or shale cut slopes that do not require control blasting techniques rake excavate hoe ram or mechanically shape these slopes to obtain a neat and smooth appearance .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure excavation by the number of cubic yards cubic meters of material in the original position acceptably excavated using the average end area method .
the department will measure embankment rock granular embankment and granular material type ___ by the number of cubic yards cubic meters of material in the final position acceptably placed using the average end area method .
measurement will include overbreakage or slides not attributable to carelessness of the contractor embankment settlement caused by soft embankment foundation unsuitable materials excavated and removed to obtain proper stability in cut sections and in foundation areas for fill sections .
the department may use threedimensional measurements where it is impractical to measure material by the cross section method due to the erratic location of isolated deposits .
the department will not measure excavation or embankment outside plan limits .
the department will measure borrow by the cubic yard cubic meter or ton metric ton as specified in the contract documents .
the contract documents will specify borrow only when the measurement of the material in its final location by volume is impractical .
for example this would apply when the borrow material is to be placed in locations that are under water or in locations with extremely soft foundations .
in addition the department may specify borrow when additional material is needed and when item num is specified .
in this case the department will pay for borrow under num borrow .
the department will measure the volume of borrow material in a natural formation either by the average end area method or by weight .
where measurement is by the average end area the department will take cross sections after the surface has been cleared and scalped and again after the borrow area excavation has been completed .
the cross sections determine the volume for payment .
where the total weight is measured and converted to volume the department will determine material density in pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meters in its original position by a series of representative field measurements made after clearing and scalping have been performed and as the excavation exposes the borrow material .
weigh the acceptable material minus excess moisture excavated from the borrow area for incorporation into the embankment and furnish the department with load slips .
the department will determine the cubic yards cubic meters for payment by dividing the total weight of the borrow material by the average weight per cubic yard cubic meter of the undisturbed material .
if the moistures of the inplace borrow site density test material is not within num percent of the accepted delivered material the department will calculate volume based on the dry densities and weights .
the department will calculate the volume of borrow from sources other than natural inplace formations such as processed slag sand stone or gravel and quarry material as follows determine the material inplace compacted density in pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meter .
the volume paid will be the total weight of the material furnished minus excess moisture divided by num percent of the average embankment density .
if the moisture content of the accepted inplace density test material is not within num percent of the delivered material the department will calculate volume based on the dry densities and weights .
where measurements show that completed embankment exists outside the plan cross sections or outside the allowable tolerances the department will multiply the quantity outside plan lines by a shrinkage factor to determine the quantity deducted from the measured borrow quantity .
the shrinkage factor is determined by dividing the volume or weight of the material excavated or used as borrow by the volume or weight of the material compacted in place .
when the measurement is by weight the department will accept the material based on the freight bills and weight and volume evidence according to num .
num basis of payment .
if the contract does not include num clearing and grubbing or an estimated quantity for num tree removed or num stump removed or an estimated quantity for the pay items under item num the department will not pay for this work directly but will considered it incidental to pay items under item num .
the department will not pay for additional wasting cost of material excavated in the work that was wasted instead of being dried as detailed in num.h .
if the contractor elects to use pcs the department will not pay for additional work necessary to comply with the requirements specified in num.j .
if during excavation the contractor encounters remains of prehistoric archaeological sites historical archaeological sites or human remains the department will pay for such excavation according to num .
if during excavation the contractor encounters hazardous material or waste the department will pay according to num .
if necessary during the construction in num.h num.a or num.a the department will not pay for removing the saturated embankment or drying the embankment .
if caused by improper excavation methods the department will not pay for removing slides and breakages beyond the limits of the planned finished work .
the department will pay for the removal of slides and breakages beyond the limits of the planned finished work according to num when there is no contractor fault or neglect .
if caused by the lack of implementing erosion controls the department will not pay for reshaping shoulders slopes and ditches damaged by erosion during construction .
if caused by the contractors equipment or methods the department will not pay for repairing or restoring damaged areas designated for salvage .
when topsoil is specified the department will not make deductions or additions from the earthwork quantities for the topsoil .
the department will not adjust earthwork quantities when the volume between two consecutive crosssections differs by less than num percent from the plan quantity unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan quantity is greater than num cubic yards num m for all pay items measured by the cubic yard cubic meter under item num combined .
for quantity differences greater than num percent or greater than num cubic yards num m submit supporting documentation to the engineer .
however the department will adjust earthwork quantities for changes less than num percent or num cubic yards num m when the change results from the following undercutting foundation settlement changes to grades or slopes and removing slides .
for quantities measured for payment the department will use the plan cross sections corrected for errors as the original field cross sections .
additional cross sections may be interpolated from the plans at points necessary to more accurately determine quantities .
the department will pay according to num for changes or extra work that increases the haul distance more than num mile num km to the work detailed in the contract documents .
the department will pay for additional quantities that increase the haul distance num mile num km or less at the unit bid price .
when specified the payment for borrow includes all work to complete the embankment construction to the cross sections shown on the plans .
the department will not make additional payment for the embankment construction of the borrow material .
when borrow is not specified all work is included in the excavation or embankment pay items .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard excavation cubic meter num cubic yard embankment cubic meter num cubic yard or ton granular embankment cubic meter or metric ton num cubic yard or ton granular material type ___ cubic meter or metric ton num cubic yard or ton borrow cubic meter or metric ton num cubic yard or ton rock cubic meter or metric ton item num subgrade compaction and proof rolling num description num materials num compaction of the subgrade num unstable subgrade num rock shale or coal subgrade num proof rolling num spreading and placing of materials num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing suitable subgrade material by drying compacting proof rolling and grading .
this work also consists of removing unsuitable subgrade material and constructing new embankment to the limits shown on the plans .
the contract documents provide the anticipated amount of excavation for unsuitable subgrade material which includes unsuitable soil rock shale and coal in the subgrade and for unstable subgrade material .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish suitable material conforming to num.r num and num except use soils in the top num inches num mm of the subgrade that have a maximum dry density of at least num pounds per cubic foot num kgm .
furnish material that conforms to num.b or num.c when granular embankment is specified .
furnish material that conforms to num.c when granular material type ___ is specified except do not use rpcc eaf slag or bof slag .
do not use granular material type d e or f in the location where underdrains are to be constructed .
furnish geotextile fabric that conforms to num type d num compaction of the subgrade .
compact subgrade materials that have a maximum dry density of num to num pounds per cubic foot num to num kgm to not less than num percent of maximum dry density .
compact all other subgrade materials to not less than num percent of maximum dry density .
determine the maximum dry density using aashto t num aashto t num or test section method described in supplement num according to the engineer .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the engineer will perform all compaction tests according to supplement num .
the department may check for compaction before or after the fine grading operation .
if needed for compaction acceptance use the test section method as follows a .
use a minimum of eight passes with a steel drum roller having a minimum effective weight of num tons num metric tons .
b .
use num percent of the test section maximum dry density for acceptance of the production subgrade compaction .
c. use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to construct the test section for the production subgrade compaction .
d. construct a new test section when the subgrade material supporting foundation or embankment material changes .
e. reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable .
the engineer may reduce the minimum number of passes if the passes are detrimental to compaction .
use the moisture controls specified in num.a .
compact the subgrade under pavements to a depth of num inches num mm below the subgrade surface and num inches num mm beyond the edge of the surface of the pavement paved shoulders or paved medians .
compact all subgrades under paved driveways paved mailbox turnouts curbs and gutters to a depth of num inches num mm below the subgrade surface .
maintain and drain the subgrade according to num.a .
num unstable subgrade .
if satisfactory subgrade stability can not be obtained by moisture control and compaction according to num the engineer will direct the contractor to remove the unstable material and to construct the replacement material to the finished grade within the tolerances specified in num .
conduct the removal and replacement operations to allow the engineer to measure the crosssections before placing the replacement material .
remove the unstable subgrade material to the depth determined by the engineer or specified in the contract documents .
replace with suitable material according to num .
num rock shale or coal subgrade .
if an aggregate base is not a part of the pavement design excavate the subgrade num feet num m below the final subgrade elevation where rock shale or coal is encountered .
if an aggregate base is part of the pavement design reduce the above numfoot num m excavation depth by the thickness of the aggregate base or bases .
maintain a total excavation depth of num feet num m below the bottom of the asphalt or concrete pavement .
excavate for a width of num foot num m beyond the shoulders .
replace with suitable material according to num .
num proof rolling .
test the stability and uniformity of the subgrade compaction by proof rolling .
a .
use a proof roller conforming to the following num .
four heavy pneumatic tire wheels mounted on a rigid steel frame .
num .
wheels evenly spaced in one line across the width of the roller .
num .
wheels arranged so that all wheels carry approximately equal loads when operated over an uneven surface .
num .
a maximum centertocenter spacing between adjacent wheels not exceeding num inches num m. num .
a body for ballast loading capable of varying the gross load from num to num tons num to num metric tons .
num .
tires capable of operating at inflation pressures ranging from num to num pounds per square inch num to num kpa .
provide a tire pressure gage for measurement before use .
num .
tires filled with liquid from num to num percent by volume .
provide ballast that consist of blocks of known weight sand bags with a weight of num pounds num kg bags of other material of known weight or other suitable material such that the total ballast weight is readily determinable at all times .
provide sufficient ballast to load equipment to a maximum gross weight of num tons num metric tons .
furnish the engineer information verifying that the weights and tire pressures can be met .
b .
after compacting the subgrade according to num and before placing overlying course proof roll designated subgrade areas .
if proof rolling is performed after the underdrains are installed do not use the proof roller within num num feet num mm of the underdrains .
ensure that the subgrade moisture content at the time of proof rolling is within num percent of the moisture used for acceptance in num .
adjust the load and tire inflation pressure as directed by the engineer or according to the following num .
for soils classified as anum anum anum or anum use a numton num metric tons roller with a tire pressure of num pounds per square inch num kpa .
num .
for granular soils and soil rock and granular mixtures use a numton num metric tons roller with a tire pressure of num pounds per square inch num kpa .
num .
when proof rolling areas where unsuitable or unstable subgrade materials have already been excavated and replaced with granular material use the weight and tire pressure appropriate for the original subgrade material type .
measure the tire pressure in the presence of the engineer .
operate equipment at a speed between num num and num miles per hour num and num kmhr .
adjust the speed to allow the engineer to measure the deflections ruts or elasticity .
make only one trip of the proof roller over any area .
offset trips to completely cover the subgrade area .
where proof rolling indicates areas of unstable subgrade the engineer will investigate for the source of the problem .
the contractor is responsible for all problems found in the materials constructed under the contract documents .
correct all deficiencies found .
correct the subgrade to a uniform and satisfactory stability as directed by the engineer .
after proof rolling check the subgrade for conformance to the plans and correct all surface irregularities .
shape the subgrade within the tolerances specified in num .
num spreading and placing of materials .
place materials conforming to num in numinch num mm loose lifts .
the engineer may increase the lift thickness depending on the stability of the bottom of the excavation .
the engineer may increase the lift thickness up to num inches num mm to obtain stability at the top of the lift .
doze track or manipulate the material to maximize the density and stability .
once stability is achieved compact according to num .
when specified place geotextile fabric at the bottom of the cut or at locations designated in the contract documents .
place the geotextile fabric smooth and free of tension or wrinkles .
fold or cut the geotextile fabric to conform to curves .
overlap a minimum of num inches num mm at the ends and sides .
hold the geotextile fabric in place with pins or staples .
end dump the suitable material on the geotextile fabric .
do not operate the equipment directly on the geotextile fabric .
unless stated otherwise spread the end dumped material and maintain a minimum lift thickness of num inches num mm .
when granular material type e is specified or allowed use a geotextile fabric on the top bottom and around the type e granular material to prevent piping of material into the type e granular material .
the engineer may use granular material type e when excess water is at the bottom of the cut .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure subgrade compaction by the number of square yards square meters computed from the profile grade and typical sections and actually compacted .
the department will measure num inches num mm beyond the edge of the pavement surface paved shoulders and paved medians .
the department will measure the surface area of the paved driveways paved mailbox turnouts curb and gutter .
the department will measure proof rolling by the number of hours accepted .
the department will not measure idle time for repairs servicing loading and unloading ballast adjusting tire pressure bad weather wet subgrade usage at times and at locations other than department directed and standby time to be available when next needed or other cause for standby time .
the department will measure excavation of subgrade embankment granular embankment and granular material type ___ according to num .
all excavation is unclassified .
the department will measure geotextile fabric by the number square yards square meters of surface area of geotextile fabric placed .
the department will not measure the specified lap length .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay according to num for changes or extra work that increases the haul distance more than a num mile num km to the work detailed in the contract documents .
the department will pay for additional quantities that increase the haul distance num mile num km or less at the unit bid price .
if unstable subgrade results from inadequate surface drainage or lack of maintenance as required by num.a the department will not pay for replacing the unstable subgrade and disposing of the removed material .
for problems identified in num that are the result of soils or conditions at lower elevations than the contract work the department will pay for the corrections .
the department will pay for the subgrade compaction in areas requiring excavation and replacement in num num and num .
the department will not pay for subgrade compaction in areas stabilized under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard subgrade compaction square meter num hour proof rolling num cubic yard excavation of subgrade cubic meter num cubic yard embankment cubic meter num cubic yard granular embankment cubic meter num cubic yard granular material type ___ cubic meter num square yard geotextile fabric square meter item num chemically stabilized embankment num description num materials num submittals num construction num mixture design for chemically stabilized soils num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a chemically stabilized embankment by mixing cement or lime into the embankment soil using the method for the specified chemical .
the contract documents include an estimated quantity for the specified chemical .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to portland cement num lime quick lime num.b furnish water conforming to num .
furnish suitable natural soil from on or off the project site conforming to num and num .
num submittals .
submit for the engineers acceptance a report that lists the type of equipment to be used speed of the intended equipment usage rate of application of the chemical and calculations that demonstrate how the required percentage of chemical will be applied .
submit the report to the engineer for acceptance at least num workdays before the stabilization work begins .
if the pay item for mixture design for chemically stabilized soils is included in the contract documents prepare and submit reports according to supplement num .
num construction .
perform chemically stabilized embankment work when the air temperature is num f num c or above and when the soil is not frozen .
do not perform this work during wet or unsuitable weather .
drain and maintain the work according to num.a .
a .
spreading .
if the pay item for mixture design for chemically stabilized soils is not included in the contract documents use the following spreading percentage rate for the specified chemical .
the percentage is based on a dry density for soil of num pounds per cubic foot num kgm table num chemical spreading rate cement num lime num spread the chemical uniformly on the surface using a mechanical spreader at the approved rate and at a constant slow rate of speed .
use a distribution bar with a maximum height of num feet num meter above the ground surface .
use a canvas shroud that surrounds the distribution bar and extends to the ground surface .
minimize dusting when spreading the chemical .
control dust according to num .
do not spread chemical when wind conditions create blowing dust that exceeds the limits in num .
do not spread the chemical on standing water .
b. mixing .
immediately after spreading the chemical mix the soil and chemical by using a power driven rotary type mixer .
if necessary add water to bring the mixed material to at least optimum moisture content for cement and to at least num percent above optimum moisture content for lime .
continue mixing until the chemical is thoroughly incorporated into the soil all soil clods are reduced to a maximum size of num inches num mm and the mixture is a uniform color .
for areas not under pavements or paved shoulders the contractor may use a spring tooth or disk harrow in place of the powerdriven rotary type mixer by modifying the above procedure as follows num .
open the soil with a spring tooth or disc harrow before spreading .
num .
spread the chemical .
num .
use a minimum disc harrow coverage of ten passes in one direction and ten passes in the perpendicular direction to thoroughly incorporate the chemical into the soil .
continue mixing until all soil clods are reduced to a maximum size of num inch num mm and the mixture is a uniform color .
c. compacting .
construct and compact chemically stabilized embankment according to num except use num percent of the maximum dry density for acceptance .
determine the maximum dry density for acceptance using the ohio typical moisture density curves the moisture density curves from the contractors mixture design submittal or the maximum dry density obtained by test section method .
num mixture design for chemically stabilized soils .
when included in the plans perform a mixture design for chemically stabilized soils according to supplement num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure chemically stabilized embankment by the number of cubic yards cubic meters used in the complete and accepted work as determined by item num .
the department will measure cement and lime by the number of tons metric tons incorporated in the complete and accepted work .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay lump sum for all work labor and equipment described in num .
the department will pay twothirds of the lump sum amount bid when the sampling and testing is complete and the report is accepted by the department .
the department will pay onethird of the lump sum amount bid when the chemically stabilized embankment is completed and accepted by the department and the field verification test results are all submitted .
the department will not apply the quantity underrun adjustment factors in table num to the bid unit prices for cement and lime .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard cement stabilized embankment cubic meter num cubic yard lime stabilized embankment cubic meter num ton metric ton cement num ton metric ton lime num lump sum mixture design for chemically stabilized soils item num chemically stabilized subgrade num description num materials num submittals num test rolling num construction num mixture design for chemically stabilized soils num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a chemically stabilized subgrade by mixing cement or lime into the subgrade soil using the method for the specified chemical .
the contract documents include an estimated quantity for the specified chemical .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to portland cement num lime quick lime num.b furnish water conforming to num .
for the curing coat furnish rapid setting emulsified asphalt conforming to num .
num submittals .
submit a report that lists the type of equipment to be used speed of the intended equipment usage rate of application of the chemical and calculations that demonstrate how the required percentage of chemical will be applied .
for phased work list in the report the procedure to be used to construct the chemically stabilized subgrade to ensure full depth and continuity across phase interfaces .
submit the report to the engineer at least num workdays before the stabilization work begins .
department acceptance of the report is not required .
the absence of department acceptance does not supersede the engineers authority as defined in num .
if the pay item for mixture design for chemically stabilized soils is included in the contract documents prepare and submit reports according to supplement num .
num test rolling .
when specified test roll prior to chemical stabilization with a proof roller conforming to num .
num construction .
perform chemical stabilization work including the curing period when the air temperature is num f num c or above and when the soil is not frozen .
do not perform this work during wet or unsuitable weather .
where phasing for maintenance of traffic uses part width stabilization of the subgrade ensure that the required chemical spreading rate mixing depth and compaction are provided at the interface between adjacent phases .
a .
spreading .
shape the subgrade to the approximate profile grade prior to spreading the chemical so as to permit the construction of a uniformly compacted course of chemically treated soil to the thickness shown on the plans .
the addition of the chemical will raise the subgrade profile approximately num inch num mm .
remove this excess material during the fine grading .
if the pay item for mixture design for chemically stabilized soils is not included in the contract documents use the following spreading percentage rate for the specified chemical .
the percentage is based on a dry density for soil of num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum table num chemical spreading rate cement num lime num spread the chemical uniformly on the subgrade using a mechanical spreader at the approved rate and at a constant slow rate of speed .
use a distribution bar with a maximum height of num feet num meter above the subgrade .
use a canvas shroud that surrounds the distribution bar and extends to the subgrade .
minimize dusting when spreading the chemical .
control dust according to num .
do not spread the chemical when wind conditions create blowing dust that exceeds the limits in num .
do not spread the chemical on standing water .
b. mixing .
immediately after spreading the chemical mix the soil and chemical as follows .
num .
cement .
mix the chemical and soil using a power driven transverse type mixer equipped with a computer controlled volumetric water readout .
continue mixing until the cement is thoroughly incorporated into the soil and is a uniform color .
do not water during the initial mixing .
perform the initial mixing so that num percent of the soil mixture passes the no .
num sieve num mm and num percent passes the num inch sieve nummm exclusive of aggregate larger than the no .
num sieve num mm size .
after the initial mixing remix the soil and introduce water through the mixer to bring the mixed material to at least optimum moisture .
uniformly distribute the water in sufficient quantity to hydrate the cement .
if the chemical and soil can be mixed to the required gradation and the water can be added to bring the soil mixture to the required moisture content in one mixing then only one mixing of the soil water and chemical is required .
restrict the addition of water when the moisture content of the soil exceeds num percent above optimum moisture .
add water to the mixed soil within num hours after the initial mixing .
once the water is added to the mixture complete the mixing compacting and shaping within num hours from start to finish .
num .
lime .
mix the lime and soil using a power driven transverse type mixer equipped with a computer controlled volumetric water readout .
if necessary add water to bring the mixed material to at least num percent above optimum moisture content .
continue mixing until the lime is thoroughly incorporated into the soil all soil clods are reduced to a maximum size of num inches num mm and the mixture is a uniform color .
after the initial mixing lightly compact the material to seal it against rain or excessive drying by using a steel wheel or pneumatic tire roller .
allow the lime and soil mixture to cure mellow for a period of not less than num hours and not more than num days .
if more than num days elapse between initial mixing and final mixing add an additional num percent of lime during the final mixing .
furnish the additional lime at no cost to the department unless the delay beyond the numday limit is caused by conditions beyond the contractors control .
perform the final mixing until the soil mixture is completely pulverized with all clods reduced to a maximum size of num inch num mm and at least num percent of the clods passing the no .
num num mm sieve exclusive of aggregate larger than the no .
num sieve num mm .
continue mixing until the lime is uniformly distributed throughout the pulverized soil .
during final mixing return the mixture to the moisture contents stated above then shape and compact the mixture .
num .
mixture depth check .
check the uniformity of the mix by digging trenches or a series of holes at regular intervals for the full depth of treatment and inspecting the color and depth of the exposed material .
use diluted hydrochloric acid or phenolphthalein to indicate the presence of calcium and ensure that the chemical is mixed to the desired depth .
c. compacting .
start compaction no more than num minutes after the final mixing .
compact all chemically stabilized subgrade to the requirements in num except use num percent of the maximum dry density for acceptance .
determine the maximum dry density for acceptance by using the ohio typical moisture density curves the moisture density curves from the contractors mixture design submittal or the maximum dry density obtained by test section method .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the engineer will perform all compaction tests according to supplement num .
use a vibratory footed roller weighing at least num tons num metric tons .
use the moisture controls according to num.a except ensure that the moisture content at time of compaction is at or above optimum .
perform the final rolling using a smooth drum roller .
do not use vibration during the final rolling .
the contractor may either shape and fine grade the chemically stabilized subgrade before the curing period or shape the subgrade before the curing period and fine grade after the curing period .
if fine grading before the curing period fine grade the same day as mixing compacting and shaping .
if fine grading after the curing period shape the subgrade approximately num inch num mm above the profile grade and typical sections .
in either case fine grade the subgrade to the profile grade and typical sections within the tolerances in num .
d. curing .
immediately after the compaction and shaping of the chemically stabilized subgrade cover the surface with curing coat for curing the chemically stabilized subgrade .
use a rate of num gallon per num square feet num liters per square meter for emulsions .
apply the curing coat before the surface dries .
if the curing coat is delayed or the surface starts to dry out indicated by turning white apply water for temporary curing until the curing coat can be applied .
do not apply the curing coat unless the curing coat can set up before it rains .
when the application of curing coat must be delayed keep the chemically stabilized subgrade wet by using water until the curing coat can be applied .
cure the chemically stabilized subgrade for at least five days before the placement of the overlying course .
e. proof rolling .
after the curing period proof roll the chemically stabilized subgrade according to item num .
f. protection .
drain and maintain the work according to num.a .
do not operate any equipment on the chemically stabilized subgrade during the curing period .
do not allow the chemically stabilized subgrade to freeze during the cure period .
cover the completed chemically stabilized subgrade with the aggregate base within num calendar days .
num mixture design for chemically stabilized soils .
when included in the plans perform a mixture design for chemically stabilized soils according to supplement num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure chemically stabilized subgrade by the number of square yards square meters computed from the profile grade and typical sections accepted in place .
the department will measure cement and lime by the number of tons metric tons incorporated in the complete and accepted work .
the department will measure test rolling according to num as specified for proof rolling .
the department will measure curing coat by the number of square yards square meters computed from the profile grade and typical sections accepted in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay lump sum for all work labor and equipment described in num .
the department will pay twothirds of the lump sum amount bid when the soil sampling and testing is complete and the report is accepted by the department .
the department will pay onethird of the lump sum amount bid when the chemically stabilized subgrade is completed and accepted by the department and the field verification test results are all submitted .
the department will not apply the quantity underrun adjustment factors in table num to the bid unit prices for cement and lime .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard cement stabilized subgrade __inches deep square meter num square yard lime stabilized subgrade __ inches deep square meter num ton metric ton cement num ton metric ton lime num square yard curing coat square meter num hour test rolling num lump sum mixture design for chemically stabilized soils item num rock blasting num description num regulations on the use of explosives num product specifications num stabilization num blasting plan submittal num production holes num blasting test sections num safety procedures num presplitting num cushion blasting num sliver cuts num blaster num blasting consultant num preblast condition survey num vibration control and monitoring num airblast and noise control num hydrologist num flyrock control num public meetings num record keeping num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of using production and controlled blasting techniques to fracture rock or shale and to construct stable final rock cut faces .
controlled blasting refers to the controlled use of explosives and blasting accessories in carefully spaced and aligned drill holes to produce a free surface or shear plane in the rock along the specified excavation backslopes .
controlled blasting techniques include presplitting cushion blasting and sliver cut blasting .
if the designed cut slope is steeper than num and deeper than num feet num m use controlled blasting techniques even if the main excavation is ripped or excavated .
in rare instances the department will specify presplitting for num to num slopes .
for all slopes that do not require controlled blasting techniques rake excavate hoe ram or mechanically shape these slopes to obtain a neat and smooth appearance .
production blasting refers to the rock fragmentation blasts resulting from more widely spaced production holes drilled throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast line .
detonate production holes in a controlled delay sequence .
num regulations on the use of explosives .
perform all blasting operations according to all applicable federal state and local laws and regulations and the provisions of num .
these regulated blasting operations include but are not limited to the following a .
storage and handling of explosives blasting agents and detonators .
b .
use of explosives in character and amount as allowed .
c. storage plan including the type of magazine or explosive storage facility to be used on the job site .
d. record keeping placarding safe distances and all other requirements concerning storage .
e. obtaining and displaying magazine permits .
num product specifications .
be aware that delay elements in blasting caps may deteriorate with age .
aged explosives are known to deliver much less than the rated energy .
if evaporation occurs or if improperly mixed bulk explosives such as ammonium nitrate and fuel oil may not contain the proper amount of diesel oil .
low diesel oil drastically reduces the energy content of the explosive and commonly produces reddish brown or yellow fumes upon detonation even in dry blast holes .
use products conforming to manufacturers specifications .
ship the manufacturer recommended expiration dates with the products delivered to the project .
do not use any blasting product that is either excessively old or in a deteriorated condition .
cease all work until the products age or quality is determined .
num stabilization .
remove or stabilize rock along the cut face that is loose hanging or creates a potentially dangerous situation during or upon the completion of the excavation in each lift .
do not drill the next lift until this work is performed .
num blasting plan submittal .
submit three copies of the blasting plan to the engineer and one copy of the blasting plan to the office of construction administration for review at least two weeks before beginning drilling and blasting operations or at any time the drilling and blasting methods change .
if the drilling and blasting methods change submit four copies of the changed sections one week prior to the work .
the blasting plan shall include at a minimum the following a .
general details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls proposed to use for both the controlled and production blasting .
b .
station limits of proposed shots .
critical distances to structures .
place the preblast survey limits detailed in num on the rightofway or plan view sheets .
c. one plan and section view for each main excavation cut showing the proposed typical range of drill patterns including a range of values for the free face burden blast hole spacing blast hole diameters blast hole angles lift heights and subdrill depths .
d. a typical loading diagram showing the type and amount of explosives primers and initiators and location and depth of stemming .
e. typical range of initiator sequence of blast holes including delay times and delay system .
f. manufacturers data sheets for all explosives primers and initiators to be employed .
g. use the blasters plan form or the blasting plan forms in fhwa publication fhwahinum rock blasting and overbreak control .
adapt these forms to meet the project requirements .
in a subsequent submittal submit one detailed plan for all test sections .
submit or fax at least num hours before the shot .
detail the specific proposed amounts of materials and work described in num.a through num.g above on this detailed plan .
the blasting plan submittal is for quality control informational and record keeping purposes .
the review of the blasting plan does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for using existing drilling and blasting technology and for obtaining the required results .
if specified in the contract use an approved blasting consultant conforming to num to assist with the blast design and to ensure that the blasting plan is carried out on the project .
num production holes .
perform all production blasting including blasting carried out in conjunction with the blasting test section requirements of num according to the following requirements a .
drill the production blast holes on the patterns and to the depths submitted in the blasting plan and detailed plan as specified in num but not exceeding a depth of num feet num m. drill the production blast holes within two blast hole diameters of the staked collar location .
if the blaster does not drill the production holes then the blaster shall inspect the holes and review the drilling logs prior to loading the holes .
b .
deepen or cleanout blast holes if they are plugged or unable to be fully loaded .
check and measure blast holes before any explosives are loaded into any of the holes to eliminate any safety hazard resulting from drilling near loaded holes .
c. maintain a burden distance that is equal to or less than the bench height in order to control the blasting effects .
d. drill the row of production blast holes immediately adjacent to the controlled blast line on a plane approximately parallel to the controlled blast line .
drill the production blast holes no closer than num feet num m to the controlled blast line .
drill the bottom of the production holes no lower than the bottom of the controlled blast holes except by the amount of subdrilling used in the production holes .
do not exceed num num inches num mm in diameter for the production blast holes .
delay the detonation sequence of the production holes toward a free face .
e. maintain a stemming depth of at least num times the burden distance .
if water is present or when blasting within num feet num m of a structure use crushed no .
num coarse aggregate for holes less than num inches num mm in diameter and crushed no .
num coarse aggregate for holes num inches num mm in diameter and larger for the stemming material .
use the coarse aggregate gradations of nos .
num and num gradations on table num .
if gravel is used use crushed material with a minimum of two mechanically fractured faces on num percent of the material .
in other locations the contractor may use drill cuttings for stemming if it does not compromise the shot integrity .
f. take all necessary precautions in the production blasting to minimize blast damage to the rock backslope .
g. drill a line of buffer holes on a parallel plane adjacent to the presplit holes if presplit results are not satisfactory and production holes are damaging the presplit line .
drill the buffer hole num num inch num num mm in diameter .
drill the line of buffer holes approximately num feet num m from the presplit line and space num to num feet num to num m center tocenter .
do not load the buffer holes with more than num percent of the full explosive load that could be placed in a numinch num mm production hole .
delay the detonation sequence toward a free face .
num blasting test sections .
before commencing fullscale blasting operations demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed blasting plan .
drill blast and excavate short test sections to determine which combination of methods hole spacing and charge works best .
use a test section with lengths up to num feet num m for presplitting and num feet num m for production blasting when field conditions warrant .
do not exceed a production hole depth of num feet num m for the first test section .
begin the controlled blasting tests for presplitting with the controlled blast holes spaced num inches num mm apart then adjust if needed until the spacing for fullscale presplit blasting operations is approved .
a new test section is required to increase the spacing for the presplitting to a maximum of num inches num mm .
perform two test sections on every project .
use explosive depths greater than num feet num m for these test sections .
use one test section for controlled blasting and one test section for production blasting .
apply the requirements specified for controlled and production blasting operations to the test section blasting .
for controlled blasting and for production blasts within num feet num m of the finished slope do not drill ahead of the test shot area until the test section has been excavated and the results evaluated .
if the test shots are unsatisfactory revise methods as necessary to achieve the required results .
unsatisfactory test shot results include an excessive amount of fragmentation beyond the indicated lines and grade excessive flyrock or violation of other requirements within item num .
if the drilling and blasting methods do not produce the desired result of a uniform slope and shear face within the tolerances specified drill blast and excavate short sections not exceeding num feet num m in length for a presplit line or num feet num m for a production hole line until a technique produces the desired results .
the blasting consultant shall witness the test sections drilling and loading operations and be present when all test sections are shot .
the time spent witnessing these operations is considered part of the time required to observe the loading drilling and blasting operations as specified in num .
num safety procedures a .
warnings and signals .
establish a method of warning all employees on the job site of an impending blast .
define the limits of the blasting area where there is a flyrock danger .
control the access to the blasting area to prevent the presence of livestock or unauthorized persons at least ten minutes before each blast .
notify all employees in the area that a blast shall be fired with a one minute signal .
after the blast is over sound an all clear signal so all employees in the area understand that all blasting operations are finished .
one minute before the blast sound three long signals lasting five seconds on an air horn or siren .
for the all clear signal sound one long signal lasting at least five seconds to indicate that all blasting has ceased .
fill out the departments blast site security plan form caewnum .
b .
lightning protection .
furnish maintain and operate lightning detection equipment during the entire period of blasting operations and during the periods that explosives are used at the site .
if the lightning detection device indicates a blasting hazard potential evacuate personnel from all areas where explosives are present .
if a lightning detector indicates a blasting hazard perform the following num .
clear the blasting area of all personnel .
num .
notify the engineer of the potential hazards and precautions to be taken .
num .
terminate the loading of holes and return the unused explosives to the day storage area .
num .
if blast holes are loaded and would pose a hazard to traffic if detonated close the roads until the lightning hazard has passed .
num .
when the hazard dissipates inform the engineer that production blasting can continue .
c. check for misfires .
observe the entire blast area for a minimum of five minutes following a blast to guard against rock fall before commencing work in the cut .
the five minute delay between blasting and not allowing anyone but the blaster to enter the area is needed to make sure that no misfires have occurred .
during the five minute delay the blaster is responsible for going into the shot area and checking all the holes to make sure that they have detonated .
if any holes have not fired the blaster shall handle these misfires before others enter the work area .
halt the blasting operations if the methods being employed result in the required slopes not being in a stable condition or the safety and convenience of the traveling public is jeopardized .
d. misfire handling procedures .
if a visual inspection indicates that complete detonation of all charges did not take place proceed as follows num .
if the system was energized and no charges fired for electric systems test the lead wire continuity before inspection of the remainder of the blast .
for nonelectric systems check the lead in or tube to make sure that detonation has entered the blast area .
num .
if an inspection of the electrical trunkline or lead in tubingline indicates that there is a break in the line or if the tubing did not fire repair the system and refire the blast .
if the inspection indicates that the trunkline has fired and misfired charges remain the blaster shall do the following a .
exclude all employees except those necessary to correct the problem .
b .
close traffic if a premature explosion could be a hazard to traffic on nearby roads .
c. correct the misfire in a safe manner .
if the misfire poses a problem that the blaster can not safely correct the contractor shall call a consultant or an explosive company representative skilled in the art of correcting misfires to correct the problem .
num presplitting .
perform all presplitting including that carried out in conjunction with the blasting test section requirements of num according to the following requirements a .
completely remove all overburden soil and loose or decomposed rock along the top of the excavation for a distance of at least num feet num m beyond the end of the production hole drilling limits or to the end of the cut before drilling the presplitting holes .
b .
remove potentially dangerous boulders or other material located beyond the excavation limits .
c. drill the presplit holes num num inch num num mm in diameter .
d. control the drilling operations by using proper equipment and technique to ensure that no hole deviates from the plane of the planned slope by more than num inches num mm either parallel or normal to the slope .
e. extend presplit holes a minimum of num feet num m beyond the limits of the production holes to be detonated or to the end of the cut as applicable .
f. drill the presplit holes for any individual lift to a vertical depth of less than or equal to num feet num m. demonstrate that the blast can stay within the above tolerances and produce a uniform slope .
if more than num percent of the presplit holes are misaligned in any one lift reduce the depth of the lifts until the numinch num mm alignment tolerance is met .
g. if a cut height requires more than one lift or if there is a slope change for example when changing from a num slope to a num slope use a maximum numfoot num m offset between lifts for drill equipment clearances .
begin the presplit blast hole drilling at a point that allows for the necessary offsets and adjust to compensate for any drift that may occur in the upper lifts .
move the controlled blast line back if required to accommodate for these conditions .
h. the contractor may drill num feet num m below ditch bottom to remove the toe berm .
i .
before placing charges determine if the hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth .
exercise all necessary precautions so that the placing of the charges will not cause caving of material from the walls of the holes .
j .
drill hole conditions may vary from dry to filled with water .
use whatever types of explosives and blasting accessories necessary to accomplish the specified results .
k. use a maximum diameter of explosives that is not greater than onehalf the diameter of the presplit hole .
l. do not use bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil anfo in the presplit holes .
m. use only standard explosives manufactured especially for presplitting in the presplit holes .
n. if using a continuous column cartridge type of explosives with detonating cord assemble and affix the detonating cord according to the explosive manufacturers instructions .
furnish a copy of the instructions to the engineer .
o .
the contractor may make the bottom charge of a presplit hole larger than the line charges but not large enough to cause overbreak .
place the top charge of the presplitting far enough below the collar and reduce the charge sufficiently to avoid overbreaking and heaving .
p. stem the upper portion of all presplit holes from the topmost charge to the hole collar .
use stemming material conforming to the stemming specified for the production holes in num .
q .
as long as equally satisfactory presplit slopes are obtained either presplit the slope face before drilling for production blasting or presplit the slope face and production blast at the same time provided the presplitting drill holes are fired first .
if required to reduce ground vibrations or noise delay the presplit holes except that the hole tohole delay must be less than num milliseconds .
r. do not deviate the presplit slope face more than num foot num m from a plane passing through adjacent drill holes except where the character of the rock is such that irregularities are unavoidable .
measure the numfoot num m tolerance perpendicular to the plane of the slope .
do not encroach on the roadbed with any portion of the slope .
s. use the same diameter and drilled in the same plane and to the same tolerance as the presplit holes when using unloaded and unstemmed guide holes between presplit holes .
t. detonate the presplit line before detonating any production holes except when the closest horizontal distance between the production line and presplit line is greater than num feet num m. num cushion blasting .
if the horizontal distance from the cut face to the existing rock face is less than num feet num m the contractor may use cushion blasting instead of presplitting .
perform cushion blasting according to num except as follows a .
detonate along the cut face after the detonation of all production holes .
b .
between the trim line and the nearest production row use a difference in delay time of num to num milliseconds .
num sliver cuts .
for sliver cuts pioneering the top of cuts and preparing a working platform to begin the controlled blasting and drilling operations may require unusual working methods and use of equipment .
use angle drilled holes or fan drilled holes during the initial pioneering operations to obtain the desired rock face .
apply the hole diameter requirements for controlled blasting for pioneering work .
do not exceed a hole spacing of num inches num mm .
num blaster .
use an experienced blaster in charge of all blasting operations .
use a blaster with at least five years of proven experience in heavy construction or highway rock blasting and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting required by the contract .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed blaster .
include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which the blaster was responsibly in charge of the rock blasting .
list a description of the projects with details of the blasting operations .
list the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information .
obtain approval of the blaster before beginning any drilling and blasting work .
allow num days for the review of this documentation .
the blaster shall perform the following a .
control the ground vibrations by the use of properly designed delay sequences and by using allowable charge weights per delay .
b .
base the allowable charge weights per delay on vibration levels that will not cause damage .
c. establish the allowable charge weights per delay by carrying out trial blasts and measuring the vibration levels .
d. independently measure the vibrations and airblast at the closest structure using the criteria and limits set in num and num .
ensure that only trained and certified personnel set up the seismographs .
e. use appropriate blast hole patterns detonation systems and stemming to prevent venting of blasts and to minimize airblast and noise levels produced by the blasting operations .
f. carry out the trial blasts according to the blasting test section requirements of num .
g. report the vibrations velocity and frequency and airblasts on both seismographs before the next blast .
this report shall denote whether or not these numbers exceeded the allowable set by the vibration specialist .
h. modify num.a through num.f above as required to limit ground vibrations and airblast to the levels established by the vibration specialist and the airblast and noise control specialist .
i .
coordinate and review the blast hole layout and drilling operations .
the blaster blasting contractor or the contractor shall obtain insurance as specified in num .
present a certificate of insurance num days before the blasting operations begin .
num blasting consultant .
if specified in the contract retain an experienced and recognized blasting consultant to assist in the blast design .
the blasting consultant shall assist in the design of both the controlled and production blasting .
retain a blasting consultant with at least five years of proven experience in heavy construction or highway rock blasting design and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting design required by the contract .
the contractor shall not use a blasting consultant that is an employee of the contractor explosives manufacturer or explosives distributor .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed blasting consultant .
include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which the blasting consultant was responsibly in charge of the rock blasting design .
list a description of the projects with details of the blast plans and modifications made during the project .
list the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information .
obtain approval of the blasting consultant before beginning any drilling and blasting work .
allow num days for the review of this documentation .
the blasting consultant shall observe the loading drilling or blasting operations for at least num hours per week if these operations are in progress for num or more hours per week .
the blasting consultant shall witness the drilling loading and blasting of the first shot in each major cut .
at a minimum the blasting consultant shall witness the drilling loading and blasting of every numth shot on the project .
the blasting consultant shall write a written report to the engineer at least once a month detailing the blasting operations .
the time spent writing this report is not considered part of the time required to observe the loading drilling and blasting operations .
the contractor shall coordinate the blasting consultants hours with the engineer .
num preblast condition survey .
if specified in the contract conduct a preblast survey of any buildings structures or utilities within num feet num m or to the nearest structure up to a nummile num km radius of the blasting operations .
use a greater radius if the structures are potentially at risk from blasting damage .
the contractor shall use a survey method acceptable to its insurance company .
the contractor is responsible for any damage resulting from blasting .
if owners or occupants fail to allow access to the property for the preblast survey send a certified letter to the owner or occupant .
make the notification effort and the certified letter part of the preblast survey records .
submit a copy of the preblast survey records to the engineer before beginning the blasting operations at the critical blasting locations .
notify occupants of local buildings before the commencement of blasting .
num vibration control and monitoring .
if specified in the contract use vibration control and monitoring if blasting near buildings structures or utilities that may be subject to damage from blast induced ground vibrations .
the vibration specialist interprets the seismograph records to ensure that the seismograph data is effective in the control of the blasting operations with respect to the existing structures .
retain an experienced vibration specialist to establish the safe vibration limits .
use a vibration specialist with at least five years of proven experience in monitoring vibrations on heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting vibration monitoring required by the contract .
use a vibration specialist that is an expert in the interpretation of the vibration data .
the contractor shall not use a vibration specialist that is an employee of the contractor explosives manufacturer or explosives distributor .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed vibration specialist .
include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which the vibration specialist was responsibly in charge of monitoring the rock blasting vibrations .
list a description of the projects with details of the vibration interpretations made on the project .
list the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information .
obtain approval of the vibration specialist before beginning any drilling and blasting work .
allow num days for the review of this documentation .
the vibration specialist shall perform the following a .
monitor each blast with an approved seismograph located between the blast area and the closest structure subject to blast damage .
b .
use a seismograph capable of recording particle velocity for three mutually perpendicular components of vibration in the range generally found with controlled blasting .
c. furnish the data recorded for each shot before the next blast and include the following num .
identification of instrument used .
num .
name of approved observer and interpreter .
num .
distance and direction of recording station from blast area .
num .
type of ground at recording station and material on which the instrument is sitting .
d. ensure that the peak particle velocity of each component of the safe limits of the nearest structure subject to vibration damage is not exceeded .
e. the vibration specialist may elect to summarize and report this information monthly when the blaster measures the vibration and airblast with its own seismograph and reports the measurements on the vibration specialists seismographs .
f. establish what vibration limits are being used and explain why they are being used to the engineer before blasting begins near structures denoted in the preblast survey in num .
g. stop all operations if the vibration limits are exceeded until the vibration specialist reports to the engineer that no damage has occurred or will occur and that corrective action has been taken to lower the vibration .
num airblast and noise control .
if specified in the contract install an airblast monitoring system between the main blasting area and the nearest structure subject to blast damage or annoyance .
retain an experienced airblast and noise control specialist .
use an airblast and noise control specialist with at least five years of proven experience in airblast and noise control on heavy construction highway rock blasting projects and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of rock blasting airblast and noise control monitoring required by the contract .
use an airblast and noise control specialist that is an expert in airblast and noise control .
the contractor shall not use an airblast and noise control specialist that is an employee of the contractor explosives manufacturer or explosives distributor .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed airblast and noise control specialist .
include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which the airblast and noise control specialist was responsibly in charge of the airblast and noise control of the rock blasting operations .
list a description of the projects with details of the airblast and noise control monitoring made on the project .
list the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information .
obtain approval of the airblast and noise control specialist before beginning any drilling and blasting work .
allow num days for the review of this documentation .
the airblast and noise control specialist shall perform the following a .
use equipment of the type specifically manufactured for the purpose to make the airblast measurements .
hold peak overpressure below num db at the nearest structure or other designated location .
lower the overpressure limit if it proves too high based on damage or complaints .
b .
the airblast and noise control specialist may establish the peak overpressure limits higher than num db .
submit information explaining why higher limits are needed and are safe to the engineer before blasting begins near structures denoted in the preblast survey in num .
c. furnish a permanent signed and dated record of the peak overpressure measurements to the engineer immediately after each shot or use the same reporting procedures and time frames denoted for vibration in num .
d. stop all operations if the overpressure limits are exceeded until the airblast and noise control specialist reports to the engineer that no damage has occurred or will occur and that corrective action has been taken to lower the airblast .
num hydrologist .
if specified in the contract use a qualified hydrologist to monitor before during and after blasting or major excavation the quantity and quality of the water supplies within num feet num m of the blasting or major excavation areas .
the water supplies shall include but not be limited to all wells springs or other water supplies for human consumption .
retain an experienced hydrologist .
the contractor shall not use a hydrologist that is an employee of the contractor explosives manufacturer or explosives distributor .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed hydrologist .
include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway projects on which the hydrologist was responsibly in charge of monitoring water quality and quantities .
list a description of the projects with details of the water monitoring or modeling performed on the projects .
list the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information .
obtain approval of the hydrologist before beginning any major excavation drilling or blasting work .
allow num days for the review of this documentation .
the hydrologist shall perform at minimum all of the following a .
review the available public records including ohio dnr well logs to obtain background information and to identify the locations and geology of water supplies within num feet num m of the blasting areas or major excavations .
b .
examine private wells and public and industrial water supplies as allowed by property owners or occupants and measure water levels and well depths with a water level meter .
clean the water level meter before and between each use .
c. collect water quality data ph ecoli specific conductivity turbidity sulfate and iron from private wells and public and industrial water supplies to determine the major excavation work or blasting effects on the water supplies by using field instruments .
d. measure the water quality and water level for a minimum of two times per week for two weeks before during and two weeks after major excavation or blasting within num feet num m of the water supplies .
e. perform an associated field survey of the locations and elevations of wells and springs .
f. evaluate the need for piezometers to monitor the ground water conditions .
place and monitor the piezometers as necessary .
g. provide a monitoring plan report detailing the proposed activities frequencies testing and any recommendations for monitoring the water supplies as detailed in num.a through num.f above .
submit this report at least num days before beginning the scheduled blasting or major excavation .
h. provide a monthly report of the conclusions and results of the monitoring plan .
i .
provide a final report on the final condition or effect of the blasting or major excavation on the water supplies .
submit this report within num days after the blasting or major excavation is completed on the project .
j .
meet with the engineer in order to coordinate this work and provide input update the project schedule report progress including completed work and updated schedule and make recommendations .
allow for ten meetings .
the contractor is not responsible for damages to the above denoted water supplies if the blasting or excavation is done according to this specification .
the contractor is responsible for damage caused by negligence vibration or noise above the allowable limits flyrock or back break .
num flyrock control .
before firing any blast in areas where flying rock may result in personal injury or unacceptable damage to property or the work cover the rock with blasting mats soil or other equally serviceable material to prevent flyrock .
if flyrock leaves the construction site or lands on a traveled road the contractor shall cease all blasting operations until the blasting consultant specified in num reviews the site and determines the cause and solution to the flyrock problem .
before blasting proceeds submit a written report addressing the following a .
why the flyrock left the construction site or landed on a traveled road .
b .
what corrective measures were taken to prevent this from reoccurring num public meetings .
if a blasting consultant vibration specialist airblast and noise control specialist or hydrologist are specified in the contract make the consultant specialists contractors superintendent and blaster available for one day to prepare for and participate in a public meeting organized by the engineer and conducted by the contractor to inform the public about anticipated drilling and blasting operations .
the consultant and specialists shall be prepared to answer any questions dealing with the magnitude of seismic motion vibrations airblast overpressure flyrock and water problems that may affect the public .
num record keeping .
a .
daily explosive material consumption .
keep a daily record of the transactions at each storage magazine .
update inventory records at the close of every business day .
show on the records the class and quantities received and issued and total remaining on hand at the end of each day .
check the remaining explosive inventory each day and report any discrepancies that would indicate a theft or loss of explosive material .
b .
report of loss .
if a loss or theft of explosives occur report all circumstances and details of the loss or theft immediately to the nearest bureau of alcohol tobacco and firearms as well as to the local law enforcement authorities and the engineer .
c. daily drilling and blasting logs .
on a weekly basis provide a daily log of the drilling and blasting operations .
update the log at the close of each business day .
fill out the department or blasters drilling form to document the following burden spacing bench height hole depth and diameter and subdrill depth .
document additional information about the drilling such as voids mud seams air pressure loss and lack of cuttings .
the driller shall give this form to the blaster and the department .
document on the blasting log the number of blasts times and dates of blasts the blasting locations and patterns and all of the following information num .
station limits of the shot .
num .
plan and section views of drill pattern including free face burden blast hole spacing blast hole diameters blast hole angles lift height and subdrill depth .
num .
loading diagram showing type and amount of explosive primers and initiators and location and depth of stemming .
num .
initiators sequence of blast holes including delay times and delay system in each blast hole .
num .
trade names and sizes of all explosives primers and initiators employed .
num .
signature of the blaster in charge .
num .
use the blasters blasting form or the blasting report form in fhwa publication fhwahinum rock blasting and overbreak control .
adapt these forms to meet the project requirements .
the drilling and blasting logs are for quality control informational and record keeping purposes .
review of the blast log by the engineer does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the drilling and blasting log .
d. video recording of blasts .
record video of each blast .
index the recordings in a manner that permits easy and correct identification of each blast .
submit copies of the blast recordings on a weekly basis .
if submitting the video recordings as electronic data files furnish them in a video format acceptable to the engineer and capable of being viewed on the departments computers .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure presplitting by the number of square yards square meters along the slope face of the cut .
the horizontal measurement will begin at the first hole and end at the last hole of the cut and the vertical slope measurement will be along the sloped drill hole .
num basis of payment .
the department will not make separate payment for the production blasting operations .
payment for the production blasting is incidental to the other work items in the contract requiring blasting .
the department will pay for additional excavation volume resulting from the numfoot num m offsets at the contract unit price for item num excavation .
the department will pay for the removal of this material beyond the excavation limits under num .
the department will pay lump sum for all work for the preblast condition survey blasting consultant airblast and noise control vibration control and monitoring and hydrologist .
the same person or consultant may perform the preblast survey vibration control and monitoring airblast and noise control and the work required of the hydrologists .
the department may make intermediate payments based on the percentage of the work completed for preblast condition survey blasting consultant airblast and noise control vibration control and monitoring or hydrologist .
payment for guide holes is incidental to presplitting .
payment for all of controlled blasting is included in the payment for presplitting .
the department will pay for stabilization under num if caused by geology .
the department will not pay for stabilization if caused by the contractors blasting operations .
the department will pay for the placement and monitoring of piezometers according to num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard presplitting square meter num lump sum preblast condition survey num lump sum blasting consultant num lump sum airblast and noise control num lump sum vibration control and monitoring num lump sum hydrologist item num linear grading num description num materials num construction requirements num ditch cleanout num reshaping under guardrail num preparing subgrade for shoulder paving num grading tolerances num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of performing linear grading within the specified alignment detailed in the contract documents and within the grading tolerances .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish suitable materials as defined in num.r .
num construction requirements .
construct embankment and subgrade work according to items num and num .
when offprojectlimit embankment material is needed for the work an estimated quantity for item num borrow will be specified in the contract documents .
num ditch cleanout .
reestablish the crosssection of the existing ditch .
use the required embankment material to fill the eroded conditions .
the compaction requirements specified in item num do not apply .
num reshaping under guardrail .
reshape graded shoulders at locations where the existing guardrail is removed or where the new guardrail is to be erected to ensure a smooth drainable surface free of all irregularities .
num preparing subgrade for shoulder paving .
prepare the subgrade for shoulder paving by excavating the existing shoulder material to the depth shown in the plan .
trim unsound or broken edges of asphalt concrete or concrete pavement to a line established by the engineer .
remove any unstable material and shape and compact the subgrade .
compact the subgrade according to num .
backfill areas graded in excess of the depth shown on the plans with item num compacted aggregate at no expense to the department .
num grading tolerances .
do not encroach on stream channels impact wetlands or extend beyond construction limits rightofway or easement limits .
do not make alignment or profile grade adjustments that adversely affect drainage .
construct the work to the tolerances in num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure linear grading reshaping under guardrail and preparing subgrade for shoulder paving by the number of either stations or miles meters or kilometers completed and accepted along each side of the pavement .
the department will not make deductions for intersections and other gaps .
the department will measure ditch cleanout by the number of feet meters measured along the centerline of the ditch .
the department will measure borrow according to num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay according to num for changes or extra work that increases the haul distance by more than num mile num km to the work detailed in the contract documents .
the department will pay for additional quantities that increase the haul distance num mile num km or less at the unit bid price .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num station or mile linear grading meter or kilometer num feet meters ditch cleanout num station or mile reshaping under guardrail meter or kilometer num station or mile preparing subgrade for shoulder paving meter or kilometer num cubic yard or ton borrow cubic meter or metric ton num pavement repairs item num partial depth pavement repair num description num removal of existing pavement num placement of asphalt concrete num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of partial depth removal of existing pavement in areas exhibiting deterioration at the surface applying tack coat and placing and compacting asphalt concrete .
num removal of existing pavement .
the engineer will designate the location and limits of areas to be repaired .
provide the engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repair .
construct rectangular repair areas with dimensions as required to envelop surface deterioration .
unless otherwise specified extend repair areas the full width of a traffic lane .
remove pavement to the depth shown on the plans .
remove the pavement to the specified depth within the designated limits without loosening or otherwise damaging adjacent pavement .
dispose of removed pavement according to num .
trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face num inches num mm deep from the surface unless the repair is covered with an overlay within num days .
num placement of asphalt concrete .
apply num material to thoroughly coat the exposed surface and to fill cracks and joint openings .
place and compact approved asphalt concrete meeting the design requirements of the item shown in the pay item description in one or more lifts as necessary to finish flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
place surface course mixes at a maximum num inch num mm lift thickness and intermediate courses at a maximum num inch num mm lift thickness .
thoroughly compact the final lift using a type i pneumatic tire roller conforming to num .
as the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift .
ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic .
if the contract does not include resurfacing seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a num to num inch num to num mm wide strip of approved num material or num approved pg binder .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of partial depth pavement repair by the number of square yards square meters or cubic yards cubic meters of pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including aerosol spray paint tack coat asphalt concrete and perimeter seal .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square yard partial depth pavement repair num square meter num square yard partial depth pavement repair num square meter num cubic yard partial depth pavement repair num cubic meter num cubic yard partial depth pavement repair num cubic meter item num full depth rigid pavement removal and flexible replacement num description num removal of existing rigid pavement num correction of subgrade num placement of asphalt concrete num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of the full depth removal of existing rigid pavement correcting the subgrade placing and compacting asphalt concrete and restoring the shoulders .
num removal of existing rigid pavement .
conform to num except the last paragraph does not apply .
num correction of subgrade .
shape and recompact the subgrade as the engineer directs .
clean all vertical faces of the existing pavement and coat them with asphalt material according to num .
num placement of asphalt concrete .
construct the pavement replacement by placing and compacting item num num type num or num nummm material in two or more lifts according to num .
thoroughly and uniformly compact all lifts before the final lift using suitable mechanical compaction equipment operated over the entire replacement area .
thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to num .
as the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift .
ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic .
trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face num inches num mm deep from the surface unless the repair is covered with an overlay within num days .
if the contract does not include resurfacing seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a num to num inch num to num mm wide strip of approved num material or num approved pg binder .
after completing repairs restore the existing shoulders to the condition that existed prior to the repair work .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of full depth rigid pavement removal and flexible replacement by the number of square yards square meters of rigid pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the engineer .
the department will measure the quantity of full depth pavement sawing by the number of feet meters of full depth saw cuts in the complete and accepted work .
the department will not measure offset saw cuts .
the department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including aerosol spray paint removing pavement correcting the subgrade placing flexible pavement sealing and restoring the shoulders .
include the cost of removal disposal and replacement of pavement damaged adjacent to the repair area in the contract unit price for full depth rigid pavement removal and flexible replacement .
include the cost of any additional concrete sawing and removal depths less than num inch num mm greater than those shown in the plans .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard full depth rigid pavement removal and flexible replacement square meter num foot meter full depth pavement sawing item num pavement repair num description num removal of existing pavement num placement of asphalt concrete num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of removing existing asphalt concrete brick portland cement concrete or aggregate pavement courses shaping and compacting the exposed material and placing new asphalt concrete pavement or aggregate and asphalt concrete pavement courses .
the plans show details about the repairs and replacement material .
num removal of existing pavement .
the engineer will designate the location and limits of areas to be repaired .
provide the engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repairs .
repair the full depth of the pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans .
cut the existing pavement at the limits specified and as necessary to prevent disturbing or undermining the remaining pavement during removal .
completely remove pavement in the repair area to the specified depth without displacing undermining or otherwise damaging the remaining pavement .
dispose of removed pavement according to num .
trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face num inches num mm deep from the surface unless the repair is covered with an overlay within num days .
num placement of asphalt concrete .
shape and compact the exposed underlying material as the engineer directs .
before placing asphalt concrete clean all vertical faces of the existing pavement and coat them with asphalt material according to num .
place the replacement material in lifts as the engineer directs .
thoroughly and uniformly compact each lift using suitable compaction equipment as the engineer directs .
finish the final lift flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to num .
as the rolling progresses add additional asphalt concrete as necessary to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface .
continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift .
ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic .
if the contract does not include resurfacing seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a num to num inch num to num mm wide strip of approved num material or num approved pg binder .
after completing repairs restore the existing shoulders to the condition that existed prior to the repair work .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of pavement repair by either the number of square yards square meters or cubic yards cubic meters of pavement repaired in the complete and accepted work calculated using the dimensions established by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including aerosol spray paint and replacement and restoration materials cutting removing and disposing of existing pavement shaping and compacting the exposed underlying material placing new pavement and restoring the shoulders .
the department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by the pavement sawing or pavement removal .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard pavement repair square meter num cubic yard pavement repair cubic meter item num pavement planing num description num equipment num planing num surface patching num surface tolerances num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of planing asphalt concrete and disposing of the cuttings and if specified in the contract patching the planed surface .
num equipment .
use selfpropelled planing equipment that has sufficient power and stability to consistently and efficiently meet the requirements of num and the plans .
use equipment with either grinding sawing or milling type cutters .
ensure that the cutters are mounted rigidly to the carrier and are adjustable to control the depth of cut and crossslope .
use equipment with a suitable carrier wheelbase or with an automatic control system having an external reference .
ensure that crossslope adjustments or automatic controls are capable of producing either a variable or a constant crossslope as required .
for small or confined areas the contractor may use suitable supplemental equipment or methods approved by the engineer .
num planing .
make one or more planing passes as necessary over the designated area to the depth specified in the plans .
remove irregularities such as bumps corrugations and wheel ruts when required to establish a new pavement surface elevation or crossslope .
remove cuttings from the surface following each pass .
before opening the completed area to traffic thoroughly clean the surface of all loose material that would create a hazard or nuisance or would redeposit into the surface texture .
dispose of cuttings according to num .
implement effective measures to control dust pavement contamination and the scattering of loose particles during planing and cleaning operations .
if planing damages the adjacent pavement repair the damaged area to the engineers satisfaction .
ensure that the repaired area matches the adjacent pavement in terms of smoothness and mix type .
num surface patching .
patch areas of the planed surface that the engineer designates that have spalling or dislodged unsound pavement .
before patching clean areas of loose material coat with num asphalt material and fill with item num type num or num nummm or nummm material .
level and compact new material flush to the adjacent planed pavement .
num surface tolerances .
plane the surface free from grooves ridges gouges or other irregularities detrimental to the safe operation of vehicles on the planed surface .
if the contract specifies planing without resurfacing plane the surface to a smoothness of num inch in num feet num mm in num m. if the contract specifies resurfacing after planing plane the surface to a smoothness of num inch in num feet num mm in num m. match the surfaces at the edges of adjacent passes within num inch num mm .
ensure that the crossslope of the planed surface is within num inch in num feet num mm in num m of the specified crossslope .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure the quantity of pavement planing asphalt concrete by the number of square yards square meters .
the engineer will measure the quantity of patching planed surface by the number of square yards square meters .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for repairs due to damage caused by planing operations .
if the depth of the planed surfaces is increased by more than num inches num mm the department will compensate for the additional work .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard pavement planing asphalt concrete square meter num square yard square meter patching planed surface item num full depth pavement removal and rigid replacement num description num materials num removal of existing pavement num correction of disturbed subgrade num placing dowels and tiebars num placement of portland cement concrete num wearing course replacement num opening to traffic num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of full depth removal of existing pavement removing subbase where specified compacting the subgrade furnishing and placing dowels tiebars and mesh where specified placing consolidating finishing and curing new portland cement concrete to the level of the adjacent portland cement concrete pavement replacing wearing course where required and restoring affected shoulders .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num qc ms qc fs num curing materials type num num nonshrink nonmetallic grout num reinforcing steel num preformed elastomeric joint sealer num tiebar num or num dowel bars and basket assemblies num or num expansion shield anchors type a num use epoxy coated hook bolt wiggle bolt and coupling .
select and furnish grout from the qualified product list issued by the laboratory that firmly anchors the dowel or tiebar within num minutes .
a .
rapid repair concrete mix materials .
if the bid item requires rrcm rapid repair concrete mix do not use the concrete classes listed above .
develop a specialized mix design as follows use one of the following special rapid early repair admixture systems such as num .
num x num concrete system num .
rapid num num .
other manufactured systems acceptable to the director develop a rrcm concrete mix design that will achieve a flexural strength of num psi num mpa in not less than num hours and not more than num hours using num in x num in num mm x num mm beam samples conforming to astm cnum .
use cements conforming to num num or num use fine aggregate conforming to num.a use coarse aggregates conforming to num.b and num provide concrete with num to num percent air content .
during the testing of the rrcm mix design develop the mixs maturity curve according to supplement num s num using the actual materials that will be used on the project .
document and submit to the engineer the rrcm mix design results showing flexural strength time to strength materials sources of materials quantities of materials and batching requirements .
the engineer will have num days review the mix design and accept or reject .
num removal of existing pavement .
the engineer will locate and mark all areas for repair before the start of diamond sawing .
provide the engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repair .
saw cut the existing rigid pavement to the full depth at the limits of the area designated by the engineer using a diamond saw blade .
where there is an existing asphalt concrete overlay on top of the concrete pavement to be removed the contractor may make either a full depth saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay and the concrete pavement or make an offset saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay .
if making an offset saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay remove the overlay as necessary to provide clearance for the full depth saw cut through the concrete pavement .
the contractor may elect to make additional cuts to facilitate the removal of the pavement .
remove pavement in the repair area by the liftout method without damaging or undermining the remaining pavement .
after the repair area is isolated by full depth saw cuts drill holes through the deteriorated slab and install lift pins .
vertically lift the pavement out of the repair area .
remove loose debris left behind after liftout using hand methods .
dispose of removed pavement according to item num .
do not break the pavement and clean out the material using a backhoe unless the engineer determines that the liftout method is not feasible due to deteriorated pavement or existing asphalt concrete repairs .
if the bottom face of the adjacent concrete pavement is deteriorated for a height greater than onefourth num the thickness of the rigid pavement make additional full depth saw cuts as directed by the engineer along the full width of the lane or lanes to remove the deteriorated areas .
repair pavement damaged during the pavement sawing or pavement removal according to item num or item num .
num correction of subgrade .
after removing the pavement full depth and before installing dowels or tiebars shape and recompact the subgrade to the satisfaction of the engineer .
use concrete to replace any subgrade material removed as part of the rigid pavement replacement .
num placing dowels and tiebars .
drill dowel and tiebar holes using hydraulic electric or pneumatic percussion drills without spalling or damaging the existing concrete .
provide drills capable of independent adjustment of each drill shaft in the horizontal and vertical direction .
when drilling dowels use a device capable of drilling a minimum of three holes at a time .
for patches num feet num m or greater in length provide tie bars or wiggle bolts of the size and spaced as shown on the standard construction drawings along the longitudinal joints .
blow all drilled holes clean with oilfree compressed air .
maintain holes dry and frost free before grouting the dowels or tiebars .
pneumatically inject grout starting at the rear of the drilled holes and drawing a bead of material towards the front .
inject a sufficient amount of grout to fill all voids around the dowels and tiebars .
use a grout retention disc with a radius slot as shown in the standard drawings to retain the grout within the drilled holes .
place the grout retention disc on the dowels and tiebars at the end to be inserted in the hole .
insert dowels and tiebars in the holes and rotate the dowels and tiebars approximately one full revolution .
ensure a small amount of grout extrudes through the radius slot in the grout retention disc when the dowels and tiebars are installed .
hold dowel bars in proper alignment until the grout has hardened .
num placement of portland cement concrete .
do not place any portland cement concrete for rigid pavement replacement until the grout around the dowels and tiebars has hardened .
coat dowel bars with bond breaking material conforming to num.b .
place portland cement concrete according to num .
use forms when placing portland cement concrete against asphalt concrete or any unbound material .
cast each patch in one continuous operation .
consolidate the concrete around the perimeter of the patch and within the limits of the patch area using an internal type vibrator .
use approved internal type vibrators capable of visibly affecting the concrete for a distance of num inches num m from the vibrator head .
when using rrcm concrete install maturity sensors to measure the maturity of each days placement according to supplement num .
if rrcm placement from one location to another is delayed by more than num hour treat the delayed placement as a new days placement and install additional maturity sensors according to supplement num .
ensure that batch tickets of the delivered rrcm conform to the accepted mix design .
provide batch tickets in accordance with num .
screed repairs less than num feet num m in length parallel to the centerline .
screed repairs num feet num m in length and longer perpendicular to the centerline .
while the concrete is still in a plastic state test the surface for trueness and for being flush with the edges of the adjacent slabs using a numfoot num m straightedge .
place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline with half of the straightedge resting on the adjacent pavement and draw the straightedge across the patch to test the patch edges .
check areas within the patch length in a similar manner .
where the straightedge shows deviations correct all high or low areas exceeding num inch in num feet num mm in num m. recheck the concrete surface after making corrections to ensure conformance to the above tolerance .
make additional checks and corrections until patch is within tolerance .
texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement .
apply the liquid membraneforming curing compound at a minimum rate of num gallon num l of material for each num square feet num m .
num wearing course replacement .
trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face num inches num mm deep from the surface .
replace the removed asphalt concrete overlay with material as shown on the plans .
compact the material as approved by the engineer using any of the roller types specified in num .
apply item num tack coat to the replacement surfaces .
before opening the rigid replacement to traffic restore the shoulders to the original line and grade .
use either aggregate or asphalt concrete as shown on the plans or as the engineer directs .
fill the low areas and compact them flush with the surrounding shoulder .
seal the perimeter surface of the repaired areas by applying a num to num inch num to num mm wide strip of approved num material or num approved pg binder .
num opening to traffic .
do not open the rigid replacement to traffic until the concrete attains a modulus of rupture of num pounds per square inch num mpa .
for rrcm mixes do not open the rigid replacement to traffic until the rrcm attains a modulus of rupture of num pounds per square inch num mpa based on maturity testing .
if maintaining traffic in adjacent lanes schedule work in order to place the concrete in the prepared repair area within num hours after removing pavement .
in accordance with standard drawing mtnum drums may be used as a separator to the adjacent traveled lane for repairs num feet num m or less in length .
if unable to complete placement of the concrete in the exposed repair area by the end of a daily work shift fill or cover repair areas less than num feet num m from the traveled lane .
fill using a temporary patch material suitable to the engineer or cover unfilled repair areas num feet num m or less in length with a steel plate .
do not leave repair areas unfilled with concrete when work is suspended on weekends or holidays .
if unable to complete placement of the concrete in the exposed repair area before suspending work for a weekend or holiday or within the numhour time specified above fill the repair area with an asphalt concrete mixture or other suitable temporary patch material with a durable surface as the engineer directs .
maintain the temporary patches while they are in service .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of full depth pavement removal and rigid replacement by the number of square yards square meters repaired in the complete and accepted work .
the department will measure the quantity of full depth pavement sawing by the number of feet meters of perimeter full depth saw cuts in the complete and accepted work .
the department will not measure offset saw cuts .
the department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including paint developing and testing the concrete mix removing pavement by any method removing subbase for undercut replacement compacting subbase and subgrade placing rigid pavement including concrete necessary to replace removed subbase or subgrade furnishing and placing dowels tiebars and mesh performing maturity testing and acceptance placing maintaining removing and disposing of temporary patches and restoring the shoulders .
the department will not pay for additional concrete sawing and removal depths within num inch num mm greater than those shown on the plans .
the department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by pavement sawing pavement drilling or pavement removal .
the department will include tack coat in the cost of the asphalt concrete .
the department will pay for asphalt concrete according to item num item num or item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard full depth pavement removal and rigid replacement class ___ square meter num foot meter full depth pavement sawing item num bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavement num description num materials num equipment num removal of unsound concrete num preparation of patch area num bonding grout installation num placing patching material num curing and loading num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavements at spall areas adjacent to cracks or joints or other areas of the pavement as designated by the engineer .
this work involves removing all loose and unsound concrete and asphalt material patches removing sound concrete as directed preparing the surface applying a bonding grout if required reconstructing the joint or crack and mixing placing finishing and curing of the patching material called out in the pay item description .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to portland cement num fine aggregate num coarse aggregate no .
num size num curing material num airentraining admixture num quick setting concrete mortar num num equipment .
use a milling machine concrete saw jackhammers or other approved equipment to remove existing surface material .
provide oil and moisture free compressed air for cleaning and abrasive blasting the prepared area .
provide an onsite concrete mixer capable of mixing a minimum of numcubic foot num m batches of patching material .
provide chipping hammers not heavier than the nominal numpound num kg class .
num removal of unsound concrete .
the engineer will locate and mark all areas to be repaired prior to concrete sawing .
provide the engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline the areas for repair .
repair areas will be rectangular or square in shape with dimensions as required to envelope the surface deterioration .
saw the perimeter of all areas designated for removal to a depth of num inch num mm to produce a vertical or slightly undercut face .
make additional saw cuts as required to facilitate removal .
remove all unsound concrete all asphalt material and all obviously loose and disintegrated concrete within the patch area .
remove sound concrete where required to achieve the minimum depth within the patch area .
remove concrete by jack hammering or milling .
the minimum depth of any partial depth repair is num num inch num mm except at the perimeter saw cuts .
operate chipping hammers at an angle of less than num degrees measured from the surface of the pavement .
during removal of unsound concrete remove all pavement reinforcing exposed in the patch areas using a cutting tool or a torch .
num preparation of patch area .
before placing the patching material or before applying the bonding grout if used abrasive blast the exposed concrete surfaces to which the patching material is to bond until free of loose particles oil dust traces of asphalt concrete and joint sealer and other contaminates .
do not begin abrasive blasting operations until implementing reasonably available engineering controls to limit fugitive dust that are acceptable to the engineer .
conform to state regional and local government agency requirements regarding control of dust generated by the blasting operation .
remove all sandblasting residue with compressed air just prior to placing the patching material or just prior to applying the bonding grout if used .
for types b and c patching materials that do not use water as the activator perform additional surface preparation according to the patching material manufacturers recommendations .
recreate joints and cracks through or along the patch using a joint board that extends below the prepared surface and has a width equal to the existing joint or crack .
one hour after placing the patching material remove the joint board in a manner that does not damage the patch .
num bonding grout installation .
for bonding type a patches use grout that consists of equal parts by volume of portland cement and sand mixed with sufficient water to form a stiff slurry .
using a stiff brush or broom apply a thin uniform coating of grout to the prepared surface .
scrub the grout onto the dry surfaces of the prepared area to be patched immediately before placing the patching material .
do not allow excess grout to collect in low spots .
do not allow the grout to dry before placing the new concrete .
paint grout over all sawed joints between the patch and adjacent concrete immediately after completing the finishing .
for bonding types b and c patches conform to the patching material manufacturers recommendations .
num placement of patch material .
use type a b or c patch material as follows a .
type a .
provide patch material consisting of one part high early strength portland cement one and a half parts fine aggregate and one and a half parts coarse aggregate by volume .
add sufficient airentraining admixture to maintain an air content of num num percent .
add enough water to obtain the minimum slump practical for placing and do not allow slump to exceed num inches num mm .
mix the materials on site .
do not use readymixed concrete .
place the concrete mixture in the patch area while the bonding grout is still wet .
slightly overfill vibrate and strike off the concrete .
b .
type b .
provide patch material consisting of quick setting concrete mortar num type num or num .
mix and place the mortar according to the manufacturers recommendations .
add coarse aggregate as needed according to the manufacturers instructions .
place the concrete mixture in the patch area .
if the manufacturers requirements specify using bonding grout place the concrete mixture while the bonding grout is still wet .
slightly overfill vibrate and strike off the concrete .
c. type c. provide patch material consisting of a blend of quick setting concrete mortar num type num and selected aggregates with an activator .
mix and place these materials according to the manufacturers recommendations .
add coarse aggregate as needed according to the manufacturers instructions .
place the concrete mixture in the patch area .
if the manufacturers requirements specify using bonding grout place the concrete mixture while the bonding grout is still wet .
slightly overfill vibrate and strike off the concrete .
screed patches num feet num m and less in length parallel to the centerline .
screed patches over num feet num m in length perpendicular to the centerline .
while the concrete is still in a plastic state test the surface for trueness and for being flush with the edges of the adjacent slabs using a numfoot num m straightedge .
place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline with the ends resting on the adjacent pavement and draw the straightedge across the patch .
where the straightedge shows deviations correct all high or low areas exceeding num inch in num feet num mm in num m. recheck the concrete surface after making corrections to assure that the patch area meets the surface tolerance before the patching material hardens .
texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement .
num curing and opening to traffic .
cure type a patches according to num except allow the patch to attain a modulus of rupture of num pounds per square inch num mpa before opening to traffic .
cure types b and c patches according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavement type ___ by the number of square feet square meters of the exposed surface of all patches irrespective of the depth of the patch repaired in the complete and accepted work .
if the actual measured area of a patch is less than num square feet num m the engineer will increase each such measurement to num square feet num m .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square feet bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavement type __ square meter item num diamond grinding portland cement concrete pavement num description num equipment num construction num final surface finish num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of diamond grinding and texturing portland cement concrete pavement longitudinally to substantially eliminate joint and crack faulting and to restore proper riding characteristics to the pavement surface .
num equipment .
provide grinding equipment that is a power driven selfpropelled machine that is specifically designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades or diamond impregnated cylinder rings .
mount the blades or cylinder rings on an arbor head .
provide a grinding head at least num feet num m wide .
ensure the equipment is capable of grinding the surface in the longitudinal direction without causing spalls or other damage at cracks joints and other locations .
ensure the equipment is capable of correcting the pavement profile and providing proper cross slope on the concrete pavement .
provide equipment with an effective wheelbase of at least num feet num m a set of pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine and rear wheels that travel and track in the fresh cut pavement .
ensure the center of the grinding head is no further than num feet num m forward from the center of the back wheels .
ensure the equipment is of a shape and dimension that does not encroach on traffic movement outside of the work area .
furnish and maintain a profiler conforming to supplement num for daily use during the grinding operations .
provide all necessary supplies to fully operate and graph the results of testing the ground pavement for smoothness .
the engineer will verify the profiler according to supplement num .
num construction .
the plans will designate the areas of pavement surfaces to be ground .
grinding of bridge decks approach slabs and roadway shoulders will not be required unless indicated on the plans or required to provide drainage .
perform grinding in a manner that eliminates crack or joint faults while providing positive lateral drainage by maintaining a constant crossslope between grinding extremities in each lane .
transition auxiliary or ramp lane grinding as required from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable riding surface .
ensure the operation results in pavement that conforms to the typical crosssection and the requirements specified for the final surface finish however it is the intention of this specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be eliminated and the overall riding characteristics be restored within the limits specified .
to accomplish the smoothness required grinding may not be required on num percent of the pavement surface .
during initial grinding operations use the profiler to test the pavement surface as soon as the concrete has been ground full lane width .
this initial testing is to aid the contractor in evaluating the grinding methods and equipment being used .
subsequent to the initial testing run daily profiles of each days grinding the next working day .
remove all grinding residue .
remove solid residue before it is blown by traffic action or wind .
do not allow residue to flow across lanes used by the traveling public or into gutters or drainage facilities .
num final surface finish .
produce a pavement surface that is true to grade with the ground area consisting of a longitudinal corduroytype texture .
ensure the peaks of the ridges are approximately num inch num mm higher than the grooves with num to num evenly spaced grooves per foot num to num per meter .
measure the finished pavement surface for riding quality .
produce a mainline riding surface which does not exceed an iri of num inches per mile num mkm nor any localized surface deviations in excess of num inches in num feet num mm in num m as measured with the approved profiler .
use equipment conforming to supplement num and obtain a profile and smoothness measurements using proval and supplement num .
the engineer will witness the testing of the pavement surfaces wheel paths .
the wheel paths are located parallel to the centerline of the pavement and approximately num feet num m from the center of the lane measured transversely .
maintain the alignment of the profiler with reference to the pavement edge at all times .
regrind any num mile num km sections with an iri greater than num inches per mile num mkm until the measured iri is less than num inches per mile num mkm .
provide the necessary traffic control and survey stationing for initial measurements or any subsequent measurements .
measure the entire length of pavement event marking the profile runs such that the data can later be identified when the profile sensors is within num foot num m of any bridge deck pressure relief joint approach slab or pavement not included in the grinding area identified in the plans or established by the engineer .
ensure transverse joints and cracks are flush with adjacent surfaces .
the engineer will visually inspect transverse joints and cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
adjacent sides of joints or cracks within of num inch num mm of each other will be considered flush .
ensure the transverse slope of the pavement is uniform to a degree that no depressions or misalignments of slope greater num inch in num feet num mm in num m are present .
use a straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline to measure depressions and misalignments .
straightedge requirements do not apply outside of area ground .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure diamond grinding by the number of square yards square meters of pavement ground and accepted .
the quantity of diamond grinding will be determined by multiplying the width specified on the plan by the total length of the diamond ground surface .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all work involved in grinding the existing surface removing residue cleaning the pavement and testing with a profiler .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square yard diamond grinding portland cement concrete pavement square meter item num load transfer retrofit num description num materials num equipment num construction num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of sawing slots across transverse cracks cleaning the slot injecting caulking filler placing a dowel or deformed bar in the slot and filling the slot with a patching material .
num materials .
furnish a one part silicone sealant which does not require a primer for bond to concrete and conforms to the following table properties requirements flow astm dnum num inchesnum mm maximum extrusion rate cnum method a num to num gramsminute tack free time num f num f num c num c astm cnum num to num minutes specific gravity astm d num method a num to num durometer hardness shore a cured num days num f num f num c num c and num to num r.h. astm d num num to num at num f num c tensile stress num elongation num day cure num f num f num c num c and num to num r.h. astm d num die c num psi num kpa maximum elongation num day cure num f num f num c num c and num to num r.h. astm d num die c. num minimum bond to concrete mortar briquettes air cured num days num f num f num c numcnum num psi num kpa minimum movement capability and adhesion num extend num and compress num no adhesive or cohesive failure after num cycles at num f num c shelf life num months from date of shipment from manufacturer num bond to concrete mortar briquettes molded in accordance with aashto t num sawed in half and bonded with a thin section of sealant and tested in accordance with aashto t num .
briquettes will be dried to constant weight in oven at num f num f num c num c. num movement capability and adhesion prepare numinch numinch numinch num mm num mm num mm concrete blocks in accordance with astm c num .
a sawed face will be used for bond surface .
seal num inches num mm of block leaving num inch num mm on each end of specimen unsealed .
the depth of sealant will be num inch num mm and the width num inch num mm .
subject sealant to movement in accordance with astm c num .
the magnitude of the movement will be as specified and the rate of extension or compression will be num inch num mm per hour .
furnish materials conforming to aggregate num.a.num curing material num type num dowel bars num or num deformed bars num or num bar chairs num or nonmetallic material preformed filler num patching material .
must meet the performance requirements of astm cnum table num rnum concrete material with the following exceptions and additions final set time astm cnum num minutes minimum length change astm cnum num days num maximum freeze thaw durability factor astm cnum procedure a num cycles or procedure b num cycles durability factor num minimum furnish patching material according to the departments qualified products list qpl mix prepackaged materials that contain all aggregates needed to produce the desired concrete as specified by the manufacturer .
for bagged cementitious materials that need additional aggregates grade the aggregate according to the patching material manufacturers recommendation except ensure that num passes the numinch num mm sieve and a minimum of num percent by weight passes the numinch num mm sieve .
num equipment .
furnish equipment to create slots that has a power driven gang type assembly consisting of diamond blade saws capable of sawing a minimum of six sawcuts at one time to the required dimensions without damage to the surrounding pavement .
furnish jack hammers weighing less than num pounds num kg .
furnish abrasive blast equipment capable of removing the saw slurry or other foreign material from the exposed surfaces leaving a clean newly exposed concrete surface free of spalls laitance and all contaminants detrimental to achieving an adequate bond .
ensure water blasting pressure with abrasives in the water is num psi num bar or less .
num construction .
the engineer will locate and mark cracks to be retrofitted .
provide the engineer with aerosol spray paint to mark the cracks to be retrofit .
construct num numinch num mm wide slots into the pavement to the required depth to place the center of the bar at middepth in the concrete slab .
ensure the slots are parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
saw the sides of the slots using the required sawing equipment .
make multiple saw cuts parallel to the centerline if necessary to properly remove material from the slot and to provide a level surface for the feet of the bar chairs .
chip out the concrete using jack hammers to create the slot .
do not operate jack hammers in a manner that causes damage to the surrounding concrete .
construct three slots on one foot num m centers in each wheel path as shown in the standard drawings .
do not allow traffic across the crack once the concrete has been removed from the slots until all six retrofit bars are in place cured and completed .
do not allow the tires of construction vehicles to travel on slots where concrete has been removed .
clean the sides of the slots by approved blast methods to produce a rough surface .
ensure any blasting operation does not damage the surrounding pavement .
do not begin abrasive blasting operations until implementing reasonably available engineering controls to limit fugitive dust that are acceptable to the engineer .
conform to state regional and local government agency requirements regarding control of dust generated by the blasting operation .
caulk cracks at the bottom and sides of the slot with an approved silicone sealant in order to prevent any grout from entering the crack .
apply the sealant with a pressure applicator that forces it into the crack .
place a num inch num mm thick preformed filler board on dowel bars to maintain the crack as shown in the standard drawings .
ensure the filler board fits tight around the dowel and to the bottom and sides of the slot .
maintain the filler board in a vertical position and tight to all sides during placement of the patching material .
ensure the filler board extends from the bottom of the slot to the surface of the pavement .
if for any reason the filler board shifts during placement of the patching material redo the dowel bar retrofit at no expense to the department .
ensure the bar chair firmly holds the bar centered in the slot .
obtain the engineers approval before using any bar chairs .
the engineer will reject any chair design that may allow movement of the bar during the placement of grout .
provide smooth dowel bars num num inches num mm in diameter and num inches num mm long .
center the filler board on dowel bars .
coat dowel bars with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil as a bondbreaking material just prior to installation in the slot .
place an expansion cap on each end of dowel bars prior to installation .
ensure the expansion caps are tight fitting and made of nonmetallic material which will allow num inch num mm movement at each end of the dowel .
provide num numm deformed bars num inches num mm long .
use two chairs to firmly hold the bar in the slot during placement of the patching material .
furnish chairs that are a nominal num num inches num mm wide and center the bar across the crack .
ensure dowel bars vary no more than num inch num mm from parallel to the pavement surface and the centerline of the pavement .
just prior to placement of the patching material make one or more passes of an air blast to provide a dustfree clean slot to insure an adequate bond of the patching material .
mix place and cure the patching material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
consolidate the patching material using a vibrator approved by the engineer .
place the patching material in the slot and finish to produce a smooth even surface .
repair any damage to the pavement due to the contractors operation at no expense to the department .
cure the patching material for a minimum of four hours before placing any vehicle loads on the repair or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of retrofit dowel bars and retrofit deformed bars by the actual number in the complete and accepted work .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including paint sawing and cleaning the slots installing dowel chairs dowels deformed bars bond breaker material dowel bar end caps sealantcaulking material filler material and patching material .
the department will not pay for additional work or materials required due to shifting of the filler board .
the department will not pay for any additional work to repair damage to the pavement caused by the contractor .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows item unit description num each retrofit dowel bar num each retrofit deformed bar num bases item num asphalt concrete base num description num composition num mixing num spreading and finishing num spreading and surface tolerances num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a base course of aggregate and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface .
the requirements of item num apply except as modified by this specification .
num composition .
furnish aggregate for the mix that conforms to the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num submit for omms approval the desired percentage of the aggregate passing the no .
num num mm sieve and blend of individual components .
the contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to num .
omm will establish the required binder content within a range of num to num percent .
do not make changes in these jmf values due to unsatisfactory results or other conditions except as authorized by omm .
obtain a new jmf approval for any desired change to an existing jmf .
num mixing .
if using a batch plant use screens with openings of sizes that result in a reasonably balanced separation of the dried and heated aggregate into a minimum of two bins .
num spreading and finishing .
ensure that the maximum compacted depth of any one layer is num inches num mm .
ensure that the temperature of the mixture when delivered to the paver is a minimum of num f num c. ensure the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in compacting the mixture .
num spreading and surface tolerances .
do not exceed num inch num mm in surface variation from the testing edge of a numfoot num m straightedge .
if using item num asphalt concrete base as a subbase for a rigid pavement or base do not exceed a variation of num inch num mm .
correct variations in excess of slope or surface tolerances by adding or removing material in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
the contractor may use asphalt concrete approved by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities complete in place at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard asphalt concrete base cubic meter item num asphalt concrete base num description num composition num mixing num spreading and finishing num spreading and surface tolerances num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a base course of aggregate and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface .
the requirements of item num apply except as modified by this specification .
num composition a .
general .
furnish a mixture that conforms to the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num num to num num inch num mm num num to num num inch num mm num num to num num inch num mm num num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num provide aggregate to retain a minimum of num percent of the material on each of these sieves .
this requirement applies to the gradation of the jmf and the mix production according to item num .
in the design of the asphalt concrete base the requirements of item num apply except as follows the contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to num .
should problems with proper coating or other material issues related to the use of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement or reclaimed asphalt shingles be evident omm may restrict the allowable percentage of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement to the reduced limits shown in tables num and num or may eliminate use of reclaimed asphalt shingles .
in this case the virgin binder content will be adjusted by omm .
add hydrated lime in the dry form at a rate of num percent by the dry weight of aggregate for asphalt concrete base if antistrip additive is required and hydrated lime is used .
design the asphalt concrete base to yield num percent air voids and the following properties property acceptable range of values minimum maximum binder content note num numtotal stability lb n num blow num num flow num mm num blow num voids in mineral aggregate num note num see tables in num use equipment that meets the requirements of a level num laboratory as specified in supplement num .
ensure that the following equipment is designed and manufactured according to astm dnum to prepare and test a marshall specimen with a numinch num mm diameter and a num num inch num num mm height num .
specimen mold assembly num .
specimen extractor num .
compaction hammer .
num .
compaction pedestal specimen mold holder .
num .
marshall test apparatus .
produce batches of asphalt concrete base in the amount that will result in a compacted specimen num num inch num num mm in height .
this amount is about num grams .
b. compaction of specimens .
fill the mold with asphalt concrete base by placing approximately onehalf of the batch in the mold and spading it vigorously with a heated spatula or trowel num times around the perimeter and ten times over the interior .
place the second half of the batch in the mold and spade the mixture in the same manner .
compact the specimen on both sides with num blows .
c. stability correlation ratios .
convert measured stability values for specimens that depart from the standard numinch num mm thickness to an equivalent numinch num mm value by multiplying the stability value by the appropriate correlation ratio as follows approximate thickness of specimen inches mm correlation ratio num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mixing .
conform to the requirements of num .
num spreading and finishing .
ensure that the compacted depth of any one layer is a minimum of num inches num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm .
if the plan thickness is num inches num mm num mm and district testing confirms the jmf and mixture production has num passing the num inch num mm sieve the num may be placed in two lifts if requested by the contractor .
one lift of plan thickness will be required if top size aggregate dragging occurs .
ensure that the temperature of the mixture when delivered to the paver is a minimum of num f num c. ensure the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in compacting the mixture .
num spreading and surface tolerances .
conform to the requirements of num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities complete in place at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard asphalt concrete base cubic meter item num aggregate base num description num materials num before spreading num spreading num compaction num finished surface num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing and compacting one or more courses of aggregate on a prepared surface including furnishing and incorporating all water required for compaction .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num .
num before spreading .
sample the material stockpile according to astm dnum to determine the initial moisture content to be used for compaction .
create the moisturedensity curve according to aashto t num method c to determine the optimum moisture content .. for projects when the total volume of material is less than num cubic yards num mnum the optimum moisture content may be obtained from a moisturedensity curve that was performed on the material within num year prior to the date of placement .
submit moisturedensity test results to the engineer .
use material that has reasonably uniform moisture content .
ensure the moisture content is not less than num percent below the optimum moisture content before spreading .
add water to the stockpile if necessary to meet this moisture requirement .
handle the material in a manner to minimize segregation .
if segregation occurs thoroughly mix or regrade the stockpile .
num spreading .
spread the material on the prepared surface .
do not use frozen material and do not spread on frozen surfaces .
do not exceed a compacted lift thickness of num inches num mm when using vibratory rollers with effective weights greater than num tons num metric tons .
do not exceed a compacted lift thickness of num inches num mm when using vibratory rollers with effective weights from num to num tons num to num metric tons .
do not exceed a maximum compacted lift thickness of num inches num mm when these vibratory rollers are not used .
the effective weight of a vibratory roller is the weight plus the centrifugal force from vibration .
submit documentation from the manufacturer that shows the vibratory roller meets the minimum effective weight requirements .
place the material in two or more approximately equal lifts when the specified compacted thickness exceeds the maximum allowed .
place the material with selfpropelled spreading machines capable of placing the material true to line and grade .
spreading machines such as spreader boxes or pavers are allowed .
do not use graders or dozers without spreader boxes to spread the material except for areas described in the next paragraph .
spread the material such that it minimizes segregation and requires minimal blading or manipulation .
the department may perform inplace gradation testing in areas that are visually segregated according to supplement num .
the contractor may use handplacing methods dozers or graders when the total area of the material is num square yards num m or less or in small areas where selfpropelled spreading machines are impractical .
small areas include lane widths less than num feet num m or lengths less than num feet num m. the department will not take inplace gradation tests in these small areas .
the department may test for inplace gradation after spreading but before compaction testing according to supplement num .
num compaction .
add water or dry the material to bring it to within num percent of the optimum moisture content before compacting .
maintain the moisture content within this range during all compaction operations .
the engineer will determine the percentage of moisture to apply or to be dried from the material .
uniformly apply the water or dry the material throughout the lift and in a manner that does not soften or disturb the lower courses .
reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable during the compaction operation .
compact each lift of material immediately after spreading .
use rollers that correspond with the lift thickness as described in num .
the contractor may use lighter rollers or vibratory equipment in small areas as specified in num or when heavier rollers are not practical .
approved compaction equipment may consist of vibratory rollers static rollers or vibratory equipment .
at the beginning of the compaction operation construct a test section according to supplement num .
use a minimum compactive effort of eight passes to construct the test section .
use and adjust the vibration on the vibratory rollers to maximize the density and stability .
construct a new test section when the material changes or when the supporting materials change appreciably .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the engineer will perform all compaction tests according to supplement num .
the engineer will use num percent of the test section maximum dry density for acceptance of the production material .
use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to obtain the test section maximum dry density for the production material .
at a minimum use eight passes in the production area .
the engineer may reduce the minimum passes if the passes are detrimental to compaction .
the engineer may check the production material density before or after the finishing operations .
maintain the surface of each lift during the compaction operations in such a manner that the surface texture is reasonably uniform and the material is firmly keyed .
cover the aggregate base with the next layer of pavement before the end of the construction season .
if the aggregate base is not covered up then assume all liability for contamination of damage to and instability of the base subgrade and underdrains .
provide drainage and maintain the material according to num.a .
num finished surface .
ensure that the finished surface does not vary more than num inch num mm from a numfoot num m straightedge parallel to the centerline or more than num inch num mm from a template conforming to the required crosssection .
furnish straightedges templates or other devices satisfactory to the engineer and check the surface for conformance with these requirements .
do not construct the aggregate base at a consistent depth below the required minimum compacted depth thickness .
when the depth is found to be less than the required depth provide the engineer with a written corrective action plan for approval .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure aggregate base by the number of cubic yards cubic meters computed from the profile grade and typical sections compacted in place .
where variable depth is specified the department will measure the number of cubic yards cubic meters of aggregate base by converting from weight using the following conversion factors table num material conversion factor crushed stone num lbyd num kgm crushed gravel num lbyd num kgm crushed slag num less than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm num to num lbft num to num kgm num lbyd num kgm more than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm granulated slag num lbyd num kgm num based on average dry rodded weight of standard size of slag aggregates on record at the laboratory .
the conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights .
these numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of no .
num num or num gradation .
the department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the original source .
the department will verify that the moisture content of the delivered material is less than num percent above saturated surface dry ssd .
if the moisture content is greater than num percent above ssd then the department will calculate the number of cubic yards cubic meters based on the dry density and dry weight .
the department will determine the pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meter for aggregate mixtures by using num percent of the test section maximum dry density obtained in num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard aggregate base cubic meter item num portland cement concrete base num description num construction num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a portland cement concrete base on a prepared surface .
num construction .
the requirements of item num apply except as follows .
do not comply with the requirements of num .
provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes .
dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located within num feet num m of a pressure relief joint .
do not place construction joints within num feet num m of another parallel joint .
modify the curing membrane application rate specified in num to num square feet per gallon num ml of treated pavement surface .
produce a final surface with a uniform gritty longitudinal or transverse texture using a broom drag in either direction .
ensure that pavement surface variations do not exceed num inch in num feet num mm in num m. impressing station numbers into the plastic concrete as specified in num is not required .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure concrete base by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted in place .
the width equals the base width shown on the typical cross section of the plans plus additional widening as the engineer directs in writing .
the department will field measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num basis of payment .
for base found deficient in thickness the department will pay a reduced price according to num.a .
the department will not make additional payment over the contract unit price for any base with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
for base found deficient in strength the department will pay a reduced price according to num.b and table num .
use the determination and pay procedures for non qcqa items .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows .
item unit description num square yard concrete base square meter item num rubblize and roll num description num materials num equipment num construction details num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of rubblizing and rolling reinforced concrete pavement before placing an asphalt concrete pavement .
num materials .
furnish filler aggregate conforming to item num .
num equipment .
use a selfcontained and selfpropelled unit of either the resonant frequency type or the multiple head breaker type for rubblizing the concrete pavement .
if using a resonant frequency unit ensure that it is capable of producing low amplitude numpoundforce num n blows at a rate of not less than num blows per second .
if using a multiple head breaker unit ensure that it has the capability of rubblizing the full numfoot num m lane width in a single pass .
ensure the breaking head consists of num to num hammers each weighing num to num pounds num to num kg .
attach each hammer to a hydraulic lift cylinder that operates as an independent unit develops num to num footpounds num to num j of energy depending on lift height selected cycles at a rate of num to num impacts per minute and has a maximum lift height of num inches num m. use a vibratory steel wheel roller having a total weight of not less than num tons num metric tons .
num construction details .
make a full depth saw cut or cut load transfer devices at joints on ramps or mainline where the rubblizing abuts concrete pavement or approach slabs that are to remain in place permanently or temporarily for maintenance of traffic .
before the rubblizing operations begin the engineer will designate a test section .
rubblize the test section according to this specification .
after rubblizing excavate a test pit where the engineer designates to check for proper particle size throughout the thickness of the concrete .
fill in the test pit using the excavated material and additional filler aggregate as necessary .
compact the test pit as part of the rolling operation .
excavate at least one test pit at the location designated by the engineer for each production day or every num square yards num mnum whichever is greater .
adjust the rubblizing procedure to maintain the proper particle sizes .
control the operating speed of the rubblizing equipment such that num of the rubblized particles above the reinforcing steel are reduced to num inches num mm in their largest dimension num of the rubblized particles below the reinforcing steel do not exceed num inches num mm in their largest dimension and no particles exceed num inches num mm in their largest dimension .
before placing the initial asphalt concrete course compact the rubblized pavement with two passes of the vibratory roller .
operate the roller in the vibratory mode and at a speed not to exceed num feet num m per second .
leave steel reinforcement in place in the rubblized pavement .
however cut off any exposed steel reinforcement below the surface and remove it from the site .
fill depressions num inch num mm or greater in depth compared to the immediate surrounding area resulting from the rubblizing the compactive effort or the steel reinforcement removal with the filler aggregate .
strike off excess aggregate level with the surrounding area .
compact filled depressions with the same roller and compactive effort previously described .
do not allow traffic on the rubblized pavement before the asphalt concrete base and intermediate courses are in place .
do not allow more than num hours to elapse between rubblizing the pavement and placing the initial asphalt concrete course .
however in the event of rain the engineer may waive this time limitation to allow sufficient time for the rubblized pavement to dry to the engineers satisfaction .
if the engineer waives the time limitation cease rubblizing the pavement until the engineer allows paving to resume .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure rubblize and roll by the number of square yards square meters .
the engineer will use the width of the concrete pavement prior to rubblizing and will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
the department will measure the filler aggregate by the number of cubic yards cubic meters furnished placed and compacted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard rubblize and roll square meter num cubic yard filler aggregate cubic meter item num cracking and seating non reinforced concrete pavement num description num equipment num construction details num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of cracking and seating nonreinforced concrete pavement or concrete base before placing an asphalt concrete pavement .
num equipment .
use devices for cracking the concrete capable of producing the desired crack pattern without extensive spalling or excessive shattering .
extensive spalling is spalling over num num inches num mm in depth .
do not use whiphammers .
use watering equipment capable of wetting the cracked surface uniformly to reveal the crack pattern .
use a numton num metric tons pneumatic tire roller conforming to the requirements of item num for seating the cracked concrete slabs .
use pneumatic tire towing equipment capable of moving the roller forward and backward along predetermined lines .
num construction details .
demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction the ability of the selected equipment and procedures to produce cracking of acceptable quality by cracking at least three but no more than five concrete slabs .
when cracking the test slabs furnish and apply water to dampen the cracked concrete to enhance visual determination of the cracking pattern .
in addition to num provide positive provision to contain any flying debris during cracking operations .
crack concrete into nominal num numfoot num num m segments .
in the event panels are already cracked into segments crack these segments further into nominally equalsized square or rectangular pieces having longitudinal and transverse dimensions not more than num feet num m and not less than num feet num m wherever feasible .
do not allow the cracking equipment to impact the slabs within num foot num m of another break line joint or the edge of the concrete .
furnish and apply water to a check section of three to five slabs at least once each day to verify that a satisfactory crack pattern is being maintained .
make adjustments to the energy or striking pattern when the engineer deems it necessary based on the check sections .
roll the cracked concrete until the concrete pieces are firmly seated .
perform rolling with at least two coverages as specified in item num .
the engineer will determine the maximum number of coverages of the roller on the test sections to ensure seating without damage to the concrete .
before placing the asphalt concrete remove all loose pieces of broken concrete that are not firmly seated .
repair all voids such as spalls removed loose pieces joints or cracks that in the engineers opinion will make uniform compaction of the first asphalt concrete course difficult .
repair voids by applying num tack coat filling with asphalt concrete and compacting as directed by the engineer .
do not allow traffic on the cracked concrete before the asphalt concrete base and intermediate courses are in place .
num method of measurement .
the engineer will measure the area of nonreinforced concrete pavement or concrete base satisfactorily cracked and seated in square yards square meters .
the engineer will use the width of the concrete pavement prior to cracking and will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num basis of payment .
include the cost of all crack pattern test and check sections including water and for repairing of joint cracks spalls and voids in the contract unit price for cracking and seating nonreinforced concrete pavement .
the department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract price as follows .
item unit description num square yard cracking and seating non reinforced concrete pavement square meter num flexible pavement item num asphalt concrete pavementsgeneral num description num mix design and quality control num materials num reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement and reclaimed asphalt shingles num mixing plants num weather limitations num notification num asphalt binder num aggregate preparation num mixing num hauling num spreading equipment num rollers num conditioning existing surface num spreading finishing and night work num compaction num joints num asphalt binder compatibility num spreading and surface tolerances num asphalt binder price adjustment num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this specification is applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and amount of asphalt binder or pavement use .
deviations from these general requirements are covered in the specific requirements for each type according to the appropriate contract item or items .
work consists of one or more courses of asphalt concrete constructed on a prepared foundation .
the asphalt concrete consists of a mixture of graded aggregate and specified type and grade of asphalt binder .
control all production processes to assure the engineer that the mixture delivered to the paving site is uniform in composition conforms to the specification requirements and that the placed mixture is free of any defect ex .
segregation tenderness lack of mixture and texture uniformity raveling flushing rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control at project completion .
the asphalt concrete pavement thickness shown on the plans or stated in the proposal is for exclusive use in calculating the weight required to be placed per unit of surface area .
num mix design and quality control .
use an approved job mix formula jmf .
the quality control and acceptance requirements of item num apply unless otherwise specified .
if required to perform the mix design or quality control provide a laboratory and personnel meeting the requirements of supplement num to perform mix design and quality control tests .
calibrate asphalt content nuclear gauges according to supplement num using personnel with a minimum level num approval according to supplement num .
mix and test the calibration verification sample with a department employee present .
provide and dispose of the solvent used for cleaning the asphalt content nuclear gauge pans .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to asphalt binder asphalt concrete num num num asphalt material num num ssnum num num or num aggregates base courses num aggregates intermediate and surface courses num mineral filler num sample aggregate asphalt binder asphalt material and mineral filler according to num .
if num percent of coarse aggregate in an asphalt mix design is steel slag num.e the contractor may include steel slag as a maximum of up to num percent of fine aggregate .
if a steel slag source causes bulking expansion resulting in flushing or material loss in asphalt concrete courses omm will place limits on the amount of steel slag allowed in a mix design .
bulking may be shown through testing such as astm d num or through field failure such as but not limited to flushing on newer pavement or apparent overasphalting in production .
the department may require the steel slag processor at any time to perform additional testing to verify steel slag properties .
potential pavement performance problems due to poor control of steel slag aggregate include bulking poor gradation and specific gravity control resulting in highly variable void properties excess soft pieces resulting in pock marks flushing etc .
take prompt corrective action if mixture delivered to the paving site is not uniform in composition does not conform to the specification requirements or is not free of any defect ex .
segregation tenderness lack of mixture and texture uniformity raveling flushing rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control as determined by the engineer .
the engineer will stop conditional acceptance of the asphalt concrete for failure to correct problems .
num reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement and reclaimed asphalt shingles .
provide reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement rap andor reclaimed asphalt shingles ras according to the following requirements when choosing to use them in a mix .
failure to follow these requirements will result in a rejection of the contractor qcp num restriction of any rap or ras use at the facility andor a change to unconditional acceptance at the facility .
job mix formula .
the contractor may use a blend of new materials in combination with rap obtained from verifiable department or ohio turnpike commission projects andor ras obtained from unused manufactured shingle waste or used roofing tearoff shingles as listed in tables num and num and as follows .
if the rap is not from the above sources or the source is unknown process and blend the rap into a single uniform stockpile test according to level num asphalt mix design requirements and obtain district testing approval for use .
obtain written approval from omm for use of unusually large old rap stockpiles of unknown content andor age .
include approved methods in the qcp for ongoing processing and testing of these piles .
ensure no foreign or deleterious material num num is present in rap .
all ras suppliers must be approved and meet the requirements of supplement num .
ensure that the jmf falls within the specified limits of the required mix item .
ensure the jmf submittal includes the percentages of rap ras virgin aggregates and virgin asphalt binder required for the mix item .
report all rap and ras test results including binder blend analysis in the jmf submittal .
identify the rap in the jmf submittal as to project origin and mix types .
identify the approved manufactured shingle waste manufacturer source or the approved tearoff ras processor in the jmf submittal .
determine rap properties and uniformity as follows .
determine the final rap gradation and asphalt binder content on a minimum of four separate stockpile or roadway for concurrent grinding samples all agreeing within a range of num percent for asphalt binder content and num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
if fractionated rap is used use a suitable sieve for determining gradation uniformity .
determine rap binder content from a centrifuge extraction test .
do not use reflux extraction or oven burnoff .
determine ras properties and usage as follows .
use no more than num percent ras by dry weight of mix .
when using rap and ras in combination use no more than num percent ras .
for design assume num percent available ras binder .
determine gradation and specific gravity according to aashto pp num section num or subsequent aashto applicable standard .
provide the required certification forms in the jmf submittal documenting that the ras meets aashto mp num section num and that ras from roofing tearoffs conforms to the epas neshap num cfr num subpart m and other applicable agency requirements for asbestos .
rap and ras usage limits and requirements .
process and use rap and ras as follows .
process and use rap by one of the following two methods .
note on the jmf submittal rap page which of method num or method num methods described below apply to the rap .
when using ras without rap apply the virgin binder requirements of table num method num .
use pgnum virgin binder in all num intermediate courses regardless of the percentage of rap used .
if greater than num percent rap is used in a jmf submittal use pgnum or pgnum virgin binder .
if num percent rap is used in the jmf submittal the contractor may submit a num gram rap sample along with a blend chart according to level num mix design procedures to determine the grade of virgin asphalt binder to use .
when using both num percent or greater rap and num percent ras in an intermediate or base course use pgnum or pgnum .
odot may request rap andor ras samples or binder properties at any time .
a .
method num standard rap .
include rap in a jmf submittal according to the standard rapras limits table num unless specified differently in the applicable mix specification .
for mixes that will contain up to num percent rap and no ras the jmf submittal is not required to include the rap except when a virgin polymer asphalt binder is used in a surface course .
for surface course jmfs having polymer asphalt binder only submit at num or num percent rap .
table num method num standard rapras limits asphalt mix application percent rap by dry weight of mix max .
ras usage num total virgin asphalt binder content min .
comments num polymer surface course num none num polymerized binder is virgin .
for nonpolymer virgin binder allow num max rap num surface course num manufacturing waste only num polymer or nonpolymer virgin .
num num intermediate course num manufacturing waste and tearoffs num any mix type used as an intermediate course .
num base course num manufacturing waste and tearoffs num omm will establish the asphalt binder content .
num base course num num manufacturing waste and tearoffs num a lower rap limit of num percent will be required if poor production mixing or coating is evident .
num no more than num ras by dry weight of mix rap processing for table num method numstandard rap .
for surface courses process rap to less than num inch num mm and place a num inch num mm screen on the cold feed .
for other courses place a numinch num mm screen on the cold feed .
ensure that the rap is the proper size to allow for complete breakdown in the plant .
if mixing is incomplete place a smaller screen on the cold feed .
b .
method num extended rap .
include rap in a jmf submittal according to the extended rapras limits table num unless specified differently in the applicable mix specification .
only use method num with counter flow drum plants or minidrum batch plant configurations meeting num .
for mixes that will contain up to num percent rap and no ras the jmf submittal is not required to include the rap unless a virgin polymer asphalt binder is used in a surface course .
for jmfs having polymer asphalt binder do not submit at num through num percent rap .
table num method numextended rapras limits asphalt mix application percent rap by dry weight of mix max .
ras usage num total virgin asphalt binder content min .
comments num polymer surface course num none num polymerized binder is virgin .
for nonpolymer virgin binder allow num max rap num surface course num manufacturing waste only num polymer or nonpolymer virgin .
num num intermediate course num manufacturing waste and tear offs num any mix type used as an intermediate course .
num base course num manufacturing waste and tear offs num omm will establish the asphalt binder content .
num base course num num manufacturing waste and tear offs num a lower limit of num percent will be required if poor coating is evident .
the virgin requirement of num does not apply .
num no more than num ras by dry weight of mix rap processing for table num method numextended rap .
process rap by means of fractionation or by additional in line processing .
include in the qcp additional methods and procedures to dictate how this is to be accomplished at plants .
specify documentation method for rap measurement .
fractionation is the process of creating separate piles of rap from one pile when split over a specific sieve or sieves .
test fractionated piles to show uniformity .
for additional in line processing only process rap from a uniform tested and approved stockpile by passing the rap over a double deck screen placed inline between the rap cold feed bin and the mixer .
use a num inch num mm screen for surface and intermediate mixes and a num inch num mm screen for base mixes .
do not use concurrent project rap in a stream process .
c. ras processing and usage .
include ras in a jmf submittal according to the standard rapras limits table num or extended rapras limits table num unless specified differently in the applicable mix specification .
when using ras without rap apply the virgin binder requirements of table num method num .
ensure ras is processed to have num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve and at least num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
ensure ras has less than num percent deleterious materials and num percent metals by weight .
do not blend ras from manufacturing waste and ras from roofing tearoffs .
ensure the qcp includes ras usage methods before using ras .
include in the contractor qcp what contractor requirements apply to the ras processor .
introduce and control ras in asphalt plants in the same manner as rap is introduced and controlled .
ras for base courses may be preblended with rap if using rate control equipment to ensure uniformity of blending and if satisfactory blend and production is achieved .
ras may be preblended with a small amount of virgin aggregate meeting num to minimize stockpile agglomeration .
include in the contractor qcp blending equipment type and operation and uniformity testing requirements for preblended rap and ras or ras and virgin aggregate .
other methods must be approved by omm .
rap and ras qc and management requirements .
maintain as part of the qc records the signed certification forms as required in supplement num .
always note on the daily quality control report how much rap and ras is actually being used .
apply a tolerance of num percent on the amount of rap used if needed for a quality control adjustment but do not exceed the limits of table num or table num whichever applies .
if this adjustment is not adequate for maintaining control of the mix submit a new jmf for approval .
do not apply this tolerance to ras .
include in the qcp methods to be used to meet method num and method num requirements above and the following requirements provide enough space for meeting all rap and ras handling requirements at a hot mix facility .
provide a clean graded base for stockpiles that does not collect water .
test blended rap and ras stockpiles to assure uniform gradation and asphalt binder content .
ensure uniform stockpile properties match the jmf submitted rap and ras properties unless the uniform stockpile will be processed into the asphalt plant using plant cold feed in line processing .
if the uniform stockpile will be processed into the asphalt plant using plant cold feed in line processing determine the processed rap properties for use in the mix design .
record in the jmf submittal both the uniform stockpile and in line processed rap properties .
if desired when applying method num standard rap requirements use concurrent department project rap in a stream process in place of stockpiling and testing for uniformity but do so in the following manner .
concurrent project rap must be taken from one existing mix type on the concurrent project or two existing mix types if both mix types are taken at the same time in one pass of the milling machine .
submit a new jmf for each existing mix type on the project or each milling pass of two types desired for use as concurrent project rap .
include in the qcp methods of validating rap properties when using concurrent project rap .
if these requirements are not met blend and test for uniformity and apply the stockpile requirements of this specification .
maintain in the plant lab and control room an up to date and dated site map of all tested and untested rap and ras stockpiles .
give each stockpile a unique identification and identify if ras piles are from unused manufactured shingle waste or used roofing tearoff shingles .
provide in the plant lab rap and ras properties for each uniform blended stockpile cross referenced with its identification .
in addition provide the date the stockpile processing was completed and the stockpile estimated size in tons .
provide signage at all rap and ras piles .
do not add to a stockpile once it is tested for uniformity .
provide signage at all uniform stockpiles to inform haulers that uniform piles are not to be added to .
stockpiles and processing methods are subject to inspection and approval by the laboratory at any time .
rejection of stockpiles can occur for the presence of foreign or deleterious materials lack of uniformity incomplete mixing in the asphalt mixture adding to piles or moving rap or ras in a way not traceable through the qcp records and methods .
omm will resolve disputes over acceptability of rap or ras .
num mixing plants .
the department will approve mixing plants before preparation of the mixtures .
schedule a date with the department for approval inspection to be at least num week before mix production .
do not produce mixtures for projects from unapproved plants .
general requirements for asphalt concrete mixing plants are specified in item num .
set the asphalt binder controls for the computerized plant at the virgin asphalt binder content of the jmf at all times unless change is authorized by omm .
asphalt mixtures may be produced using the warm mix asphalt method according to num except as restricted by specification .
num weather limitations .
place asphalt concrete only if the surface is dry and if weather conditions are such that proper handling finishing and compaction can be accomplished .
never place asphalt concrete if the surface temperature is below the minimum established in table num .
table num course thickness minimum surface temperature num inches num mm and over num f num num c num num to num inches num to num mm num f num c num to num inches num to num mm num f num c less than num inch num mm num f num c variable intermediate num to num inches num to num mm num f num c num instead of num f num c use a minimum air temperature of num f num c if paving on an aggregate base or subgrade .
in addition to the above surface temperature requirements do not place surface courses if the air temperature is less than num f num c. for any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder ensure that the paving surface is at least num f num c and the air temperature is at least num f num c. do not schedule the placement of any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder after november num regardless of pavement or air temperature .
num notification .
notify the engineer at least num hours before starting paving on a project .
after starting if paving operations are stopped for num week or more notify the engineer at least num hours before resuming paving on a project .
num asphalt binder .
heat the asphalt binder and deliver it to the mixer within the temperature range specified in table num .
do not use asphalt binder while it is foaming in a storage tank .
take samples using correct new containers from the binder line between the last piping tee and inlet into the plant unless a different storage method requires a different sampling location .
num aggregate preparation .
feed aggregates in their proper proportions and at a rate to permit correct and uniform control of heating and drying .
remove all aggregates in the plant that will produce a mix outside the temperature limits or that contain excessive moisture or expanding gases causing foaming in the mixture and return them to the proper stockpiles .
num mixing .
maintain the temperature of the mix at the plant within the range in jmf or according to the specification .
ensure the mixture is workable and temperature is sufficient for compaction at the point of placement .
the engineer will verify the required temperature of the mixture on arrival at the project site based on the temperature range in the jmf and heat losses in transit .
for batch plants after all of the aggregate is in the mixer add the asphalt binder in an evenly spread sheet over the full length of the mixer .
the mixing time is defined as the interval between the start of application of the asphalt binder and the opening of the mixer gate .
discharge all asphalt binder required for one batch in num seconds or less .
after the asphalt binder is added apply the mixing time determined by omm but not less than num seconds .
num hauling .
use trucks for hauling asphalt concrete that have tight clean smooth metal beds from which the entire quantity of mixture is discharged smoothly into the spreading equipment .
before loading apply a thin coating of an approved release agent to the inside surfaces of the truck bed to prevent adhesion of mixture to the bed surfaces .
omm maintains a list of approved release agents .
do not use fuel oil for this purpose .
drain truck beds after applying the release agent and before loading .
load trucks in manner to minimize segregation of the mixture according to the approved qcp .
do not clean out truck beds on the roadway ahead of the paver .
provide a location away from the roadway or off the project for cleaning trucks .
if there is excessive sticking of material in truck beds the sticking is in areas of the truck that would indicate excessive cooling of the mix front corners bottom etc .
due to a long haul and it is not resolved in a reasonable time the engineer will require an insulated bed .
the contractor may only make procedure changes for better mix handling at the discretion of omm .
equip each truck with a securely fastened waterproof cover of suitable material to protect the mixture from wind and weather .
at the request of the engineer remove covers before dumping into the paver .
if transporting hot asphalt concrete at prevailing air temperatures below num f num c or if the length of haul exceeds num miles num km insulate all truck beds to maintain workable mix temperature and ensure that all covers are fastened to exclude the wind .
do not exceed a distance of num miles num km from the asphalt concrete plant to the paving site except by specific permission of the department .
completely discharge the mixture into the spreading equipment and within num minutes of loading .
num spreading equipment .
use selfcontained spreading equipment of sufficient size power and stability to receive distribute and strikeoff the asphalt concrete at rates and widths meeting the typical sections and other details shown on the plans .
use spreading equipment that has automatic control systems that maintain the screed in a constant position relative to profile and crossslope references .
ensure control of the screed position is reasonably independent of irregularities in the underlying surface and of the spreader operation .
equip asphalt spreading equipment to prevent the segregation of coarse aggregate from the remainder of the asphalt concrete when the material moves from the hopper to the screed .
use means and methods approved by the asphalt spreader manufacturer consisting of but not limited to any combination of chain curtains deflector plates or other such devices .
the engineer will base final approval of spreading equipment on the demonstrated capability of the equipment to place the mixture to the required crosssection profile and alignment in an acceptable finished condition ready for compaction .
where the use of standard fullscale spreading equipment is impractical due to the size or irregularity of the area to be paved use specialized equipment or hand methods approved by the engineer to spread the asphalt concrete .
antisegregation equipment .
when specified provide a material transfer vehicle mtv with paver hopper insert a material transfer device mtd with paver hopper insert or a remixing paver specifically manufactured to eliminate segregation .
use paver hopper inserts with a minimum capacity of num tons num metric tons .
remixing may be done by the mtv or mtd in the paver hopper insert or by the remixing paver .
provide and operate equipment in a manner that does not result in physical segregation and limits temperature differentials to less than num f num c throughout the mixture .
use antisegregation equipment when paving intermediate and surface courses on all mainline lanes of the traveled way including express lanes collectordistributor lanes continuous center turn lanes acceleration deceleration lanes and ramp lanes .
on the first day or night of paving any jmf perform a test strip of a minimum of num ft num m in length .
notify the engineer a minimum of num hours prior to performing the test strip .
demonstrate to the engineer that the selected equipment is not physically segregating the mix and consistently limits the temperature differential of the mat surface measured transversely to num f num c or less .
document results of each test strip on department form cafpnum .
remove equipment or jmf that provides a mat with physical segregation does not meet the temperature differential requirement or both .
perform a new test strip any time placement equipment or jmf is replaced .
if the contractor is unable to produce a satisfactory test strip in two attempts per jmf cease paving and provide a written plan to the dca for approval prior to continuing the paving operation .
cease the paving operation in the events of equipment breakdown inability to consistently provide a mat free of physical segregation inability to consistently meet the temperature differential requirements or any combination .
do not resume paving until equipment is replaced with suitable equipment .
the engineer may allow paving to continue if an isolated area of mat temperature differential is in excess of num f num c. the engineer may require additional evaluation of the area to determine the acceptability of the material .
num rollers .
use only steel wheel and pneumatic tire types of rollers meeting the minimum requirements of the following tables .
conform to manufacturers specifications for all ballasting .
table num roller capacity roller type maximum capacity square yards per hour mhr tandem num num threewheel num num trench num per inch width num per num mm width pneumatic tire type i num num pneumatic tire type ii num num vibratory vibrating roll num per inch width num per num mm width vibratory static roll not vibrating num per inch width num per num mm width table num steel wheel rollers roller type threewheel tandem vibratory static trench total weight tons metric tons num num num to num num to num num to num num to num compression rolls pounds per inch width knm minimum num num num num num num num num table num pneumatic tire rollers type i tire size minimum num num in num num mm wheel load minimum num lb .
num kg average tire contact pressure minimum num psi num kpa type ii tire size minimum num num in num num mm wheel load minimum num lb .
num kg average tire contact pressure minimum num psi num kpa for pneumatic tire rollers use selfpropelled reversible units with vertical oscillation on all wheels on at least one axle .
determine the tire inflation pressure necessary to meet the specified minimum contact area and contact pressure requirements .
furnish the tire manufacturers charts or tabulations to the engineer for verification of the required inflation pressure .
check tire inflation pressure as the engineer directs and maintain it within num pounds per square inch num kpa of the required pressure .
provide rolls and wheels with the necessary accessories to prevent adhesion of the mixture and keep them properly moistened with water water containing a detergent or water containing an approved additive .
do not use excess liquid .
num conditioning existing surface .
clean the surface on which the asphalt concrete is to be placed and keep it free of accumulations of materials that would in the judgment of the engineer contaminate the mixture prevent bonding or interfere with spreading operations .
where approved subgrade or pavement courses previously constructed under the contract become loosened rutted or otherwise defective correct the deficiency according to the contract item or items involved before the spreading of a subsequent pavement course .
if a quantity of asphalt concrete is specified for use in spot leveling or patching spread and compact the material needed to effect the corrections as directed by the engineer .
if placing asphalt concrete against a vertical pavement face curb gutter manhole or other structure clean the surface of foreign material and apply a thick uniform coating of num pg binder supplemental specification num hot applied asphaltic joint adhesive or num sbr asphalt emulsion to provide num percent coverage .
num spreading finishing and night work spreading and finishing .
do not comingle multiple jmfs in the same asphalt paver .
spread the mixture at a rate calculated using the specified thickness and the compacted width of the pavement course being placed and the weighttovolume conversion factors established in num .
maintain the actual rate of spreading the mixture equal to the required calculated rate within the tolerance specified in num .
for pavement courses specified for leveling the actual rate of spreading the mixture may vary from the required calculated rate as approved by the engineer to accomplish the intended purpose .
for intermediate courses make the maximum compacted depth of any one layer num inches num mm .
spread and finish the mixture using approved equipment or methods such that compaction can follow immediately .
preheat screeds and extensions before placing any asphalt concrete .
use side plates sufficient to contain the mixture laterally during spreading .
use only screed extensions rigid or extendable having the same features as the main screed including but not limited to vibration heating prestrikeoffs and tamping bars .
when using frontmounted hydraulically extendable screeds at a fixed paving width use full width auger extensions and full tunnel extensions .
when using fixed screed extensions use full width auger extensions and full tunnel extensions .
do not allow a buildup of excess material in front of the screed .
where excessive buildup of material is not controlled the engineer will require paver changes to correct the problem .
ensure the paver operation screed screed extension and or mix design provide a mat prior to compaction that is free of texture inconsistencies shadowing streaking tearing pulling or other deficiencies .
take immediate action to correct the paver operation screed screed extensions or mix design .
the engineer may stop placement until corrections are completed .
use strikeoff platesstrikeoff extensions only on irregular areas such as mailbox turnouts driveway turnouts and other irregular nontravelled roadway areas .
the engineer may approve the use of strikeoff platesextensions on variable width shoulders if the use of a standard extendable screed extension with the same features as the main screed is not practicable .
perform supplemental hand forming and tamping where irregularities develop and where placing the mixture by hand methods .
take prompt corrective action if placed mixture exhibits any defect ex .
segregation tenderness lack of mixture and texture uniformity raveling flushing rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control and as determined by the engineer .
remove and replace or otherwise correct in a manner satisfactory to the engineer any portion of the pavement course found to be defective in surface texture or composition before or after compaction .
coordinate the spreading operation with the rate of production and delivery of the mixture to attain uniform continuous progress .
avoid erratic spreader operation due to irregular contact with the hauling vehicle surging in the feed and distribution of the mixture or other cause .
maintain sufficient control of the spreading equipment with regard to line and grade references so that the pavement course when compacted as specified is in reasonable conformance with the contract documents .
do not displace or damage bridge deck waterproofing membranes during spreading operations on the membranes .
do not allow traffic on the compacted mixture until it has cooled sufficiently to prevent glazing as determined by the engineer .
after completion of the surface course seal gutters with asphalt binder as directed by the engineer .
apply the material at a uniform width of approximately num inches num mm and at a rate just sufficient to fill surface voids .
night work .
do not start night work or carry on day work into night work without operating an adequate and approved lighting system .
night work is defined as work performed from num minutes after sunset to num minutes before sunrise .
operation of adequate lighting system consists of furnishing installing operating maintaining moving and removing night time lighting to illuminate construction work areas for night work .
obtain the engineers approval of the lighting at the beginning of the project and before starting the paving operation by measuring the luminance .
provide an illuminated zone around all operating machinery .
provide an illuminated zone of at least num foot candles num lux of lighting luminance in the immediate vicinity of pavers rollers grinding equipment material transfer vehicles etc .
and at least num footcandle num lux at num feet num m from this equipment .
provide an illuminated zone of at least num footcandles num lux of lighting luminance in the immediate vicinity of coring equipment and at least num footcandle num lux at num feet num m. position the light sources so they dont interfere with or impede traffic in any direction and do not cause glare for motorists or point onto adjacent properties .
provide a photometer capable of measuring the level of luminance on each night project .
take luminance measurements at a height of num inches num millimeters above the roadway .
obtain the luminance level any time requested by the engineer .
test the illumination levels on the site each time a change in lighting configuration is made .
replace nonfunctioning lamps immediately .
check the luminaires aiming daily .
clean the luminaires regularly .
correct any deficient lighting within one hour or the engineer will terminate construction activities .
when the total project includes more than one continuous lane mile including bridges of surface course paving in combination with night paving and no pay item for antisegregation equipment provide antisegregation equipment according to num for only the surface course .
no additional payment will be made for this anti segregation equipment .
num compaction .
immediately after spreading the asphalt concrete and adjusting any surface irregularities compact the mixture uniformly using rollers conforming to num .
do not use a spreading rate that exceeds the total of the specified capacities of the rollers in use .
however if compacting a mixture spread as an intermediate or preleveling course less than numinch num mm thick do not use a spreading rate that exceeds twice the total capacity of the rollers in use .
coordinate the spreading of the mixture with the required roller coverage considering the rate of cooling of the mixture as affected by lift thickness and environmental conditions .
complete the required roller coverage during the period of time in which the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in compacting the mixture .
compact base mixtures using a combination of both steel wheel and type i pneumatic tire rollers however in small areas compact these mixtures as the engineer approves using any of the rollers specified in num .
compact intermediate and surface mixtures using a threewheel roller in the breakdown position roller immediately behind the paver of the roller train however in small areas compact these mixtures as the engineer approves using any of the roller types specified in num .
compact variable depth courses using a combination of both steel wheel and pneumatic tire rollers however in small areas compact these mixtures as the engineer approves using any of the roller types specified in num .
for surface courses using a polymer modified asphalt binder give a copy of the jmf approval letter containing the design compaction temperature to the engineer before any mix is placed .
unless otherwise specified ensure that the mix temperature immediately before rolling is not less than num f num c if placing hot mix asphalt and not less than num f num c if placing warm mix asphalt according to num .
do not compact polymer asphalt concrete surface courses with pneumatic tire rollers .
when using pneumatic tire rollers ensure for any mix that surface deviations and deformations caused by the tires are removed with steel wheel rollers .
do not use pneumatic tire rollers if any resultant surface deformations can not be removed .
do not use vibratory rollers on courses with a thickness under num inches num mm .
if using vibratory rollers supplement them with threewheel or pneumatic tire rollers .
unless otherwise directed begin rolling at the sides and proceed longitudinally parallel to the centerline at a slow uniform speed .
after each coverage or complete round trip move the roller towards the crown of the road to begin its next pass overlapping the previous pass by at least onehalf the width of the previous pass .
on superelevated curves begin rolling at the low side and progress toward the high side .
where a longitudinal joint is being made roll the joint then follow the applicable rolling procedure .
continue rolling until full coverage of the course is complete and all roller marks are eliminated .
take care to prevent displacement of the edge line and grade .
where displacement occurs correct the area immediately in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
along curbs headers walls and in other areas not accessible to rollers thoroughly compact the mixture with hot hand tampers or with mechanical tampers .
on depressed areas the contractor may use trench rollers or rollers fitted with compression strips .
replace mixture that becomes loose broken contaminated or otherwise defective with fresh hot mixture .
compact it to match with the surrounding area .
num joints .
place the asphalt concrete mixture as continuous as possible .
set up joints at the proper height above the adjacent construction to receive maximum compaction .
where the edge of the new pavement is significantly rounded trim it to a vertical face before placing the adjacent pavement .
on projects where traffic is allowed to cross the edge of the new pavement lane complete the longitudinal joint of the adjacent lane or shoulder within num hours .
construct longitudinal joints using string line or other controls as a point of reference to provide a straight longitudinal joint .
prior to placing adjacent pavement trim any locations along the longitudinal joint that deviate horizontally from the point of reference .
maintain a consistent overlap of num to num num inches num to num mm on adjacent pavement when closing longitudinal joints .
where phasing for maintenance of traffic will not allow lapping cold longitudinal joints according to standard drawing bpnum provide a minimum of num inches num mm offset between cold joints for each course placed .
form hot longitudinal joints using pavers operating in contiguous lanes one just ahead of the other .
maintain the distance between pavers in adjacent lanes such that it does not exceed the distance that a normal size load of mixture will cover .
alternate loads of mixture between the pavers .
do not allow rollers performing the initial rolling operation in one lane closer than num inches num m to the longitudinal joint until the adjacent lane is placed .
instead of hot joint construction using multiple pavers the contractor may use full width construction with a single unit paver .
compact all cold longitudinal joints on intermediate and surface courses using a threewheel roller .
for surface courses form or cut all transverse construction joints to a vertical .
seal all cold longitudinal construction joints by coating the entire face of the cold joint with a certified num pg binder or supplemental specification num hot applied asphaltic joint adhesive to provide num percent coverage of the joint .
overlap the joint edges by at least num inch num mm .
seal all cold transverse construction joints with a certified num pg binder supplemental specification num hot applied asphaltic joint adhesive or num sbr asphalt emulsion to provide num percent coverage of the joint or with a certified num asphalt material applied at a rate of num gallon per square yard num lm .
num asphalt binder compatibility .
if excess fat spots regular random areas of flushing or excess drain down occur on a project that are not attributable to over rolling plant operation or mix quality compared to the jmf the department will consider the asphalt binder incompatible .
the department will reject any onhand asphalt binder because of incompatibility .
the department may use its discretion in determining if problem areas can be corrected or if removal and replacement is required .
demonstrate to omm through reporting actual testing analysis the compatibility of another asphalt binder and that proper equipment is in place in order to be allowed to resume .
num spreading and surface tolerances .
if a uniform course is specified make checks and adjustments to maintain the rate of spreading within a tolerance of num percent of the required calculated weight per unit of area .
if a variable depth course is specified place the mixture as shown on the plans .
if a longitudinal profile is specified by elevations on the plans do not allow the completed pavement surface to deviate more than num inch num mm at any point from parallel with the specified profile .
before placing the surface course check the profile of the preceding course at numfoot num m intervals along the outside edge of each traffic lane and along any additional line described in superelevation tables and submit a tabulation of all results that includes documentation of all deviations from the above tolerance to the engineer .
perform corrective work necessary for compliance with the profile tolerance before placing the surface course .
the requirements of this paragraph do not apply to small incidental areas of pavement less than num feet num m in length .
do not vary the transverse slope of the surface of the completed course from the specified slope by more than num inch in num feet num mm in num m. do not vary the surface of each completed intermediate or surface course from the testing edge of a numfoot num m rolling straightedge by more than num inch num mm .
furnish straightedges straightedges equipped with levels or other devices such as approved profilers conforming to supplement num and using proval software .
equipment will be satisfactory to the engineer .
check the surface course for variations in slope or surface at locations where bumps are suspected when directed by the engineer .
correct variations in excess of slope or surface tolerance by removing mixture to neat lines and replacing or by surface grinding in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num asphalt binder price adjustment .
a contract item is eligible for a price adjustment when the contracts proposal specifically includes an asphalt binder price adjustment note and the contract item meets the quantity limitations of the proposal note .
num method of measurement .
the contractor is responsible for recording the net weight of each truckload of mixture to the nearest num pounds num kg in triplicate on plant ticket forms approved by the department .
if the pay quantities are established by platform scales provide a tare weight for each truck at the beginning of each days operation and a minimum of every num hours of operation each day .
the engineer may require additional tare weight measurements at any time .
the engineer will have the right to monitor all weighing operations and may require reweighing trucks at any time or location .
correct any discrepancies immediately .
continued noncompliance will result in the department taking necessary and appropriate action such as but not limited to assigning a department ticket writer to the plant .
send one copy of the plant ticket with each load delivered to the paver and present it to the engineer .
the engineer will convert the total of the weights recorded on the plant tickets representing mixture finished according to contract requirements to cubic yards cubic meters using a conversion factor established by omm .
omm will establish this conversion factor from the approved jmf .
however if a mix design is not available omm will use the conversion factors in table num .
if a uniform course is specified the department will not pay for a number of cubic yards cubic meters that exceeds the quantity calculated from plan lines and dimensions .
table num aggregate lbyd kgm gravel and stone num num slag less than num lbyd less than num kgm num num num slag num to num lbyd num to num kgm num num num slag more than num lbyd more than num kgm num num num num based on average dry rodded weight at the laboratory .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for all work performed and measured as specified above according to the appropriate contract items for each type .
the cost of sealing the joints is included in the unit price bid for the asphalt concrete .
the department will assess all costs against the contractor that it incurs as a result of taking necessary and appropriate action due to the contractors continued noncompliance .
the department will not pay for removing and replacing incompatible asphalt binder areas .
item num asphalt concrete mixing plants num description num calibration num polymer binders num water injection system for warm mix asphalt num description .
this specification consists of the minimum requirements for an asphalt concrete mixing plant to produce asphalt concrete mixes according to department specifications .
ensure asphalt concrete mixing plants conform to the requirements of supplement num in addition to the following .
num calibration .
ensure the plant is calibrated according to supplement num when producing any asphalt concrete for the department .
ensure that the calibration is accurate within num percent .
when performing a complete calibration for odot projects notify district testing num hours in advance of the calibration .
num polymer binders .
if an asphalt binder is modified by sbr at an asphalt concrete mixing plant equip the plant with an automated sbr flow control and monitoring system .
obtain omms approval of the system before operating and demonstrate the system calibration to district testing .
if district testing waives the demonstration provide a letter documenting calibration data for the flow system to district testing for each project .
obtain written approval from omm for the use of sbr and ensure the qcp contains methods for properly controlling and sampling sbr binder blends .
for drum mix plants introduce the sbr directly into the asphalt binder line through means of an inline motionless blender or other device approved by omm which is able to provide a homogeneous blend .
ensure the inline motionless blender design provides aggressive interaction of asphalt binder and sbr emulsion to provide a homogenous blend at the sampling port .
some blenders such as swirl type blenders do not accomplish proper blending .
the astec in line sbr blender or similar design accomplishes proper blending .
locate a sampling valve between the inline blender and the plant drum at least num ft num m downstream of the inline blender and at least num ft num m downstream of a piping elbow .
ensure the sampling valve port is at least num in num mm in diameter .
ensure the sampling valve can be opened quickly for maximizing sample flow for the purpose of obtaining a proper sample .
in place of an inline sampling valve a sample may be taken from a num to num gal num to num l surge tank as long as the tank is downstream of the required blender and the inline flow can be quickly and directly diverted to the surge tank .
contents of the tank should be drained into a num gal num l sampling bucket and stirred before filling the required sample container .
provide a sampling valve port that is in a position to safely obtain the required sample volume in the required num gal num l sampling bucket .
provide a stable sampling rack to obtain a sample .
for batch plants add the sbr after the aggregate has been completely coated with asphalt binder .
continue mixing for a minimum of num seconds after sbr is added and long enough to provide a uniform mixture .
ensure the sbr pumping and metering system is capable of adding the sbr within the limits of num .
for drum plants ensure the sbr pump is automatically controlled by an independent computer and interfaced with the asphalt binder flow to automatically maintain the sbr flow within specification limits .
produce asphalt mixtures for placement in automatic sbr control mode only .
ensure the sbr meter is accurate to num percent over a flow range typical of that used at the asphalt plant typically num to num gpm num to num ls at drum plants and num to num gpm num to num ls at batch plants .
ensure the sbr meter is a magnetic flow meter consisting of a metering flow tube which utilizes faradays law of induction to measure the flow and includes a transmitter to transmit the flow signal to a totalizer located in the control room of the asphalt plant .
locate the sbr meter downstream of any recirculation lines .
provide a means for removing the sbr line at the inline blender to be able to obtain a sample of the sbr for calibration purposes .
obtain omm approval for use of any other type of sbr meter .
ensure the totalizer displays total volume measured and flow rate in standard engineering units .
ensure the totalizer is interfaced with a data logger that produces printouts of the logged data every five minutes for a drum plant or every batch for a batch plant .
ensure the logged data includes time date flow rate and flow total except flow rate is not necessary for batch plant production .
balling or wadding of sbr or uncoated aggregate indicates improper mixing cease production immediately and until corrected to district testing satisfaction .
num water injection system for warm mix asphalt .
when allowed by specification use a water injection system approved by omm for the purpose of foaming the asphalt binder and lowering the mixture temperature .
only use equipment that has been proven stable and effective through project use on nonodot projects .
ensure equipment for water injection meets the following requirements a. injection equipment computer controls are in the plant control room and are tied to the plant computer metering .
b. injection equipment has variable water injection control controlled by the plant operation rate and the water injection can never exceed num percent by weight of asphalt binder .
c. water injection rate can not be manually overridden by the plant operator once in the computer .
d. injection equipment stops water flow when a control or equipment failure in the injection system occurs .
e. the water injects into the asphalt binder flow before the asphalt binder spray hits aggregate .
do not allow water to touch aggregate before the binder spray .
f. injection equipment includes water storage and pump control tied to the injection computer controls .
g. water storage low water alarm installed in the control room .
h. provide a pg binder sampling valve between the last piping tee on the tank side of the line and the injection equipment to sample pg binder before water is injected .
item num asphalt concrete quality control and acceptance num description num general num quality control program qcp num plant calibration num quality control tests num verification acceptance va num unconditional acceptance num acceptance tables for num mixes num description .
this specification outlines the contractor requirements for controlling asphalt concrete asphalt concrete base or other asphalt mixtures as specified .
num general .
the department will verify quality control by department verification acceptance va tests and monitoring reviews as specified .
if the contractor fails to operate according to its quality control program qcp the department will accept asphalt mixtures by unconditional acceptance .
restoration of va procedures will be by the departments quality control qualification committee qcqc based on district recommendation and review of the contractor problems resolutions and qcp .
acceptance does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for supplying and installing a finished product conforming to all requirements of the contract .
num quality control program qcp .
create and implement a quality control program qcp for each paving season .
the qcp will cover processes conducted to provide an asphalt mixture at the paving site that is uniform in composition conforms to the specification requirements and that when placed is free of any defect ex .
segregation lack of mixture and texture uniformity raveling rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control at project completion .
a minimum of num weeks before mix production but no later than february num submit a hard copy of the proposed qcp to omm for review and acceptance .
send a hard copy and a digital copy if available of the acceptance letter and accepted qcp to district testing in every district in which work is performed .
keep copies of the letter and the qcp in each contractor plant laboratory and plant operation control room .
digital copies of the qcp and letter in pdf format are allowed in each contractor plant laboratory and plant operation control room with the following requirements the file icon must be appropriately labeled and be on the computer desktop of a computer in each area the qcp must contain page numbering and a table of contents inside the front cover locating all sections by page number and out of date qcps must be removed from the computer desktop .
failure to comply with the approved qcp may result in removal of personnel in accordance with supplement num removal from va and adversely affect the contractors prequalification rating .
the qcp is a reflection of a contractors sincerity and ability in producing a quality product .
development of this program beyond the minimum requirements specified below is encouraged and is taken into consideration by the qcqc when reviewing contractor plant operation for qualification for va .
include in the program a .
the assignment of quality control responsibilities .
quality control includes all efforts required to achieve a product meeting specifications .
list individuals as required below and note their designated responsibilities to meet qcp requirements .
provide a quality control manager holding a supplement num level num approval and who is a company employee .
assign level num technicians for all level num qc testing duties and provide a list designating their responsibilities and expected actions .
ensure only approved personnel handle and test samples at all times .
if level num consultant technicians are used provide a document in the qcp and to them listing designated responsibilities and expected actions if different from employee expectations .
define who is responsible at plants and specific methods for ensuring haul vehicles meet all requirements and proper bed release products are used .
provide a field quality control supervisor fqcs holding supplement num field quality control supervisor approval and who is a company employee who is routinely and usually at the paving site during placement of any nontemporary asphalt concrete pavement .
ensure personnel obtaining and handling cores at the project site are approved level num technicians fqcs or personnel approved by omm .
b .
means for annual training of company and consultant technicians and their supervisors in ethical conduct according to company expectations .
document how and when training is given what the expectations are how expectations are communicated and list all personnel trained .
describe the qc managers and technician supervisors responsibilities and methods in ensuring ethical conduct is maintained throughout the year .
c. provisions to meet the department mix specifications .
d. procedures for extra testing e.g .
job start responses to poor test results or field mix problems aggregate stock testing reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement checks moistures and any other testing necessary to control materials not already defined in these specifications .
e. specify warning bands to be used by technicians for all tests and give specific instruction how the warning bands will be used for tests in concert with table num specification requirements .
f. methods to maintain all worksheets including all handwritten records and other test and sample records from the plant or project for the duration of the contract or num years whichever is longer .
define the test record process .
define company records retention requirements .
provide copies of all test reports and forms used in the quality control process .
g. procedures for equipment calibration and documentation for level num lab equipment .
provide documentation that all level num lab equipment has been calibrated at the time of the level num lab approval inspection .
procedures for calibration record storage .
h. method of quick calibration and documentation for each plant type .
i .
procedure for random sampling to be used at the plant and documentation method .
procedures for sample taking tracking handling and documentation method for all samples taken at the project paving site including taking of all cores used for density determination or density gauge correlation .
j .
all procedures to meet the processing testing and documentation requirements for rap and ras in num including test forms record keeping technician responsibilities etc .
k. procedure for ensuring that every contractor employee involved in the testing of asphalt mix and operation of the asphalt plant facility has read the qcp and has on site access to all applicable department specifications proposals policies and the current approved jmf .
l. procedure for ensuring asphalt binder bills of lading with bol load number binder source and grade are reviewed against running jmfs and record of review listing the above information be kept in the plant lab for the duration of the project .
means to meet the handling and storage requirements of num and asphalt binder suppliers for all asphalt binders .
m. means to meet delivered mixture uniformitycoating and haulingtrucking requirements .
n. define the roles and responsibilities of the field quality control supervisors .
list approved field quality control supervisors .
o .
signature of the quality assurance manager and if different the person in authority to enforce all operations covered by the qcp as outlined in this subsection .
num plant calibration .
conform to the requirements of item num .
before manufacturing asphalt concrete demonstrate to the monitoring team that the contractors facility adequately meets the specification requirements .
calibrate the plant using procedures approved by the department .
perform initial calibrations in the presence of the monitoring team .
district testing may request a letter of certification and certified data documenting the calibration results instead of having the monitoring team present .
verify the calibrations biweekly using a quick calibration .
however district testing may request additional quick calibrations if there are mix production problems or plant operation concerns .
the quick calibration is a quality control procedure developed by the contractor that verifies the accuracy of a facility to proportion materials to meet the current jmf .
include the quick calibration procedure and data forms in the qcp in accordance with num.h .
if the difference between current calibration and the quick calibration is within num percent then the current calibration is acceptable .
if the num percent variation is exceeded perform a recalibration of the facility .
document the quick calibration procedure as specified in the qcp and post the procedure and results in plain view in the plant control room and plant laboratory for reference by the monitoring team .
document all data from calibrations in a format approved by omm and retain the data for review by the monitoring team .
if asphalt concrete is being produced from a batch type facility verify the accuracy of the aggregate and asphalt binder weighing devices on a biweekly basis .
include the verification procedure in the qcp .
document the verification procedure as specified in the qcp and post the procedure and results in plain view in the plant control room and plant laboratory for reference by the monitoring team .
do not allow the deviation between the plant recorded weights and actual weights to exceed num percent .
record all data from verification of weighing devices in a format approved by omm and retain the data for review by the monitoring team .
num quality control tests .
perform quality control tests to control the asphalt concrete mix within the appropriate specifications .
for items that use num and num acceptance perform all mix testing and quality control according to num .
the contractor may test a num sublot sample instead of the required quality control test provided the sample is tested in the half day in which the sublot sample mix was produced and is tested for all required quality control properties .
for mixes that do not use num and num acceptance basic mixes e.g .
items num num and supplemental specification num test the mix according to num for asphalt binder content and gradation .
other requirements of num and num do not apply .
control the basic mixes as follows a .
if a single asphalt binder content is more than num percent beyond the jmf immediately take and test an additional sample .
b .
if two consecutive asphalt binder content tests are more than num percent beyond the jmf notify the monitoring team and cease production until the problem is corrected .
c. if the range difference in any three consecutive asphalt binder content tests is greater than num percent for num mix or num percent basic mix other than num immediately notify the monitoring team .
d. if the range difference in any three consecutive gradation tests for the no .
num num mm sieve is greater than num percent immediately notify the monitoring team .
e. if range deviations as specified in num.c or num.d continue cease production .
range is defined as the difference between the largest and the smallest test result .
num verification acceptance va. district testing will perform va testing .
if the random department va sampling and testing verifies the accompanying contractor tests the average of the contractors quality control tests for each day or night for basic mix the average of the contractors tests for each lot for num acceptance mix or daily average msg num acceptance mix will be used to determine acceptance .
a .
sampling .
district testing will perform the va by testing independent and split samples .
for plant sampling for basic mixes or num quality control testing the contractors technician will randomly select the truck in which to take a sample by using a random number procedure as outlined in the qcp .
the contractors technician will give no indication to anyone of the time that the sample is to be taken .
for other than job start previous mix production problems low production tonnage or as requested by the monitoring team exclude the first three trucks from sampling .
include the random number sample tonnage location and time of sampling on the daily quality control report contractor form tenum with each test .
tests other than the required random sample tests are at the contractors discretion according to the qcp .
provide a clean area of sufficient size and a hard surface to perform sample splitting .
split samples by quartering and recombining only as described in aashto t num method b for hard surfaces for the department and contractors sample .
the split sample size required is generally num to num pounds num to num g. a mechanical quartering device approved by omm may be used in lieu of the above but only split according to the procedure outlined in the contractor qcp .
ensure that every quality control or num sublot sample taken by the technician has a labeled split for the department .
wrap and label split samples as to lot or sublot time location tonnage and accompanying contractor test identification .
the monitoring team will pick up all department split samples within num workdays .
sample mishandling careless identification changing sample size consistency or pretesting will result in a change to unconditional acceptance .
for num acceptance mixes conform to the procedures of supplements num num num and num except take samples from a truck at the plant .
if workmanship problems continue on the project segregation etc .
or if quality control problems persist district testing may require sampling on the road according to supplement num .
lots will be num tons num metric tons and sublots will be num tons num metric tons .
however when production is limited to less than num tons num metric tons consider the quantity produced as a partial lot .
for partial lots of num tons num metric tons or less sample and test at least two sublot samples regardless of the tons produced .
split and test all sublot samples taken by the contractor from locations selected by the monitoring team or engineer .
the contractor may test a qc sample at the required sublot sample location as both a qc and sublot test provided the sample is tested for all required quality control properties .
test results will apply for both qc and sublot requirements .
a change in the location of the sublot sample must be approved by the monitoring team and be reasonably close to the original location .
this allowance does not apply to any other samples including department va sample locations selected by the monitor .
label department split samples as sublot or quality control samples .
for num acceptance mixes msg va testing will be performed by district testing on a minimum of one in every four required district sampled daily samples .
other properties can be tested for by the district as desired .
b .
reporting .
report all testing performed and sample identification on a quality control report contractor form tenum .
record on the tenum if the mixture produced was ran at the asphalt plant as a hot mix asphalt hma or as a warm mix asphalt wma produced according to num or another approved method .
deliver fax email hand completed quality control reports to district testing by the end of each day in which testing is conducted .
if desired by district testing and always for unsigned email versions mail the originals .
after startup adjustments report any plant operation changes on the quality control report .
ensure that each quality control report contains technician comments as to production quality input materials received and condition and includes any other quality control activities as specified in the qcp .
ongoing problems with inadequate incomplete or illegible reporting will result in a change to unconditional acceptance .
the contractors technician must sign each quality control report .
report test results to the accuracy of the following decimal places .
when the figures to be dropped in rounding off are exactly onehalf of unity in the decimal place to be retained round the value up to the nearest number in the decimal place to be retained .
single test average asphalt binder content num num no .
num num m sieve num num other sieves whole number num bsg num num for num acceptance mixes track the item num sublot and lot tonnages through the project and identify on the quality control report each random sublot test as to lot number and sublot tonnage location .
in addition to the quality control report submit the tenum department form with lot identification and actual sieve weights for each sublot sample from the technicians gradation worksheets .
attach computerized plant printouts representing samples tested to that days report if desired by the monitoring team or otherwise keep them with the quality control records .
ensure that the technician notes on the accompanying printout from which tonnage the quality control sample was taken with accompanying test results for ac content and percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
keep remaining printouts in the plant laboratory for the duration of the project .
keep a copy of all quality control reports for a project in the contractors plant laboratory .
c. department verification testing and monitoring .
for basic num and num acceptance mixes the monitor will randomly choose one department sample in a maximum of every four production days for va testing to confirm contractor testing and mix control .
more frequent va samples can be taken when desired .
the department va sample location will be chosen randomly by the monitor including where in the truck to take the sample if applicable .
the contractor technician will take the sample from the truck with the monitor witnessing .
the monitor will keep the sample in the departments possession until delivered to district testing or testing is complete .
the monitor will have enough sample taken to split with the contractor .
the monitor will split the sample in the contractor lab .
the monitor will have the sample tested at district testing or as noted below .
the contractor will test his split of the va sample with the monitor witnessing .
the department will use its va test result the contractor result of the split as well as the most recent previous day or night contractor quality control andor sublot test in the comparison for the department va testing .
the monitor may opt to test the department va sample in the plant laboratory with the contractors permission according to the contractors safety practices and with the restriction of only the contractors technician physically placing a sample pan in the ac gauge .
however if the monitor tests va samples on contractor equipment test a va sample on district testing equipment a minimum of one time in num production days from a given plant regardless of the number of projects or jmfs tested in the level num lab .
record the results and testing location in the district testing project record .
one day may be added to the above department sample testing frequency for each day production is less than num tons num metric tons .
for num acceptance mixes msg va testing will be performed by district testing on a minimum of one in every four required districtsampled daily samples .
this result will be compared to that days contractor average of msg qc test results .
for all mixes the district may increase the number of va testing samples if desired .
all department va test results will be given to the contractor by a reasonable arrangement acceptable to both .
department va sample testing not completed in a timely manner is of no value in verifying quality control testing quality for contractor test acceptance andor investigating problem causes .
as such if not completed in a timely manner contractor tests will automatically stand and the district will note the problem in the districts va record .
table num department verification acceptance and quality control test comparison percent asphalt binder percent passing no .
num nummm msg comparison va num qclot test num va num qclot test num va num basic num num num num num num num num num num num num num district va mix test deviation from contractor split .
num district va mix test deviation from most recent previous day or night qc andor lot test .
num deviation of district daily sample msg compared to qc msg daily average .
if the department va tests confirm contractor testing is within the verification tolerances but a pattern of high or low results exist that suggests mix control is not at the jmf then investigate with the monitoring teams assistance to correct the problem to the monitoring teams satisfaction .
direct any questions regarding interpretation of circumstances to omm .
d. contractor tests are verified .
production is acceptable if num .
the monitoring team verifies the contractors qcp is being fully followed and num .
the department va tests are within the limits specified in num.c and num .
for basic mixes the remaining sieves do not exceed the limits of the applicable specification .
failure on the contractors part to respond and resolve monitoring team concerns may result in a change to unconditional acceptance .
acceptance is based on table num .
table num mix acceptance mix type acceptance tolerances or method deviation from jmf num range basic mixes no acceptance limits stated in appropriate specification asphalt binder content num num no .
num nummm sieve num num basic mixes acceptance limits stated in appropriate specification use acceptance limits in appropriate specification num acceptance mixes calculate pay factor according to num num acceptance mixes calculate pay factor according to num num based on the average of the day or night qc tests e. contractor tests not verified .
if the department msg va test shows the msg comparison tolerance in table num is not met a single department tested msg for that day and every prior production day back to when the department msg va last met the tolerance will be used for each num daylot density determination .
the contractor may request a review with the department occasionally for the purpose of determining the cause of a comparison problem .
department decisions upon review are final .
if a contractor is requesting a review of every occurrence of lack of comparison and the department test is always found correct the department may deny that contractor further reviews .
for all other mixes if the department va test does not verify the accompanying contractor tests within the verification tolerances then the monitoring team will investigate .
if the deviation between the district and contractor test is greater than the limits in table num immediately cease production until resolved .
if the deviation is less than the limits in table num and discrepancies continue perform additional tests to aid in problem solving .
table num deviation limits property mix limits asphalt binder content all num no .
num num mm sieve all except num num num num additional tests may include any testing necessary to resolve the problem .
if the additional testing does not resolve the problem by onehalf production day or num tons num metric tons whichever occurs first to the monitoring teams satisfaction stop production if not already until problems are resolved .
contact omm for assistance in resolving problems .
if the district testing program is confirmed by the additional tests and monitoring team investigation and no reason to question the original test exists then the original district va tests will stand .
after the above investigation one of the three following actions will occur num .
mix production compares well to the jmf .
if the district test and investigation shows mix is actually controlled well compared to the jmf in spite of the contractor test the district does not have to test additional samples if the contractor testing problem is corrected .
num .
mix production does not compare well to the jmf .
if the district tests and investigation shows lack of contractor mix control compared to the jmf the district will test the remaining department split or daily samples for the days or lots represented by the original tests .
the district will use the test results to calculate the acceptance .
while working with the district immediately take steps to correct the problem according to the qcp .
failure to achieve a quick resolution will result in a change to unconditional acceptance .
num .
district testing problem .
if the district testing program has a problem as confirmed by the additional testing and district review the district will correct the problem throw out the original district test results and take new samples from the samples representing the days or lots in question for the va tests .
f. contractor removal restoration .
for num msg for a given contractor facility if in a series of num or more contractor department msg comparison tests va monitoring tests the contractor msg is lower than the department msg by more than num and occurs a minimum of num percent of the time the facility will be removed from department msg verification acceptance and operate under num .
at a minimum a report will be issued annually of the contractor department msg comparison status of each facility for this determination .
this frequency may be increased .
for all other mixes if repeated problems with poor comparison of tests are not the districts fault or poor comparison of contractor tests to the jmf or with plant operation input materials or any of the other requirements of department specifications occur in a single project or successive projects the district will request an opinion from the qcqc before notifying the contractor of removal from department va .
the district will immediately notify the contractor of the removal with a follow up letter from district testing .
once notified acceptance of asphalt mixtures is by unconditional acceptance .
restoration of the va procedures may occur on a future project with a district recommendation to the qcqc based on consistent improved plant operation and mix control a review of the contractor problems and resolutions and a review of the qcp by the qcqc .
num unconditional acceptance .
if the contractor is removed from department va the following will occur .
the contractor must bring its qcp and operation to a level acceptable to the district and qcqc before production continues .
district testing will ensure that the project cnum contractors prequalification rating survey reflects the change to unconditional acceptance in all of the appropriate cnum categories .
the department will accept all material for department projects from the facility under unconditional acceptance .
while the facility is under unconditional acceptance acceptance of small quantities under the small quantities policy will not apply .
quality control testing requirements specified in num are modified as follows a .
the required number of test series is a minimum of four each per production day or night .
if a production day is less than num hours the department may reduce the frequency but not less than one test series per every num production hours .
this requirement does not apply to num msg as outlined below .
b .
for basic mixes if the variation from the jmf for one test is num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve or num percent asphalt binder content investigate and correct the problem then resample and test .
maintain the moving average of three tests within num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve and num percent asphalt binder content .
in addition to the quality control report maintain control charts according to num for asphalt binder content and the no .
num num mm sieve .
if the range difference in any three consecutive tests is greater than num percent for asphalt binder content or num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve notify the monitoring team .
if range deviations as specified continue cease production .
for num msg the department will test a single daily msg for each corresponding num daylot density determination from the facility .
the facility can be returned to department msg va when the num percent criteria see num f is not exceeded in a series of num comparison tests .
c. report each days testing on a quality control report according to num .
report all testing performed by the contractors technician on the quality control report .
after startup adjustments report any plant operation changes on the quality control report .
ensure that each quality control report contains technician comments as to production quality input materials received and condition and includes any other quality control activities required in the qcp .
the contractors technician must sign each quality control report .
attach each days computerized plant printouts to that days report .
the technician must note on the accompanying printout from which tonnage the quality control sample was taken with accompanying test results for asphalt binder content and percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
keep a copy of all quality control reports for a project in the contractors plant laboratory .
the district will monitor according to num except notification for ceasing production does not have to be in writing .
additional samples may be obtained for department test at any time .
for basic mixes if the average of the lot or partial lot acceptance tests for any sieve other than the no .
num num mm sieve exceeds the specification limits the pay factor is determined as follows table num basic mix pay factors number of tests num num num num pay factor num num num num for num acceptance mixes the department will perform acceptance sampling and testing according to num and num except the lot size will be num tons num metric tons with num ton num metric tons sublots .
sublots and acceptance samples may be taken from the roadway or plant at the districts discretion .
department testing under unconditional acceptance will receive a lower testing priority than other va projects .
num acceptance tables for num mixes .
a lot is considered acceptable for gradation and asphalt binder content if the deviation of the average from the jmf and the range is no more than the tolerances shown in table num .
table num deviation from the jmf and range tolerances num mix property deviation from jmf percent range percent asphalt binder content num num num inch num mm sieve num num no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num based on average of four lot acceptance tests .
if the average of the lot acceptance tests for a particular sieve or sieves or for asphalt binder content deviates from the jmf by more than the tolerances shown in table num but falls within the tolerances shown in table num then the lot is considered reasonably acceptable and may remain in place with payment at a reduced pay factor as show in table num .
if the range of the lot acceptance tests for asphalt binder content or for any particular sieve or sieves exceeds the tolerance shown in table num the department will apply a pay factor of num .
table num num acceptance schedule num mix property pay factor num tests num tests num tests asphalt binder content num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num inch num mm sieve num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num based on average of lot acceptance tests from the jmf .
num remove and replace material num engineer will determine if the material may remain in place .
pay factor for material allowed to remain in place is num .
the department will determine payment for the lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the pay factor .
when any pay factors for a specific lot are less than num use the lowest pay factor to calculate the payment .
the department will base acceptance of partial lots on the average and the range of the results of tests on the number of samples obtained .
item num tack coat num description num materials num equipment num weather limitations num preparation of surface num application of asphalt material num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing and treating a paved surface with asphalt material and cover aggregate if required .
num materials .
conform to the applicable requirements of num for the asphalt material and use one of the following types num rsnum ssnum ssnumh crsnum cssnum or cssnumh num nontracking asphalt emulsion or num sbr asphalt emulsion .
supply num nontracking asphalt emulsion any time item num nontracking tack coat is specified .
conform to num for cover aggregate .
num equipment .
provide adequate cleaning equipment spreader boxes and distributors .
use distributors designed equipped maintained and operated to apply asphalt material at the specified rate per square yard square meter with uniform pressure over the required width of application .
ensure that the distributor includes a tachometer pressure gauges and an accurate volume measuring device or a calibrated tank .
mount an accurate thermometer with a range covering the specified application temperature for asphalt material at approximately center height of the tank with the stem extending into the asphalt material .
ensure that the distributor has a fullcirculating system with a spray bar that is adjustable laterally and vertically .
ensure that the spray bar will maintain a constant height above the pavement under variable load conditions .
supply each distributor with suitable charts showing truck and pump speeds and other pertinent application data necessary to obtain the required results .
do not use equipment that can not obtain the correct tack application .
num weather limitations .
do not apply the asphalt material if the surface temperature is below the minimum placement temperature for the pavement course to be placed as specified in num .
num preparation of surface .
ensure that the surface is thoroughly clean and dry when the asphalt material is applied .
remove material cleaned from the surface and dispose of it as the engineer directs .
num application of asphalt material .
uniformly apply the asphalt material with a distributor having clean nozzles functioning properly .
for irregular areas such as driveways and intersections apply the asphalt material using a method the engineer approves .
if paving asphalt concrete directly onto portland cement concrete or brick pavement tack the pavement with sbr asphalt emulsion conforming to num .
apply the asphalt material in a manner that offers the least inconvenience to traffic .
only apply the asphalt material to areas that will be covered by a pavement course during the same day .
ensure the tack breaks before releasing to construction traffic unless the paver is equipped with a spray bar system to apply tack just prior to mat placement .
apply asphalt material to obtain uniform coverage within the range specified in table num as directed by the engineer .
obtain the engineers approval for the quantity rate of application temperature and areas to be treated before application of the asphalt material .
the engineer will determine the actual application in gallons per square yard liters per square meter by a check on the project .
table num typical tack coat application rates existing pavement application rate galydnum lmnum new asphalt num to num num to num oxidized asphalt num to num num to num milled asphalt surface num to num num to num milled pcc surface num to num num to num pcc surface num to num num to num the application is considered satisfactory when the actual rate is within num percent of the required rate and the material is applied uniformly with no visible evidence of streaking ridging or pickup by construction traffic .
the engineer will require proper correction when ridging streaking pickup or other nonuniform coverage is observed .
correct nonuniform tack only in areas of nonuniform coverage .
do not reapply tack in areas where the tack meets uniformity and application requirements .
if the coverage is not uniform and not corrected the total square yardage of nonuniform application will be considered nonspecification material .
the engineer will determine the number of gallons liters for nonpayment by using the approved rate of application times the total square yards square meters of nonuniform application .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure tack coat and nontracking tack coat by the number of gallons liters of undiluted asphalt material applied for each according to item num .
num basis of payment .
the cost of cover aggregate is incidental to tack coat .
the department will not pay for nonuniformly applied materials as defined in num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num gallon liter tack coat num gallon liter nontracking tack coat item num prime coat num description num asphalt material num cover aggregate num weather limitations num equipment num preparation of surface num application of asphalt material num application of cover aggregate num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing and treating an existing surface with asphalt material and cover aggregate if required .
num asphalt material .
conform to the applicable requirements of num for asphalt material and use one of the following types num mcnum mcnum or mcnum or num primer num .
num cover aggregate .
use cover aggregate conforming to no .
num size or gradation requirements of num or num .
num weather limitations .
do not apply asphalt material on a wet surface .
do not apply prime coats for asphalt concrete or surface treatment work when the atmospheric temperature is below num f num c or when the air temperature within the preceding num hours has been num f num c or lower .
do not apply prime coats on stabilized or granular base courses when the atmospheric temperature is below num f num c. num equipment .
use equipment conforming to num .
num preparation of surface .
shape the surface to be primed to the required grade and section .
ensure the surface is free from all ruts corrugations segregated material or other irregularities and is smooth and uniformly compacted at the time of application of the asphalt material .
clean the surface in a manner that will thoroughly remove all mud earth and other foreign material .
take care to clean the edges of road to be primed to ensure uniform application of the asphalt material directly onto the existing base or pavement surface .
remove material cleaned from the surface and dispose of it as the engineer directs .
num application of asphalt material .
apply asphalt material in a uniform manner spread to the width of the section to be primed by means of a distributor conforming to num .
take care that the application of asphalt material at the junction of spreads is not in excess of the specified amount .
squeegee excess asphalt material from the surface .
correct skipped areas or deficiencies .
do not allow traffic on the prime coat until the asphalt material has been absorbed by the surface and will not be picked up .
obtain the engineers approval for the quantity rate of application temperatures and areas to be treated before application of the prime coat .
num application of cover aggregate .
if after applying the prime coat the asphalt material fails to penetrate and traffic must use the roadway spread cover aggregate in the amount required to absorb any excess asphalt material .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure prime coat by the number of gallons liters according to num .
num basis of payment .
the cost of cover aggregate is incidental to prime coat .
the department will pay for accepted quantities complete in place at the contract price as follows item unit description num gallon liter prime coat item num sawing and sealing asphalt concrete pavement joints num description num materials num construction details num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of saw cutting and sealing the finished surface of the asphalt concrete pavement and shoulders directly over and in line with transverse joints in the underlying portland cement concrete pavement .
num materials .
use joint sealant conforming to num and approved by omm before shipment to the project .
use a num inch num mm diameter closed cell foam backer rod that will form and maintain a reservoir of sealant as specified in num .
num construction details .
saw cut clean and seal transverse joints as a continuous operation .
if the surface course is not placed within num days after the intermediate course is placed make a numinch num mm wide saw cut that is onefourth the depth of the intermediate course over contraction joints and a numinch num mm wide cut that is onefourth the depth of the intermediate course over expansion joints .
saw joints in the surface course as soon as the saw can be operated without damaging the asphalt concrete but no later than num hours after the asphalt concrete is placed .
locate the sawed joints directly over each transverse pavement joint in the concrete pavement including joints at fulldepth pavement repairs .
accurately locate joints with pins or stakes before paving .
premark the saw cut on the new asphalt with a chalk line or other acceptable method .
obtain the engineers approval of the method for locating and accurately marking the proposed saw cuts before starting any resurfacing operations .
saw all transverse joints and create a joint sealant reservoir according to table num .
use either dry or wet cutting .
make one or two passes to create the saw cut and joint sealant reservoir .
table num measurement inch mm saw cut depth num num backer rod diameter num num joint sealant reservoir width num num depth num num recess below surface course num num clean dry sawed joints with compressed air to remove dirt dust or deleterious matter .
use an air compressor with a minimum rated capacity of num pounds per square inch num kpa and sufficient hose for continuous cleaning operations .
clean wet sawed joints with a water blast to remove sawing slurry dirt or deleterious matter .
dry wet sawed joints with a propane torch or lance unit capable of producing a blast of hot air at num f num c and with a gas velocity of num feet per second num ms .
extend the transverse saw cut joints the full width of the asphalt over the concrete pavement and paved shoulders .
do not allow traffic to knead together or damage the sawed joints before sealing .
heat joint sealant material in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler with the space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heat transfer medium .
provide positive temperature control and mechanical agitation .
heat the material according to the manufacturers recommendation .
consider the first gallon num l of material that flows out of the applicator wand at the start of the day spoil and discard it into a container so designated .
after cleaning place the backer rod in the sawed joints then immediately seal the joints with sealant applied through a nozzle projected into the sawed joint filling from the bottom up .
ensure that the sealant completely fills the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealant is below the surface by less than num inch num mm .
fill any depression in the seal greater than num inch num mm to the specified limit by adding additional sealant .
do not overfill the joints .
take care in the sealing of the joints so that the final appearance will present a neat line .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure sawing and sealing asphalt concrete pavement joints by the number of feet meters of joints sawed and sealed .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for saw cuts in the intermediate course .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num foot meter sawing and sealing asphalt concrete pavement joints item num traffic compacted surface num description num materials num conditioning of the subgrade num spreading and shaping num maintaining num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing an aggregate wearing course on the completed and accepted subgrade or temporary road .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num for the type of material specified type a type b or type c. num conditioning of the subgrade .
eliminate wavy and irregular surfaces and maintain the subgrade in this condition until the application of material under this item .
if the subgrade is soft due to rain frost or snow place material only as permitted .
num spreading and shaping .
uniformly spread the material using an approved spreader box or by other methods .
spread the amount of material shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
after spreading blade and shape the materials to the specified crosssections .
haul the material to its place on the road over the previously spread material .
conduct the hauling to obtain uniform compaction over the entire width of the surface material without rolling .
num maintaining .
after shaping the material blade it as directed by the engineer .
open the road to traffic immediately after all the material has been spread and shaped .
correct all holes ruts defects or soft places that occur in the subgrade or surface by adding material and dragging .
maintain the surface slopes shoulders ditches and drainage structures until the work on this item has been completed and accepted .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure traffic compacted surface type ___ by the number of cubic yards cubic meters or tons metric tons of accepted material placed shaped and maintained as specified .
the department will measure the cubic yards cubic meters of aggregate used loose in the vehicle at the point of delivery or calculate it by converting from weight using the following conversion factors table num material conversion factor gravel bank run or crusher run num lbyd num kgm limestone crusher run num lbyd num kgm gravel size no .
num and num num lbyd num kgm limestone size no .
num and num num lbyd num kgm crushed slag num less than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm num to num lbft num to num kgm num lbyd num kgm num to num lbft num to num kgm num lbyd num kgm num to num lbft num to num kgm num lbyd num kgm more than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm recycled portland cement concrete num lbyd num kgm recycled asphalt pavement num lbyd num kgm num based on average dry rodded weight determined by the laboratory .
the conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights .
these numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of nos .
num num or num gradation .
the department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the original source .
the department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority of the mixture .
ensure that the moistures of the delivered material are less than num percent above saturated surface dry condition if not the department will base payment on the dry densities and dry weights .
furnish freight bills and weight and volume evidence according to num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard or ton traffic compacted surface type a or b cubic meter or metric ton num cubic yard or ton traffic compacted surface type c cubic meter or metric ton item num stabilized crushed aggregate num description num materials num construction methods num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of placing a compacted course or courses of crushed aggregate .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num .
num construction methods .
construct the subgrade according to item num .
use the spreading and compaction requirements of item num except as modified by the following a .
use a maximum compacted lift thickness of num inches num mm .
b .
perform the initial compaction of the material by using crawler type tractors tamping rollers trench rollers suitable pneumatic tire equipment or other suitable equipment .
c. perform final compaction of the surface of the stabilized crushed aggregate by using approved pneumatic tire equipment .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the engineer will perform all compaction tests according to supplement num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure stabilized crushed aggregate by the number of cubic yards cubic meters computed from the profile grade crosssections and typical sections compacted in place .
when the plans provide for the use of material in variable width or depth of course and the quantity can not be readily calculated from the profile grade typical sections and crosssections the department will measure the cubic yards cubic meters by converting from weight using the following conversion factors table num material conversion factor crushed stone num lbyd num kgm crushed gravel num lbyd num kgm crushed slag num less than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm num to num lbft num to num kgm num lbyd num kgm more than num lbft num kgm num lbyd num kgm granulated slag num lbyd num kgm recycled portland cement concrete num lbyd num kgm recycled asphalt pavement num lbyd num kgm num based on average dry rodded weight of standard size of slag aggregates on record at the laboratory .
the conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights .
these numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of nos .
num num or num gradation .
the department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the original source .
the department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority of the mixture .
ensure that the moistures of the delivered material are less than num percent above saturated surface dry condition if not the department will base payment on the dry densities and dry weights .
furnish freight bills or certified weight bills according to num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard stabilized crushed aggregate cubic meter item num microsurfacing num description num materials num proportioning num quality control program num weather limitations num mixing equipment num equipment calibration num spreading equipment num surface preparation num test strip num application num quality control num acceptance num performance review num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a cold laid polymer modified emulsified asphalt pavement course to fill ruts or provide a leveling andor surface course for existing pavements .
warrant the microsurfacing for two years .
num materials .
use a polymer modified emulsified asphalt binder binder consisting of the following use a quicktraffic cssnumhm modified emulsified asphalt binder meeting the requirements in table num .
use only emulsion certified according to supplement num .
do not use port addition of the polymer to the emulsified asphalt .
provide to the engineer certified test data and a statement from the binder supplier with each load of binder that the binder is the same base asphalt binder polymer polymer percentage as formulated and used in the mix design .
include the percent residue on the bill of lading .
ensure the binder meets the following and specification limits will be producible for at least num days from sample date table num tests on emulsion aashto t num unless otherwise designated cssnumhm num viscosity saybolt furol at num f num c sfs num to num storage stability tests numhr difference max .
num particle charge test positive sieve tests distilled water max .
num distillation to num c residue solids min.num num tests on distillation residue penetration num c num g num sec dmm aashto t num num to num ductility num c num cmmin cm min .
aashto t num num solubility in trichloroethylene min .
aashto t num num num elastic recovery num c num cm min .
aashto t num num num softening point ring ball c min .
aashto t num num num preblend only use a minimum of num sbr solids based on weight of the asphalt binder .
use natural sbr latex modifier or synthetic sbr latex modifier conforming to num .
use only one type of latex .
mill or blend the sbr emulsion into the emulsified solution prior to the emulsification process .
num see supplement num .
for natural latex use the oven evaporation method in aashto t num in place of distillation and use this residue for further testing .
num on the base asphalt only .
solubility in npropyl bromide astm dnum can be used in place of trichloroethylene .
num straight molds .
hold at test temperature for num minutes .
place in ductilometer and elongate num cm at num cmmin .
hold for num minutes and cut .
after num hour retract the broken ends to touch and measure the elongation x in centimeters to the nearest num cm .
use the following formula to calculate the elastic recovery percent recovery numxnum x num .
report results to nearest num .
conform to num and num for aggregate except as follows table num percent by weight of fractured pieces num sand equivalence aashto tnum num minimum conform to table num gradation a for the aggregate for surface courses gradation b for the aggregate for rut fill courses and gradation a or b for the aggregate for leveling courses .
stockpile tolerance will be based on target gradation stated in the mix design but will not exceed design gradation band for no .
num sieve .
table num sieve size total percent passing a b stockpile tolerance num inch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num no .
num num m num to num num to num num no .
num num m num to num num to num num no .
num num m num to num num no .
num num m num to num num to num num screen the aggregate for oversize material prior to use using a num inch num mm screen size .
when a blend of aggregates is to be used to meet gradation a or b proportion the aggregates in a separate stockpile and blend to a uniform consistency prior to screening .
screen the aggregate to complete the blending process and to remove any oversize material prior to use .
if oversize material becomes present in the mixture screen the aggregate directly into material support units .
for mineral filler use portland cement conforming to astm c num type i .
adjustments in the quantity of mineral filler added to the mixture are permitted to improve mixture consistency mix time or set time .
do not exceed num from the mix design during placement .
use water conforming to num .
add water to the mixture to control mixture consistency only and not to control mix time .
use mix set additives as stated in the mix design to control the mixtures mix and set time .
if mix set additives are used during production of mixture include as part of the mix design .
ensure additives are compatible with the other components of the mix .
num proportioning .
develop a mix design to comply with the mix design criteria and submit to omm on approved forms at least two weeks prior to the start of calibration for preliminary jmf approval .
omm may require additional time prior for preliminary approval to perform tests on lab materials to ensure mix compliance .
omm will notify the contractor if additional time for testing is required .
final jmf approval will be granted upon successful placement in the field .
omm may require the contractor to design and submit for a new jmf for lack of mix compliance or lack of field performance .
submit the mix design and proposed materials to omm .
include a minimum of num pounds num g of each aggregate one quart num l sample of binder num ounces num g of mineral filler and one pint num l of additive if used and a complete mix design packet prepared by an aashtoaccredited laboratory in pavement preservation .
prepare the mix design by designing the mixture using the minimum midpoint and maximum residual binder content for gradations a or b and present all test data for all tests specified in table num .
determine the residual binder content and present related proportioning of total water includes moisture in aggregate mineral filler and additive with tolerances for each in the final designed mixture .
verify during the mix design the compatibility of the aggregate binder mineral filler and other additives .
produce the mix design using the same materials that will be used on the project .
approved jmfs expire on december numst .. a .
ensure that the mix design num .
has aggregate including blended aggregates meeting the gradation specified .
num .
has residual asphalt by dry weight of aggregate of num to num percent for leveling and surface courses or num to num percent for rut fill courses .
num .
has a mineral filler content of num to num percent by dry weight of aggregate and a tolerance of not greater than num percent of the mix design within the required minimum and maximum .
num .
verify the mix times and wet cohesion requirements based on specific minimum and maximum percent mineral filler total water and additive .
num .
has a total water content with a tolerance not greater than num percent .
num .
has a total nondiluted additive content with a tolerance not greater than num percent .
verify that the additive dilution rate with water specified in the mix design is consistent with the paving machine being used .
num .
meets the specified properties of the following international slurry seal association issa tests table num issa test no .
description specification tbnum wet cohesion num minutes min .
set time num kgcm min .
num minutes min .
traffic num kgcm min or near spin tbnum wet stripping num percent min .
tbnum wet track abrasion loss numhour soak num day soak num gm max .
num gm max .
tbnum saturated abrasion compatibility num g loss max .
tbnum mix time num c controllable to num seconds mix time num c controllable to num seconds tbnum lateral displacement for leveling and rut fill courses only num max .
tbnum excess asphalt by lwt sand adhesion num gm max .
check the issa tbnum set time and issa tbnum mix time tests at the highest temperature expected during construction .
for the issa tbnum test at num f num c preheat all ingredients and containers .
b .
report the following in the mix design all percentages are based on the dry weight of the aggregate num .
source and location of each individual material .
provide percentage of each aggregate source if multiple aggregate sources are used .
num .
aggregate gradation washed and dry dry for field qc .
provide aggregate gradation of each source and final combined if multiple sources are used .
num .
percentage of aggregate .
num .
sand equivalence of the aggregate .
num percentage of mineral filler and tolerance .
num .
percentage of total water and tolerance and acceptable ph range .
num .
percentage and type of mix set additives if required and tolerance .
num .
percentage of binder and residual asphalt content in the mixture .
num .
quantitative effects of moisture content on the unit weight of the aggregate per aashto t num .
num quality control program qcp .
create and implement a quality control program qcp for each construction season .
the qcp will cover processes conducted to provide a microsurface mixture at the project site that is uniform in composition conforms to the specification requirements and project mix design and that when placed is free of any defects lack of mixing inconsistent texture inconsistent profile excessive overlap at joints streaking drag marks roughness raveling rutting holes and debris etc .
within the contractors control at project completion .
submit a hard copy of the proposed qcp to omm for review and acceptance .
submit by february num or a minimum of five num weeks before calibration .
submit a hard copy and a digital copy if available of the qcp acceptance letter and accepted qcp to district testing a minimum of two weeks prior to calibration .
keep copies of the letter and the qcp with each contractors quality control manager and provide a copy of both to the engineer .
digital copies of the qcp and letter in pdf format are allowed with the following requirements the file icon must be appropriately labeled and be on the computer desktop .
the qcp must contain page numbering and a table of contents inside the front cover locating all sections by page number and out of date qcps must be removed from the computer desktop .
failure to comply with the approved qcp may result in work stoppage and adversely affect the contractors prequalification rating .
the qcp is a reflection of a contractors sincerity and ability in producing a quality product .
development of this program beyond the minimum requirements specified below is encouraged .
include in the program a .
the assignment of quality control responsibilities .
quality control includes all efforts required to achieve a product meeting specifications .
list individuals as required below and note their designated responsibilities to meet qcp requirements .
provide a quality control manager who is a company employee who is routinely and usually at the paving site during placement of any microsurfacing .
provide a list designating technician responsibilities and expected actions .
ensure only trained personnel handle and test samples at all times .
define who is responsible at the project site and specific methods for ensuring mixing equipment haul vehicles etc .
meet requirements .
b .
means for annual training of company and consultant technicians and their supervisors in ethical conduct according to company expectations .
document how and when training is given what the expectations are how expectations are communicated and list all personnel trained .
describe the qc managers and technician supervisors responsibilities and methods in ensuring ethical conduct is maintained throughout the year .
c. provisions to meet the department mix specifications .
d. procedures for extra testing e.g .
job start responses to poor test results or field mix problems aggregate stock testing moistures and any other testing necessary to control materials not already defined in these specifications .
e. methods to maintain all worksheets including all handwritten records and other test and sample records from the project for the duration of the contract or five years whichever is longer .
define the test record process .
define company records retention requirements .
provide copies of all test reports and forms used in the quality control process .
f. procedures for calibration and documentation for all testing equipment .
procedures for calibration record storage .
procedure to supply documentation records of testing equipment calibration at the request of the engineer .
g. method of performing mixing equipment calibrations including scales to be used yield checks and documentation for each project .
h. procedure for random sampling to be used at the project and documentation method .
procedures for sample taking tracking handling and documentation method for all samples taken at the project paving site .
i .
procedure for ensuring that every contractor employee involved in the testing of aggregates and microsurfacing mix and operation of the mixing equipment has read the qcp and has on site access to all applicable department specifications proposals policies and the current approved jmf .
j .
procedure for ensuring binder bills of lading with bol load number binder source and grade and binder percent residue are reviewed against running mix designs and record of review listing the above information be kept with the qc manager for the duration of the project .
means to meet the handling and storage requirements of the binder and tack coat suppliers .
k. means to meet placed mixture uniformity and haulingtrucking requirements .
l. define the roles and responsibilities of the qc manager .
m. signature of the quality control manager and if different the person in authority to enforce all operations covered by the qcp as outlined in this subsection .
num weather limitations .
apply the mixture only when it is not raining pavement has no standing water and the existing pavement surface and atmospheric temperature is a minimum of num f num c and rising and there is no forecast of an atmospheric temperature below num f num c within num hours from the time the mixture is applied .
between september num and may num do not apply the mixture if the existing pavement surface temperature is less than num f num c. num mixing equipment .
produce the mixture in a selfpropelled front feed continuous loading mixing machine equipped with a conveyer belt aggregate delivery system and an interconnected positive displacement water jacketed asphalt emulsion gear pump to accurately proportion aggregate and asphalt emulsion or a variable displacement computerized rate control to accurately proportion aggregate and asphalt emulsion .
locate the mineral filler feed so the proper amount of mineral filler is dropped on the aggregate before discharge into the pugmill .
provide a spray bar to completely prewet the aggregate dropping into the pugmill with additive and water before introduction of asphalt emulsion .
ensure that the twinshaft multiblade pugmill is a continuous flow type and minimum of num inches num m long .
ensure that the blade size and side clearances meet the equipment manufacturers recommendations .
introduce the emulsion within the first onethird of the mixer length to ensure proper mixing of all materials before exit from the pugmill .
equip the machine with opposite side driving stations to allow full control of the machine from either side .
equip the mixer with a remote forward speed control at the back mixing platform so the operator controlling the mixture placement can control forward speed and level of mixture in the spreader or rut box .
provide material control devices that are readily accessible and positioned so the amount of each material used can be determined at any time .
equip the mixing machine with a water pressure system and nozzle type spray bar to provide a water spray ahead of and outside the spreader box when required .
apply water at a rate that will dampen the surface but will not create free flowing water ahead of the spreader box .
the contractor may use truckmounted batch machines with a conveyer belt aggregate delivery system and without the front feed continuous loading feature on projects of less than num square yards num mnum on spot repairs on projects with multiple routes where every route is less than num square yards num mnum or where specified in the plans .
num equipment calibration .
before mix production calibrate the mixing equipment to the approved jmf in the presence of the engineer according to supplement num .
verify that the project calibration is not affected by any previous calibrations and scale factors by removing or resetting prior to starting a new calibration .
generate documentation for the engineer including individual calibrations of each material at various settings .
perform a calibration for each jmf used on the project .
following calibration do not make any further calibration adjustments to the mixing equipment without the engineers approval .
the engineer may require additional calibrations following any equipment break down related to the aggregate delivery belt asphalt emulsion gear pump or mixture performance issues .
submit the approved mix design information and jmfs to the engineer and district testing at least num hours prior to start of calibration .
num spreading equipment .
if a leveling or surface course is specified apply the mixture by means of a conventional spreader box attached to the mixer .
if a rut fill course is specified apply the mixture with a num to num foot num m to num m width vshaped rut filling spreader box attached to the mixer .
equip the rut filling spreader box with a steel strikeoff .
if a leveling course is specified apply the mixture with a spreader box equipped with a steel or rubber strikeoff that is designed to fill wheel path ruts .
a secondary strikeoff may be used to reduce roughness of the leveling course but will not remove mixture in wheel path ruts or affect desired cross section .
equip the spreader box with paddles or augers mounted on an adjustable shaft to continually agitate and distribute the materials throughout the box .
ensure that the equipment provides sufficient turbulence to prevent the mix from setting in the rut fill or spreader box or causing excessive side buildup or lumps .
to prevent loss of the mixture from the spreader box attach flexible seals front and rear in contact with the road .
operate the spreading equipment in such a manner as to prevent the loss of the mixture on superelevated curves .
for surface courses attach a secondary strikeoff to the spreader and adjust as required to provide a uniform mixture texture .
the contractor may use burlap drags or other drags if necessary to obtain the desired finish .
replace drags having excessive buildup .
num surface preparation .
before applying the mixture thoroughly clean the surface .
remove raised pavement markers according to num when specified .
the contractor may fill the depression caused by the removal of the casting with material meeting this specification .
remove all existing pavement markings except num traffic paint using an abrasion method conforming to num .
seal visible joints and cracks longer than num feet nummm in length and any joint or crack greater than num inch num mm in width no matter the length using item num type ii or type iii sealant only .
apply crack sealant material at a width of num to num inches num to num mm and at a thickness of not less than num inch num mm and not greater than num inch num mm .
apply a tack coat to the existing pavement surface conforming to item num cssnumh or num cssnumhm consisting of a minimum of num asphalt residue achieved by diluting with water .
apply the tack coat at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num lm that provides uniform coverage without excess runoff and allow tack to break before releasing to construction traffic .
adjust application rate of tack coat based on surface texture and porosity .
apply the tack coat only to areas that will be covered by the microsurface during the same day .
do not apply tack coat on top of a leveling course prior to placing the surface course .
protect drainage structures monument boxes water valve etc .
during material application .
num test strip .
construct a continuous numfoot num m long by lane width test strip for each approved jmfs for the project .
the test strip will demonstrate the mix and set time of the material and ability to perform under full traffic .
if handwork will be performed on the project include handwork in the test strip .
construct the test strip at the same time of day or night the full production will be applied .
perform a yield check to ensure the proper spread rate surface quality requirements and compliance with jmf components are met .
submit results to the engineer .
the engineer will evaluate the completed test strip and yield check report after a minimum of num hours under traffic to determine if the mix design and application is acceptable .
the contractor may begin full production after the engineer accepts the test strip .
if the microsurfacing is being applied between may num and october num the department may waive the test strip if the contractor has constructed a department accepted test strip during the same timeframe with the same materials and jmfs and with no documented project performance issues .
provide documentation project number district route test strip date engineer etc .
and history from the previous test strips and calibrations to the engineer. . num application .
apply the microsurfacing mixture to the prepared surface in a manner to fill cracks shallow potholes and minor surface irregularities and achieve a uniform textured surface without causing skips lumps or tears .
carry a sufficient amount of material at all times in all parts of the spreader box to ensure complete and uniform coverage .
avoid overloading of the spreader box .
do not allow lumping balling or unmixed aggregate in the spreader box .
when specified place leveling courses to cover the entire pavement area as specified .
place the leveling course in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement .
provide a completed leveling course with no drag marks or tears greater than num inch num mm wide num inch num mm deep or num inches num mm in length .
provide a completed leveling course free of flushing bleeding or added roughness .
the completed leveling course may exhibit minor raveling upon opening to traffic but will not exhibit any continued raveling after the first four hours of traffic .
if a rut fill course is specified apply enough material to fill the wheel paths without excess crowning overfilling .
an excess crown is defined as num inch num mm after num hours of traffic compaction .
apply rut fill courses in widths from num to num feet num to num m for each wheel path .
provide a smooth neat seam where two rut fill passes meet .
take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement crosssection .
feather the edges of the rut fill course to minimize the use of excess material .
when specified apply rut fill courses in widths from num to num feet num to num m for each wheel path .
apply enough material to fill the wheel paths without excess crowning overfilling .
an excess crown is defined as num inch num mm after num hours of traffic compaction .
if rut depth exceeds num inches num mm apply rut fill course in multiple courses .
provide a smooth neat seam where two rut fill passes meet .
take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement crosssection .
after compaction by traffic ensure the completed rut fill does not result in deviations in excess of num inch num mm as measured across each wheel path using a num foot num m straight edge .
do not place microsurfacing surface course material until wheel path deviations in excess of num inch num mm are corrected .
place the rut fill course in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement .
provide a completed rut fill course with no drag marks or tears greater than num inch num mm wide num inch num mm deep or num inches num mm in length .
provide a completed rut fill course free of flushing bleeding or added roughness .
the completed rut fill course may exhibit minor raveling upon opening to traffic but will not exhibit any continued raveling after the first four hours of traffic .
if a leveling course and a surface course are specified apply the microsurfacing mixture at a minimum of num pounds per square yard num kgm of dry aggregate weight for the leveling course and num num pounds per square yard num num kgm of dry aggregate weight for the surface course .
apply the two courses at a minimum combined rate of num pounds per square yard num kgm of dry aggregate weight .
if a surface course is specified and it is not placed on a microsurfacing leveling course apply the microsurface mixture at a rate of num num pounds per square yard num num kgmnum of dry aggregate weight .
apply the mixture in a manner to produce a uniform surface texture across the entire paving pass .
for leveling and surface courses provide a smooth feathered neat seam of num to num inches num to num mm where two passes meet at the pavement centerline and at edge of shoulder .
in variable width pavement sections minimize overlap and feather overlapping pass on to the completed surface .
construct overlaps such that cross slope drainage is maintained .
immediately remove excess material from the ends of each run .
construct surface courses at a width to cover the outside edges of rut fill and leveling courses .
construct seams at or near edge of lane but do not construct seams in wheel paths .
maintain straight edge lines along curbs and shoulders .
do not allow runoff in these areas .
ensure that lines at intersections are straight .. use squeegees and lutes using similar material as the secondary strikeoff to spread the mixture in areas inaccessible to the spreader box and areas requiring hand spreading .
the contractor may adjust the mix set additive to provide a slower setting time if hand spreading is needed .
do not adjust the water content to adjust the setting time .
if hand spreading pour the mixture in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and spread it uniformly by a hand squeegee or lute .
provide uniform appearance of the entire surface area regardless of the means used to spread material .
ensure that the microsurfacing cures at a rate that will permit traffic on the pavement within num hour after application without damaging the pavement surface .
however should the contractor experience a curing condition that does not allow the opening to traffic within one hour work out an arrangement agreeable to the engineer before releasing traffic on the pavement .
if the final surface course is not uniform in texture free of streaks drag marks lumps or tears stop applying the mixture and take steps to correct the streaking problem .
do not resume work until the engineer is satisfied the problem has been corrected .
if a section of pavement is not going to be exposed to traffic within num hours compact it with a pneumatic tire roller after curing .
conform the pneumatic tire roller to num and inflate the tire pressure to num to num pounds per square inch num to num kpa .
num quality control .
a .
general .
use the methods described in this section to control the quality of the mixture and application and to measure compliance .
if any test results or measures of compliance exceed any of the identified quality control tolerances or specification requirements stop placement and immediately notify the engineer and district testing .
identify the cause of exceeding any of the identified quality control tolerances and document in detail the corrective action necessary to bring the deficiency into compliance .
implement the corrective action and resume work and immediately perform a test or measure to confirm corrective action has resolved the deficiency .
if upon resuming work the tolerances are exceeded stop the work .
present a revised corrective action plan to and obtain the engineers approval before resuming work .
upon resuming work immediately perform a test or measure to confirm corrective action has resolved the deficiency .
the department can obtain samples of materials at any time .
aggregate samples can be taken from sources on hand stockpiles or from the mixing equipment .
work can be stopped and materials and jmf can be rejected on the basis of poor department test results .
if the department reports noncompliance on any material test the department will compare results with the contractors quality control manager .
the engineer will determine if the tests or compliance measurement has been satisfactory corrected .
prior to starting placement verify the ph of the water to be used is within the acceptable range on the jmf .
verify again if source of water changes .
perform a minimum of four yield checks daily with one occurring within the first num linear feet num linear meter of continuous placement and the last occurring in the last num linear feet num linear meter .
perform at least one yield check for each course applied .
for crossovers driveways and any other irregular areas determine yield checks by a means acceptable to the engineer .
ensure yield checks are a minimum of num linear feet num linear meter for continuous loading mixing machines or one fullloaded truckmounted machine .
ensure yield checks meet and include documentation of compliance for sections num num num num and num .
b. binder .
within one hour of the start of production obtain and label a binder sample from supply tanker and diluted tack coat sample from the distributor truck and give the samples to the engineer the same day .
provide and sample the binder and diluted tack coat in one quart num l plastic containers with plastic screw tops .
label and retain one sample per each additional day for the department .
take more samples when requested by the engineer .
visually inspect binder in supply tankers to ensure uniform material with no separation or contamination .
verify temperature of binder and tack coat .
monitor and verify proportioning of asphalt emulsion and water into distributor and proper mixing before use or sampling .
perform a minimum of one binder and tack coat cookoff each production day to determine the residue content of the binder and tack coat and verify compliance .
c. aggregate .
ensure the aggregate stockpile gradation does not vary by more than the stockpile tolerance in table num compared to the approved jmf and does not exceed the design gradation band for no .
num num m sieve .
ensure the percent passing does not change from the high end to the low end of the range for any two consecutive sieves .
verify the blending and screening of aggregates at the stockpile site and sample the blended and screened aggregate for qc testing .
stockpile a minimum of num percent of the project aggregate or num tons num metric tons of aggregate whichever is less at a staging area .
obtain three num aggregate samples from the stockpile and perform gradation testing on each sample according to aashto t num aashto t num supplement num aashto t num where required and moisture content per aashto t num .
use dry gradations for determining the no .
num num m sieve .
determine the percent passing for each sieve size listed in table num .
calculate the average of each sieve for all three tests .
ensure the average value for each sieve is within the requirements of table num .
do not begin production if not in compliance with gradation band and stockpile tolerance .
at a minimum test one sample taken from the stockpile randomly during each production day .
include additional testing when directed to sample and test by the engineer .
the contractor may perform an additional aggregate test to verify results if first test is not in compliance with stockpile tolerance .
report and track all test results and monitoring trending of the aggregate gradation within the stockpile .
reject aggregate that does not meet the stockpile tolerance in table num compared to the approved jmf .
do not exceed the design gradation band for no .
num sieve .
for data collection by the department if requested by the engineer obtain a mix sample randomly during the day by dragging a tube sampler across material under the mixer but before the spreader box as it moves forward .
obtain a num pound num gram minimum mix sample put in a suitable plastic container and provide to the engineer .
d. mixture application .
ensure the quality control manager and trained technicians perform and use the methods described in this section to control quality and measure compliance .
num .
supervise the mixing machine calibration test strip application and verify compliance before production begins .
num .
establish with the mix operator restrictive operating limits for use of total mixture water additive and mineral filler subject to weather conditions and course applied .
num .
maintain all calibration records and compare calibration results for each project through construction season .
num .
direct all material input settings required to produce mix design compliance .
num .
verify mixture meets required mix time set time and mix consistency .
num .
perform an aggregate moisture test at the start of each production day .
num .
communicate and direct any desired adjustments with the binder supplier asphalt emulsion for mix and set time properties .
num .
evaluate roadway for determination of planned application rates and maintain direct communication with department personnel application personnel and engineer on all compliance issues .
num .
verify and document that all cracks greater than num inch num mm in width and all cracks longer than two feet num mm have been filled and that the crack sealant is in compliance with thickness requirements .
num .
monitor roadway during application for proper surface cleaning .
num .
monitor application of tack coat for proper coverage and document application rate .
num .
monitor mixture placement for consistency uniformity of thickness across paving pass and use of water spray bars .
num .
monitor mixture application rate and finishing methods to ensure uniform surface .
num .
monitor cross section compliance subject to course type specified .
num .
monitor set properties for opening to traffic and durability under traffic .
num .
monitor daily production reports for compliance with mix design tolerances .
num .
maintain each material usage by ticket weight and verify consistency to mixing machine calibrated use .
num .
direct adjustments of material settings and mixture subject to material test results and field performance .
num .
monitor haul trucks mixing machine and allied equipment for oil drippings aggregate spillage and other factors that may affect the adherence or performance of the applied mixture .
e. documentation .
provide the engineer a daily report no later than the next calendar day excluding sundays with the following num .
a printout from the mixing machine showing the total pounds of aggregate emulsion and cement as well any other materials capable of being printed used for the day as part of the daily production report .
num .
project number county and route .
num .
date air temperature pavement temperature and humidity .
num .
binder temperature percent residue and pounds per gallon grams per liter num .
production report with courses applied lanes completed location of work daily summary of each material used application rate for each course and lane and total area per course .
num .
yield checks on application rate and compliance with application placement requirements four per day minimum .
num .
gradation and moisture content one random sample during the day and any other samples when directed by the engineer .
num .
total gallons l of tack cost used and residual asphalt content .
num .
quality control tests and reports .
num .
contractor representatives signature .
provide a bill of lading for binder and aggregate as requested or at project completion .
num acceptance .
maintain continuous control of the binder to dry aggregate proportioning to conform to the approved jmfs within a tolerance of num gallons per ton num lmetric ton .
control the spread rate to not less than the specified quantity of aggregate per square yard square meter on a dry weight basis .
within one hour of start of production obtain and label a binder and diluted tack coat sample from the distributor trucks and give the samples to the engineer the same day .
provide and sample the binder and diluted tack coat in one quart plastic containers with plastic screw tops .
label and retain one sample of each per each additional day for the department .
take more samples when requested by the engineer .
the engineer will base acceptance of the bindertodry aggregate proportion and spread rate on the engineers summary of quantities used each day .
the engineer will approve and accept a days application of microsurfacing provided a .
the engineers summary indicates conformance with the above control requirements for proportioning and spread rate and b .
the courses applied are in compliance with the application requirements of this specification and c. the pavement cracks are sealed prior to placement of the microsurface and d. the quality control requirements are met and e. the pavement is uniform in composition and texture free from excessive scratch marks tears rippling and other surface irregularities segregation raveling rutting holes debris etc .
longitudinal joints and lane edges coincide with any lane lines and edge lines and transverse joints are uniform neat and provide a smooth transition .
the spread rate requirement does not apply to rut fill courses if the contractor filled the wheel paths according to this specification .
num performance review .
perform remedial actions for any defect exceeding the threshold levels in table num for a period of two years from the date of substantial work complete as documented on the departments form cnum .
contact the department to schedule a final performance review at least num days prior to the end performance review period .
the department will review the pavement before the end of the two year performance review period to determine if remedial action is required .
the department will issue the results in writing to the contractor upon completion of the performance review .
remedial actions .
perform remedial actions by october numth of the same year as the review .
if the department determines that immediate repairs are necessary due to a potential hazard to the traveling public the department will notify the contractor and establish a date that all repairs are to be finished .
provide construction traffic control when performing any work required or allowed by this specification in accordance with current department policy and the ohio manual of uniform traffic control devices .
obtain department approval for the time the work will be performed .
provide approved materials equipment and labor to perform remedial actions at no additional cost to the department .
prior to performing a remedial action submit a remedial action plan to the dce for approval .
state in the plan when and how the remedial action will be performed what material will be used and how traffic will be controlled .
warrant remedial action work for the remainder of the warranty period .
use only microsurfacing for permanent repair and resurfacing areas .
perform temporary repairs using material approved by the dca .
replace temporary repairs with a permanent repair as soon as weather permits .
replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers rpm removed obliterated or damaged while performing a remedial action with equivalent approved pavement markings or rpms products at no cost to the department .
the contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the contractors control i.e .
car fire oil spill structural issues etc .. table num defect type threshold level num allowable distress levels nonuniform mixture num num square feet num mnum surface loss num num square feet num mnum raveling num num square feet num mnum rutting num num num inch num mm continuous in any segment .
notes num texture inconsistencies in either the transverse and or longitudinal direction .
num loss of surface by traffic wear debonding or delamination .
num moderate level raveling as defined in the strategic highway research program shrp distress identification manual for the longterm pavement performance project shrppnum .
num measure the wheel path with a num foot num m straight edge .
num only applies during the first num days of warranty or after any warranty work .
num based on num foot num m lane segment .
the beginning of a segment is the beginning of any distress type .
if any num foot num meter lane segment has repairs or defects greater than num percent of the area resurface with a full lane width of microsurfacing meeting the requirements of this specification .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure microsurfacing surface course and microsurfacing leveling course by the number of square yards square meters complete and accepted in place .
the department will base the width of the pavement course on the width shown on the plans specified in this specification or directed by the engineer .
the department will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
the department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed .
the department will measure microsurfacing rut fill course by the number of tons metric tons of dry aggregate used complete and accepted in place .
the department will base the weight of the dry aggregate used on the calibrated unit weight as reported from the aggregate delivery belt .
num basis of payment .
the cost of tack coat and item num crack sealing is incidental to microsurfacing .
the department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to num under items num num num num num and num as specified .
the department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to item num raised pavement markers removed .
the department will pay for the construction of accepted test strips at the individual bid prices for the courses constructed .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard microsurfacing surface course square meter num square yard microsurfacing leveling course square meter num ton microsurfacing rut fill course metric ton item num chip seal num description num materials num equipment num weather limitations num test strip num surface preparation num binder application num cover aggregate application num construction operation num quality control num acceptance num performance review num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing and applying a single or double chip seal .
warrant exposed chip seals for two years .
num materials .
use polymer emulsified binder conforming to num type a .
provide aggregate consisting of washed limestone or washed dolomite conforming to num .
do not use an aggregate source designated with sr on the aggregate source group list in accordance with num.f .
additionally the following requirements apply stockpile the material to be used for the chip seal at the aggregate source .
obtain five num samples from the stockpile and perform gradation testing on each sample and determine the percent passing for each sieve size listed in table num a .
calculate the total range for the no .
num num mm sieve for all five samples .
the range will not exceed num .
b .
calculate the percent passing the no .
num num m sieve for each sample .
no single sample value will exceed num percent .
c. calculate the average of each sieve for all five samples .
ensure the average value for each sieve is within the requirements of table num .
submit a letter to the engineer and district testing containing the jmf gradations and the calculations to show the cover aggregate meets requirements .
if a staging location will be used for the chip seal aggregate first move the initially tested aggregates from the aggregate source stockpile to the staging location and construct a staging stockpile .
then obtain five num aggregate samples from the staging location stockpile and perform gradation testing on each sample to determine the percent passing for each sieve size listed in table num .
evaluate the staging location aggregate samples the same as the aggregate source samples except allow an average for the no .
num num m sieve not greater than num percent .
submit the jmf gradations from the staged stockpile and the calculations to show the cover aggregate meets requirements in letter form to the engineer and district testing .
if the chip seal aggregates fail to meet requirements either at the aggregate source or the staging location re wash andor rework the aggregate materials and retest the new stockpiles .
table num sieve size total percent passing type a type b num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num num to num num num washed gradation value the district may obtain and test verification samples of the jmf aggregates at any time .
if a single verification sample is either outside the values in table num with the exception that the no .
num num m value is not greater than num percent the district will obtain five num samples and retest to determine if the aggregate jmf falls within the limits of table num .
if the jmf verification test doesnt meet the source or staging location limits the stockpile is not acceptable .
num equipment .
provide equipment conforming to the requirements of this section .
obtain approval of equipment before starting the job .
use equipment for binder distribution conforming to num except ensure that it has a computerized rate control that automatically adjusts the binder pump to the unit ground speed and has a gauge or meter in plain view for reading gallons liters .
use appropriate spray nozzles for the material and rate specified .
adjust spray bar and nozzles to provide triple lap coverage .
use type ii pneumatic tire rollers conforming to num with the exception of the requirements of table num num roller capacity .
use a minimum of num type ii pneumatic tire rollers capable of ballast loading .
the roller weight must be between num to num tons num to num metric tons each to achieve a minimum contact pressure of num psi num kpa .
tires must be inflated to the proper pressure as specified by the roller manufacturer .
use selfpropelled aggregate spreaders with a variable width aggregate hopper capable of placing from num to num feet num to num m in any increment and a computerized rate control that automatically adjusts the aggregate output to the unit ground speed .
equip spreaders with pneumatic tires a screen to remove oversized material revolving cylinders and adjustments necessary to produce a uniform distribution of particles at the specified rate .
furnish power sweepers pickup sweepers or rotary brooms as required for the initial surface preparation and for removing loose aggregate particles .
furnish accurate thermometers for determining any of the applicable temperature requirements of this specification .
num weather limitations .
place the chip seal when the pavement temperature is between num f num c and num f num c. do not schedule the performance of this work for the time period before may num or after september num .
do not place chip seal if any of the following conditions exist a .
the atmospheric temperature is below num f num c. b .
impending weather conditions do not allow for proper curing .
c. if temperatures are forecasted below num f num c within num hours from the time of work .
num test strip .
construct a continuous numfoot num m long by lane width test strip in the presence of the engineer .
do not waive test strips regardless if the same materials have been used on another project .
determine the initial binder application rates and aggregate application rates for the test strip to achieve num aggregate embedment .
for a single chip seal type a an initial target rate of num num gallon per square yard num lm is recommended for the test strip .
for a single chip seal type b an initial target rate of num num gallon per square yard num lm is recommended for the test strip .
for double chip seal a target rate of num num gallon per square yard num lm for the first course and num num gallon per square yard num lm for the second course is recommended for the test strip .
notify the engineer of the initial target rates .
calibrate the aggregate spreader to ensure a uniform application rate in both the transverse and longitudinal directions .
verify the application rates with a one square yard one square meter piece of cardboard or other material to collect and weigh the aggregate .
adjust spreader rates to maintain application rate within num of the target rate .
do not over apply cover aggregate relying on vacuum and broom sweeping to pick up all excess .
amounts of loose aggregate that create a nuisance to the public will result in work stoppage .
if work is stopped by the engineer recalibrate the aggregate spreader determining a new application rate and apply cover aggregate at the new rate .
verify the aggregate gradation meets num.c .
during the test strip and provide the results to the engineer .
the engineer and contractor will review the test strip the next workday for streaking ridging bleeding aggregate loss or other problems .
if the review shows the test strip meets the requirements of num and the application rate and quality control tests show all is in control compared to the jmf then progress with the work .
should problems be noted the engineer may require another test strip .
jmf gradation targets may be adjusted once within the limits of table num based on results of the approved test strip .
provide adjusted gradation targets to the engineer and the det prior to progressing with the work .
num surface preparation .
clean the pavement according to num .
if necessary clean areas of the pavement with a hand broom .
remove all existing pavement markings except num traffic paint using an abrasion method conforming to num .
remove the raised pavement markers according to num .
do not place material until the engineer approves the existing surface .
num binder application .
before applying binder ensure that sufficient cover aggregate is available for immediate application .
apply the binder at the target rates established from a successful test strip .
ensure distributor spray bar and nozzles are set to provide triple overlap coverage with no streak or drill patterns on the road surface .
maintain the binder temperature from num to num f num to num c during construction including the start of each day .
reheat the binder at a rate of no more than num f num c per hour when the binder is allowed to cool below num f num c. if the target application rates are not the optimum application rates to achieve proper stone embedment during the actual application immediately notify the engineer .
proper stone embedment is num of the stone chip height and can be checked by pulling out several chips by hand .
adjust and document the new application rate by stationing .
recheck stone embedment after adjustment and obtain the engineers approval of the new rate .
do not allow the binder to streak on the road surface .
if the engineer determines that streaking is occurring cease operations until the engineer is satisfied that streaking has been eliminated .
at the beginning and at the end of a contract section start and stop the application on a removable protective cover paper metal sheets or other suitable material sufficiently wide enough to allow full application on the surface being treated .
make transverse and longitudinal laps in such manner to ensure that the texture of the finished surface is uniform and continuous .
to prevent lapping at transverse junctions promptly shut off the binder spray at the end of the application .
before continuing the application place a removable protective cover a sufficient distance back from the joint on the cover aggregate so the sprayers are operating at full force when the distributor has attained the predetermined speed upon reaching the uncovered surface .
upon completion remove all removable protective covers .
num cover aggregate application .
verify the application rate with a one square yard one square meter piece of cardboard or other material to collect and weigh the aggregate before placing binder .
adjust if necessary and reverify .
record final results and inform the engineer .
immediately after applying the binder apply cover aggregate uniformly without ridges or laps at the specified rate adjusted as directed by the engineer to produce a minimum of excess loose particles .
spread the material in such manner that the tires of the truck or aggregate spreader at no time contact the uncovered and newly applied binder .
before rolling correct deficiencies in the application of cover aggregate in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
after rolling protect the surface from traffic damage during the period required for the binder to cure sufficiently and prevent dislodging of the aggregate particles by normal traffic .
during this period and as directed by the engineer correct deficiencies in cover aggregate by spreading additional aggregate or by light brooming .
apply cover aggregate at a rate necessary to provide full coverage of the binder and to avoid tracking .
do not over apply cover aggregate relying on vacuum and broom sweeping to pick up all excess .
nuisance to the public amounts of aggregate will result in work stoppage .
if work is stopped by the engineer recalibrate the aggregate spreader determining a new application rate and apply cover aggregate at the new rate .
if the target rate needs adjustment due to the gradation of the aggregate or due to existing surface conditions of the pavement immediately notify the engineer and document the new rate by stationing .
num construction operation .
establish stations at numfoot num m intervals on the entire project before placing materials .
clearly identify and maintain the stations until project completion .
keep the binder distributor aggregate spreader and rollers as close to each other as possible .
do not allow the binder distributor to be more than num feet num m ahead of the aggregate spreader .
perform rolling immediately after placing the aggregate but before the binder sets up .
do not leave aggregate unrolled for more than num minutes .
perform a minimum of two complete roller passes over the aggregate .
a single complete pass is forward and backward over the same path .
for each new pass overlap the previous pass by about onehalf the width of the roller .
use a minimum of three rollers and roll in a longitudinal direction at a speed not greater than num miles per hour num kmh .
do not operate rollers at speeds that cause pickup or dislodging of aggregate particles .
within num hours of placement but after the binder sets sweep the pavement as needed to remove all loose aggregate .
use pickup sweepers in curbed areas and where aggregate shoulders do not exist .
do not sweep loose aggregate onto lawns curbed areas or intersections .
if the pavement can not be swept within the numhour period due to problems associated with the stone moisture binder breaking humidity or other unknown the engineer may suspend the operation until the problem is resolved or more suitable conditions are obtained to maintain the numhour time frame for sweeping .
extend sweeping num foot num m beyond the edge of the chip seal to help prevent migration of loose aggregate back onto the pavement .
do not reuse aggregate from a chip seal that is swept from the pavement or that is already loose off the pavement edge .
perform a final sweeping immediately before application of permanent pavement markings or a fog seal if a fog seal is required .
use pickup sweepers in curbed areas and where aggregate shoulders do not exist .
do not sweep loose aggregate onto lawns curbed areas or intersections .
the contractor is responsible for claims of damage to vehicles prior to the final sweeping .
wait at least num hours before placing the second course of a double chip seal .
ensure the first course of a double chip seal meets the gradation of table num type a and the second course meets the gradation of table num num type b .
ensure that the first course meets requirements of this specification and is cured and capable of withstanding construction traffic without damage .
if loose aggregate is evident sweep the first course again just prior to placing the second course .
correct damage to the underlying chip seal before placing the second course .
place the longitudinal construction joint on a lane line or as directed by the engineer .
for double chip seal place the longitudinal construction joint for the first course num inches num mm off the centerline and place the second course so the longitudinal joint is at the centerline .
before opening to traffic post the roadway with loose gravelfresh tar signs and a num mph speed plaque mounted below the sign .
ensure that signs conform to item num .
place these signs in the advance warning area and just beyond each intersecting road throughout the length of the activity area .
remove the signs as directed by the engineer .
on twolane roads or pavements where traffic is maintained on a chip seal constructed that workday provide a traffic control pilot vehicle operated at no more than num miles per hour num kmh in the immediate work area .
protect all utility castings monument boxes and other similar items using tarpaper or other approved material .
remove protection before sweeping and opening to traffic .
num quality control a .
general .
use the methods described in this section to measure compliance .
if test results exceed any of the identified quality control tolerances stop placement and immediately notify the engineer and district testing .
identify the cause of exceeding any of the identified quality control tolerances and document in detail the corrective action necessary to bring the deficiency into compliance .
obtain the engineers approval before resuming work .
upon resuming work take another sample and immediately provide the test results to the engineer .
if the tolerances are exceeded stop the work .
do not resume work until approved by the engineer and district testing .
the department can obtain samples of materials at any time .
aggregate samples can be taken from sources onhand stockpiles or the aggregate spreader box .
work can be stopped and materials can be rejected on the basis of poor department test results .
any deficient materials found to be incorporated in the project will be evaluated per supplement num .
b. binder .
within one hour of start of production obtain and label a binder sample from the distributor truck and give the sample to the engineer the same day .
provide and sample the binder in one quart plastic containers with plastic screw tops .
label and retain one sample per each additional day for the department .
take more samples when requested by the engineer .
for the binder application rate as determined by a yield check do not exceed a tolerance of num gallon per square yard num lm from the established application rate .
c. coarse aggregate .
at a minimum test one sample taken from the aggregate spreader box at production start and sample and test one sample from the aggregate spreader box randomly during the day .
provide the engineer with a split sample that is a minimum of numlbs numg from each days random sample for verification testing .
an aggregate spreader box sample may be taken by laying a piece of suitable material under the spreader as it moves forward .
include additional testing when directed to sample and test by the engineer .
sample and test aggregate according to aashto t num aashto t num and supplement num aashto t num where required .
use washed gradations for determining the percent passing the no .
num num m sieve .
submit daily test results to the engineer prior to beginning the next days production .
the contractor may use additional tests .
these may include dry gradations for control purposes but acceptance of onhand aggregate will be based on washed gradations only .
reject and do not use aggregate creating dusting nuisance to the public on the project .
reject truckloads of aggregate if water is seen coming from the truck bed .
reject aggregate that does not meet the following requirements no .
num num mm sieve from jmf num no .
num num mm sieve from jmf num no .
num num m sieve from jmf num num upper limit aggregate moisture content by dry weight num max .
for aggregates with an absorption num num max .
for aggregates with an absorption num d. documentation .
provide the engineer a daily report with the following num .
project number county route .
num .
date air temperature pavement temperature and humidity .
num .
binder temperature .
num .
beginning and ending stations .
num .
target binder and aggregate application rates .
num .
yield checks on binder three per day minimum .
num .
yield checks on aggregate three per day minimum .
num .
gradation moisture content and station one sample from spreader box at production start one random sample during the day and any other samples when directed by the engineer .
num .
length width and total area .
num .
condition of loose stone signs with num mph speed plaques .
num .
contractor representatives signature .
provide a bill of lading for binder and aggregate when requested or at project completion .
num acceptance .
inspect the chip seal daily for deficiencies resulting from poor workmanship flushing tracking from equipment surface patterns loss of stone and sweeping .
inspect workmanship for untreated areas minimum overlap on longitudinal joints and minimum overlap on construction joints .
verify the following for daily acceptance a .
finished surface has no more than four tears or untreated areas greater than num inch num mm wide and num inches num mm long in any numsquare yard num mnum area .
b .
joints appear neat and uniform without buildup uncovered areas or unsightly appearance .
c. longitudinal joints have less than a numinch num mm overlap on the adjacent passes .
d. transverse joints have no more than numinch num mm difference in elevation across the joint as measured with a numfoot num m straightedge .
e. chip seal edge is neat and uniform along the roadway lane shoulder and curb lines .
f. chip seal edge has no more than numinch num mm variance in any num feet num m along the roadway edge or shoulder .
g. typical stone chip embedment is num of typical stone chip height .
for project acceptance the contractor and engineer will review the completed work num to num days after placement .
the finished work must meet the following requirements defect num severity surface patterns alternate lean and heavy lines ridges or streaking over the surface bleedingflushing distinctive appearance excess binder on surface loss of cover aggregate patches or lines of aggregate lost from surface num no more than num of any num square yard num mnum area can contain any defect .
the measurement of the num square yard num mnum area begins at the start of the defect .
perform all corrective work to the satisfaction the engineer .
num performance review .
perform remedial actions for any defect exceeding the threshold levels in table num for a period of two years from the date of substantial work complete as documented on the departments form cnum .
contact the department to schedule a final performance review at least num days prior to the end performance review period .
the department will review the pavement before the end of the two year performance review period to determine if remedial action is required .
the department will issue the results in writing to the contractor upon completion of the performance review .
remedial actions .
perform remedial actions between may num and september num .
if the department determines that immediate repairs are necessary due to a potential hazard to the traveling public the department will notify the contractor and establish a date that all repairs are to be finished .
provide construction traffic control when performing any work required or allowed by this specification during the warranty period in accordance with current department policy and the ohio manual of uniform traffic control devices .
the department will approve when the work is performed .
provide approved materials equipment and labor to perform remedial actions at no additional cost to the department .
prior to performing a remedial action submit a remedial action plan to the dca for approval .
state in the plan when and how the remedial action will be performed what material will be used and how traffic will be controlled .
warrant remedial action work for the remainder of the warranty period .
replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers rpm removed obliterated or damaged while performing a remedial action with pavement markings or rpms equal approved products at no cost to the department .
the contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the contractors control i.e .
car fire oil spill structural issues etc .. table num each segment will be num ft num m in length and the width of the lane .
the beginning point of a num ft num m segment starts at the beginning of any individual defect type .
for loss of aggregate the beginning point of a num ft num m lane segment will exclude locations where vehicles turn from or onto other state highways .
defect severity threshold levels surface patterns severe light and heavy lines over the pavement surface num of segment length affected continuous or localized bleeding flushing moderate excess binder on surface loss of stonetire contact not subject to wearing off quickly num of segment length affected continuously or total of num localized problems loss of aggregate moderate patches of aggregate loss num of segment length affected continuously or total of num localized problems num method of measurement .
the department will measure single chip seal or double chip seal by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted in place .
the department will determine the width by measuring the actual width of the chip seal .
the department will determine the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
the department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed if a double chip seal is specified .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for materials equipment or labor to make corrections .
the department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to items num num num num num and num as specified .
the department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to item num raised pavement markers removed .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard single chip seal type __ square meter num square yard double chip seal square meter item num crack sealing hot applied num description num materials num equipment num weather limitations num preparation num mixing type ii and iii num application of sealant num opening to traffic num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing and sealing pavement cracks with a hot applied crack sealant .
num materials .
furnish hot applied crack sealant of the type specified conforming to type i num type ii num.b type iii num.c type iv num.d furnish type i crack sealant material according to the departments tenum system before shipping to the project .
obtain approval of other crack sealants according to num .
num equipment .
equipment used in the performance of this work is subject to the engineers approval and to the requirements of num .
for type i crack sealant heat the sealant in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler with the space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heattransfer fluid .
use a kettle or melter with positive temperature control of the oil bath and provide a mixing vat mechanical agitation and recirculating pumps .
do not apply direct heat to the sealant .
for types ii iii and iv crack sealants heat the sealant in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler with the space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heattransfer fluid .
use a kettle or melter with separate thermometers for the oil bath and mixing vat .
equip the kettle with a full sweep type agitator .
also equip the kettle with a numinch num mm minimum recirculating pump to provide circulation of the materials when not applying the crack sealant .
do not apply direct heat to the sealant .
for types i and iv crack sealants use a mechanical applicator wand capable of continuously feeding the sealant through nozzles shaped to penetrate the cracks .
a positive sealant flow shutoff mechanism is required .
ensure that the wand produces a band according to the tolerances of num .
for types ii and iii crack sealants use a mechanical applicator wand head capable of placing the crack sealant according to the tolerances of num while filling the cracks .
a positive sealant flow shutoff mechanism is required .
use portable air compressors capable of furnishing at least num pounds per square inch num kpa of air pressure at the nozzle .
use compressors equipped with traps that maintain the compressed air free of oil and water .
use water cleaning equipment capable of delivering water at num pounds per square inch num mpa of pressure from a nozzle to the crack being cleaned .
use a propane lance unit capable of producing a blast of hot air that operates at num f num c and a gas velocity of num feet per second num ms. use mechanical and power driven routing and sawing equipment capable of following close to the path of cracks and of widening the cracks to the required dimension without causing excessive spalling or damage to the adjacent pavement .
for sawing equipment use diamond saw blades with a diameter of num inches num mm or less .
num weather limitations .
do not seal cracks if the surface is visibly damp or the temperature is below num f num c. num preparation .
fill all visible cracks according to num or as directed by the engineer .
if routing is specified rout cracks with an opening less than num inch num mm to provide a sealant reservoir with a nominal size of num inch num mm wide by num inch num mm deep .
if sawing is specified saw all cracks to num to num inch num to num mm wide and num to num inch num to num mm deep .
use hand tools or a lightweight chipping hammer to remove all slivers of asphalt concrete less than num inch num mm wide remaining along the crack after sawing .
immediately before sealing sandblast both faces of the sawed crack to remove all contamination and to texture the faces .
if the crack below the sealant reservoir is greater than num inch num mm wide insert a backer rod into the crack to form the bottom of the reservoir at the proper depth .
before applying the hot sealant clean cracks by an approved method or methods to remove dust dirt moisture vegetation and other foreign material .
keep the cracks clean and dry until all sealing operations are completed .
num mixing type ii and iii .
use weigh tickets in determining the specified proportion of fiber to blend into the binder .
add fibers to the binder and mix thoroughly in the kettle .
do not allow the temperature of the sealant in the field application to exceed the safe heating temperature recommended by the manufacturer .
do not heat type iii crack sealant to greater than num f num c. num application of sealant .
perform the crack sealing operation within num feet num m of the cleaning operation .
seal only cracks that are wide enough to permit entry of sealant .
seal tightly closed cracks less than numinch num mm wide only if they show signs of raveling or spalling .
do not seal cracks greater than numinch num mm wide and do not seal spalls or cavities greater than num inches num mm wide unless otherwise directed .
for types i and iv crack sealants fill the entire crack reservoir with the sealant from the bottom up to approximately num inch num mm above the pavement surface .
immediately scrape the filled cracks with a vshaped or ushaped squeegee or similar hand tool to smooth the overfill .
this may require more than one application of sealant .
the engineer will not accept the work if the band of sealant on the pavement surface is greater than num inches num mm wide .
for types ii and iii crack sealants place the sealant such that it fills the cracks with a band of sealant within num to num inches num to num mm wide .
the engineer will not accept the work if the thickness on the pavement is greater than num inches num mm .
num opening to traffic .
do not allow traffic on the sealant until it has cured and the possibility of tracking no longer exists .
however if the engineer determines it is necessary to allow traffic to pass over the sealant before adequate curing dust portland cement or other approved material over sealed cracks to eliminate pickup or tracking .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure crack sealing of the type specified by the number of pounds kilograms of hot applied sealant in place completed and accepted .
the department will measure crack sealing of the type specified by the square yards of sealing completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num pound kilogram crack sealing type i or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing with routing type i or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing with sawing type i or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing type ii or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing type iii or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing type ii or iii or square yard square meter num pound kilogram crack sealing type iv or square yard square meter item num fine graded polymer asphalt concrete num description num composition num materials num mixing num weather limitations num spreading compacting and finishing num surface tolerances num acceptance num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a surface course of aggregate and polymer modified asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface .
the requirements of num apply except as modified by this specification .
num composition .
for type a mixes use num percent modified asphalt binder by total mix weight .
for type b mixes submit a proposed jmf according to num to the laboratory that meets the requirements of a type num surface course except as follows a .
minimum vma num percent b .
minimum total binder content num percent c. design air voids num percent d. for projects with less than num trucks use num blows for projects with greater than or equal to num trucks use num blows .
if multiple traffic segments occur on a project use num blows for the project .
num materials .
furnish clean uncoated aggregate conforming to the applicable requirements of table num and quality requirements of num .
use a pg numm asphalt binder or a pg num asphalt binder modified by adding num num percent by weight styrene butadiene rubber sbr solids and meeting the requirements of pg num .
provide sbr conforming to num .
provide mineral filler conforming to num .
provide binders conforming to num .
ten percent rap may be used in a type b mix if all requirements of footnote num are met by the rap .
do not use rap in a type a mix .
table num mix gradation sieve size total percent passing type a num type b num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num num gradation includes any mineral filler and is specified in percent passing .
num use natural sand with at least num percent silicon dioxide by weight according to astm c num .
include with a jmf submittal certified test data from an aashto accredited laboratory showing conformance to the num percent silicon dioxide requirement .
ensure data is no more than one year old at time of submittal .
num fine aggregate use natural sand with at least num percent silicon dioxide by weight according to astm c num .
include with a jmf submittal certified test data from an aashto accredited laboratory showing conformance to the num percent silicon dioxide requirement .
ensure data is no more than one year old at time of submittal .
for num blow mixes use no more than num percent limestone sand no .
num limestone or combination of both by weight of total aggregate .
for num blow mixes use num percent limestone sand no .
num limestone air cooled slag sand or combination thereof by weight of total aggregate .
if num percent rap is used the silicon dioxide content of the total natural sand blend must be at least num percent .
contact omm for guidance on submitting rap aggregate silicon dioxide data .
num coarse aggregate for num blow mixes for the final blend of all coarse aggregate use a minimum num percent two or more fractured faces aggregate .
for num blow mixes use num percent two or more fractured faces aggregate .
meet the two or more fractured faces aggregate criteria of astm dnum .
num mixing .
ensure the mixing plant conforms to num .
discharge the mix from the plant at temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c for hot mix asphalt or num f to num f num c to num c for warm mix asphalt .
num weather limitations .
do not place the asphalt concrete when the surface of the existing pavement is less than num f num c or the air temperature is less than num f num c. num spreading compacting and finishing .
compact type a or b mixes conforming to num and num .
if compacting a mixture num inch num mm thick or less do not use a spreading rate that exceeds twice the total capacity of the rollers in use .
use a minimum of two rollers .
do not allow traffic on the compacted mixture until it has cooled sufficiently to prevent damage .
num surface tolerances .
ensure the completed surface course conforms to num .
remove raised pavement markers according to num .
the contractor may fill the depression caused by the removal of the casting with material meeting this specification .
num acceptance .
for type a mixes comply with acceptance requirements of num .
for type b mixes comply with all requirements of num .
num method of measurement .
for type a mixes use a unit weight conversion of num tonscubic yard num metric tonscubic meter .
the department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to item num raised pavement markers removed .
the department will make payment for accepted quantities completed in place at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard fine graded polymer asphalt concrete type a cubic meter num cubic yard fine graded polymer asphalt concrete type b cubic meter item num asphalt concrete mix design and quality control num description num composition num antistrip additive num jmf field adjustment num monitoring num quality control program num testing facilities num quality control tests num control charts num quality control reports num mixture deficiencies num acceptance num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a surface course or an intermediate course of aggregate and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and compacted on a prepared surface .
this specification includes general requirements applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements where the contractor is responsible for performing the mix design and quality control .
deviations from these general requirements will be covered in the specific requirements for each type .
the requirements of item num apply except as follows .
control all production processes to assure the engineer that the mixture delivered to the paving site is uniform in composition conforms to the specification requirements and that the placed mixture is free of any defect e.g .
segregation tenderness lack of mixture and texture uniformity raveling flushing rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control at project completion .
when specified provide antisegregation equipment for all courses of uniform thickness in accordance with num .
num composition .
compose the asphalt concrete of approved aggregates asphalt binder and if required other modifiers .
develop a jmf to comply with the mix design criteria and submit it to omm on approved forms at least two weeks prior to the start of production for preliminary approval .
omm may require additional time prior to preliminary approval to perform tests on lab or plant produced mixtures to ensure adequate mix performance .
omm will notify the contractor if additional time for testing is required .
based on the results of this testing omm may require the contractor to design a new jmf .
perform the mix design and supply all required data in a manner taught in level num asphalt technician school level num asphalt mix design school and in the asphalt institute manual series no .
num .
omm may visit the level num mix design lab for review .
use a numhour cure for all mix samples .
ensure the cure temperature and specimen compaction temperature are the same .
select the jmf asphalt binder content using the design air voids and ensure the jmf meets the other requirements of table num .
determine air voids from specimens prepared and tested according to supplement num .
provide a mix design with at least four asphalt binder content points including a minimum of two points above and two points below the jmf asphalt binder content .
submit no more than two jmfs for each asphalt concrete pay item per project .
additional submittals are at the discretion of omm .
unless otherwise directed submit a numpound num g minimum uncompacted sample all mixes representing the jmf .
submit additional samples as requested by omm .
do not start mix production without a preliminary jmf approval and num hour notification of district testing .
final approval of a jmf will be based upon field verification .
according to num the jmf can be rejected for failure to verify in the plant or at the project .
do not apply the gradation requirements of num for fine aggregate .
if the fa ratio using total asphalt binder content is greater than num recalculate it using the effective asphalt binder content .
calculate the effective asphalt binder content according to the asphalt institute manual series no .
num .
the value calculated to the nearest percentage point of the fifty to thirty ft value is the percent of total aggregate retained between the no .
num num m and no .
num num m sieves minus the percent of total aggregate retained between the no .
num num m and no .
num num mm sieves .
use a pg num asphalt binder for a type num intermediate course unless rap andor ras used according to num require a virgin binder grade change .
use a pg num asphalt binder for a type num intermediate course unless rap andor ras used according to num require a virgin binder grade change .
use a pg num asphalt binder and type num surface gradation for asphalt concrete for driveways and under guardrails .
identify the pg binder supplier as well as the polymer type if applicable on the jmf submittal .
a change in polymer asphalt binder or polymer source will require a redesign .
provide on one page neatly summarized dated test results for the requirements of table num .
ensure data is no more than two months old .
if sbr polymer is added at the asphalt concrete mixing plant provide in the jmf data from the sbr polymer supplier for total solids percent and ash percent according to the num .
as well provide the target amount of sbr polymer greater than or equal to num percent to achieve the properties specified .
include a letter of certification from the polymer supplier verifying percent butadiene in the sbs or sbr polymer .
report in the jmf submittal results of temperatureviscosity testing for mixing and compaction temperatures .
for polymer asphalt binders supplier recommended temperatures may be used in lieu of the temperatureviscosity results but the temperatureviscosity results must still be reported .
table num asphalt mixture composition property type num surface type num intermediate type num intermediate num num inch num mmnum num num inch num mmnum num num inch num mmnum num num inch num mmnum num num num num inch num mmnum num num to num no .
num num mmnum num num num no .
num num mmnum num num to num num no .
num num mmnum num num to num num no .
num num mnum num num to num num no .
num num mnum num num to num num to num no .
num num mnum num num to num num to num no .
num num mnum asphalt bindernum num num to num num to num fa ratio max.num num num num ft valuenum num num blowsnum num num num stability min .
poundsnum n num num num num num num flow num mmnum num to num num to num num to num design air voidsnum num num num vma min.num num num num num sieve percent passing num percent of total mix num using effective asphalt binder content num percentage points maximum num aashto t num num percent supplement num num percent supplement num num use of reclaimed pavement .
comply with the requirements of num .
num antistrip additive .
if the proposed jmf contains any gravel coarse aggregate or contains more than num percent natural sand or contains more than num percent reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement containing gravel coarse aggregate or is designed according to item num conduct the following tests moisture damage potential test supplement num washed gradation aashto t num as modified by supplement num adherent fines test for each component astm d num modify the mix with one of the following antistrip additives if the results of the moisture damage potential test show the tensile strength ratio tsr of the asphalt concrete mix to be less than num for num mixes or num for all other mix types liquid antistrip material .
include liquid antistrip material at a rate of num to num percent by weight of the asphalt binder .
however if num is specified include liquid antistrip material at a rate of num to num percent by weight of the asphalt binder .
ensure the tsr of the asphalt concrete mix is greater than or equal to num after the addition of the liquid antistrip material .
hydrated lime .
include hydrated lime in the dry form at a rate of num percent by the dry weight of aggregate for asphalt concrete .
conform to aashto m num type num for hydrated lime .
ensure the tsr of the asphalt concrete mix is greater than or equal to num after the addition of the hydrated lime .
provide the engineer the following information for each shipment of hydrated lime letter of certification production date shipment date shipment destination batch or lot number and net weight .
the laboratory may obtain samples of the hydrated lime at any time to verify quality .
if the quality of the hydrated lime is in question the laboratory may require independent laboratory testing .
include the antistrip additive in the mix design .
submit the following to omm with the proposed jmf a .
all tsr data before and after the addition of the antistrip additive .
b .
rate of addition of the liquid antistrip material if used .
c. if using liquid antistrip material submit product information information on use by other state dots using the liquid antistrip material and a letter of certification .
if using hydrated lime submit certified test data showing the hydrated lime conforms to aashto m num type num .
d. results of the washed gradation test of the individual components of the mix used in determining the combined gradation .
e. results of the adherent fines testing for each component .
omm may perform additional tests on lab or plant produced mix according to supplements num num and num .
if a change in the aggregate production is suspected the laboratory may require the contractor to perform washed gradations on components and calculate adherent fines to determine the need for additional tsr review .
store and introduce antistrip additives into the plant according to supplement num .
obtain laboratory approval of the antistrip additive storage and feed systems prior to the start of production .
provide delivery tickets to the engineer at the end of the project and at the end of each construction year on a multiple year project .
the engineer will verify the number of pounds of antistrip additive used is within num percent of the calculated amount of antistrip additive required for the total weight of asphalt binder based on the jmf used in the asphalt concrete .
num jmf field adjustments .
during the first three days of production the contractor may adjust the jmf gradation within the below limits without a redesign of the mixture .
for projects with less than num days of production give district testing written notice of any jmf gradation adjustments within num workday following the last day of production .
limit adjustments of the jmf to conform to actual production without a redesign of the mixture to num percent passing each of the num inch num mm no .
num num mm and no .
num num mm sieves and num percent passing the no .
num numm sieve .
do not exceed the limits in table num and table num in the adjusted jmf .
the adjustment on the num inch num mm sieve applies only to type num mixes .
determine the need for any jmf gradation adjustments in the time specified .
should no adjustments be made the department will base acceptance on conformance to the original jmf .
after the time period specified the department will allow no further adjustment of the jmf .
should a redesign of the mixture become necessary submit a new jmf according to the requirements for the initial jmf .
a new acceptance lot will begin when a new jmf established by a redesign of the mixture becomes effective .
make any adjustment of this new jmf as provided for the original jmf .
record both the design jmf and the adjusted jmf in effect during production of an acceptance lot on the quality control report for that lot .
in the event that a new jmf is proposed and approved also make a notation on the ticket for the first load produced under the new jmf .
num monitoring .
the department will establish district monitoring teams for the purpose of verifying all contractor mixture production processes .
verification may be accomplished by obtaining split samples from contractor qc or independent samples from the plant or roadway .
if independent samples are taken split them for contractor testing .
if the mixture quality verifies then production may continue .
if mixture quality does not verify then the monitoring team and contractor will cooperatively investigate and resolve the problem .
whenever results are disputed omm will investigate and conduct additional testing to resolve .
based on their review the monitoring team may at any time disallow production to continue .
num quality control program .
submit a qcp according to num .
include an example control chart according to num with the qcp .
use quality control technicians working in the plant lab during all mixture production and that are approved by the department .
technician approval will be according to supplement num .
num testing facilities .
provide testing facilities at the plant site conforming to supplement num .
num quality control tests .
perform quality control tests to control the asphalt concrete mix within the specifications .
as required by mix type ensure that these quality control tests measure the asphalt binder content gradation air voids and maximum specific gravity msg according to the contractors qcp .
perform each quality control test a minimum of one time each half of a production day or night two tests per production day or night or one each num tons num metric tons whichever is less .
perform more sampling and testing than the minimum specified at the start of production .
additionally perform more sampling and testing than the minimum during production when the quality control tests show the asphalt concrete being produced is outside the warning bands as shown in the contractors qcp .
immediately resolve problems indicated by any test result exceeding the warning bands and immediately retest to validate corrections have returned the materials to within the warning band limits .
the contractor may determine the method of testing of the asphalt concrete beyond the minimum specified and will detail the methods technicians will follow in the contractors qcp .
should additional testing as required above not be performed district testing after consultation with omm will require the testing frequency be increased to all tests every two hours of production for the remainder of the project .
if this occurs district testing will request an opinion from the qcqc for actions against the technician andor contractor including but not limited to warning removal andor a change of the facility to unconditional acceptance .
record the results of every test performed .
perform the required quality control tests as follows a. asphalt binder content .
determine the asphalt binder content of a sample of asphalt concrete by performing an asphalt content ac gauge test according to supplement num .
make all printouts available for review by the monitoring team at any time .
offset the ac gauge for each jmf on each project at the projects start .
perform the offset using the solvent extraction method for every qc sample according to supplement num and the ac gauge verification and offset record until the offset is established .
use solvent extraction according to supplement num when an ac gauge problem exists and for testing cooled samples that can not adequately be tested in an ac gauge test .
total for each days production the flow meter printouts for sbr polymer added at the asphalt concrete mixing plant .
calculate the percent of polymer versus neat asphalt binder in the mix each day and record on the tenum .
hold calculation worksheets and printouts in the plant laboratory for review by the monitoring team .
a num percent tolerance from the target amount of sbr polymer will be used as a guide for an acceptable amount of sbr polymer but consistently low will not be acceptable .
only take sbr pgmodified binder samples using a five gallon num l bucket .
take num gallon num l to clean the valve port and discard .
take num gallons num l again stir its contents and transfer to the required sample containers .
determine the moisture content of the asphalt concrete for each ac gauge test .
maintain the moisture content at num percent or less .
b. gradation .
perform at least one gradation test each production day on aggregate remaining after removing the asphalt binder with a solvent from an asphalt concrete sample used in an ac gauge test solvent sample or on aggregate remaining after removing the asphalt binder with a preapproved asphalt ignition oven according to supplement num and from an asphalt concrete sample used in an ac gauge test ignition oven sample .
use only an asphalt ignition oven to obtain an aggregate sample from an asphalt concrete sample having a polymer modified pg binder .
district testing may make an exception to this for sbs polymer as long as no issues arise .
correct each solvent sample for ash .
perform all other gradations on solvent samples ignition oven samples or on samples obtained according to the contractors qcp .
the gradation results of all the sieves must be representative of the jmf .
if the contractor fails to control the entire gradation the laboratory may require a redesign according to num .
when the ft value is specified for a mix in num calculate it for each gradation analysis .
maintain the ft value at num percentage points or less for these mixes .
calculate the fa ratio for every solvent sample or ignition oven sample analysis .
maintain the fa ratio so no fa ratio is greater than num for all mixes .
use the asphalt binder content determined by the ac gauge for calculating the fa ratio .
if the fa ratio is greater than num recalculate the fa ratio using the effective asphalt binder content .
calculate the effective asphalt binder content on the calculation sheet using the asphalt binder content determined by the ac gauge and attach it to the quality control report .
use bulk and effective aggregate specific gravities and remaining values needed in the calculation from the approved jmf .
do not deviate from these values without omms approval .
if the fa ratio is greater than num for ignition oven samples calculate the fa ratio using the percent passing the no .
num num m sieve from a washed gradation of the ignition oven sample according to aashto t num .
c. air voids and msg .
determine the air voids of the asphalt concrete by analyzing a set of compacted specimens and a corresponding msg determination according to supplement num .
ensure that the cure temperature and specimen compaction temperature are the same .
use a numhour cure for all mix samples used in voids analysis .
the contractor may use a numhour cure time if voids are consistently near the low void warning band .
in this case use the numhour cure for all voids testing through the remainder of the project .
for hot mix asphalt use the jmf lab compaction temperature .
for warm mix asphalt according to num use a lab compaction temperature num f num c less than the jmf lab compaction temperature for hot mix asphalt .
use a compaction temperature tolerance of num f num c .
record on the tenum if the mixture produced was ran at the asphalt plant as a hot mix asphalt hma or as a warm mix asphalt wma produced according to num or another approved method .
calculate the voids in mineral aggregate vma value for every set of compacted specimens according to supplement num .
calculate the average of all the msg determinations performed each production day and report this average on the quality control report .
when the range of three consecutive daily average msg determinations is equal to or less than num average these three average msg determinations to determine the maximum theoretical density mtd .
after the mtd is established compare all individual msg determinations to the mtd .
whenever compacted specimens are to be made and an msg determination is to be run take a sample of sufficient size to run a corresponding ac gauge test .
when the air void and msg test results are recorded reference them to the ac gauge test of the sample .
d. other requirements .
supply proper containers and take two num quart num l asphalt binder samples from the first transport truck load of each different asphalt binder grade of the project before incorporation into the storage tank .
label the samples with binder grade supplier project number and date and retain them in the plant laboratory for future reference by the department .
discard the samples at project finaling if not taken by the monitoring team .
retain a split sample for each ac gauge test and msg test and all compacted specimens for monitoring by the department .
maintain msg samples in the state described in astm d num section num .
the contractor may dispose of the ac gauge test samples after two days and all other split samples after seven days if the department does not process the split samples .
measure the temperature of the mixture and record .
validate the results on the load tickets at least once during each hour of production .
the contractor may conduct additional testing of any type .
record such additional testing along with all other quality control records and have these records readily available for the monitoring teams review .
the laboratory may observe review and approve the procedures at any time .
num control charts .
maintain up to date control charts showing each individual test result and also the moving accumulative range as follows a .
plot tests showing the percent passing for the num inch num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm and no .
num num m sieves the percent asphalt binder content the msg and the percent air voids .
round all percentages to the nearest whole percent except round asphalt binder content the no .
num num m sieve and air voids to the nearest num percent .
b .
show the out of specification limits specified in table num and qcp warning band limits on the control charts .
c. label each control chart to identify the project mix type and producer .
d. record the moving accumulative range for three tests under each test point on the chart for air voids and asphalt binder content .
accumulative range is defined as the positive total of the individual ranges of two consecutive tests in three consecutive tests regardless of the up or down direction tests take .
if more than the minimum required testing i.e .
two tests per production day or night num first paragraph is performed do not include the result in accumulative range calculations .
stop production and immediately notify the monitoring team when either e or f occurs e. any two tests in a row or any two tests in two days are outside of the specification limits of table num .
f. any four consecutive moving accumulative ranges greater than specification limits of num percent for air voids or num percent for asphalt binder content occur .
any mixture sent to the paving site without stopping production and notifying the monitoring team when required by this specification will be considered nonspecification material .
do not restart production until an adequate correction to remedy problems is in place and the monitoring team is satisfied .
following a shutdown restart production in a manner acceptable to district testing .
when production problems can not be solved within one day after a plant shut down a contractors representative holding level num asphalt department approval is required to be at the asphalt plant until a full production day is achieved with results satisfactory to the monitoring team .
table num mix characteristic out of specification limitsnum asphalt binder contentnum num to num num inch num mm sievenum num to num no .
num num mm sievenum num to num no .
num num mm sievenum num to num no .
num num m sievenum num to num air voidsnum num to num air voidsnum num to num msgnum num to num num deviation from the jmf num for design air voids of num num for design air voids of num num deviation from the mtd numunless otherwise restricted by mix type specification num quality control reports .
use contractor form tenum for the quality control report .
record all test results on the quality control report .
document all decisions regarding responses to test results on the quality control report referring to the particular test including reasons why a particular problem may exist what action was taken to correct the problem plant operation or testing and what communication with department personnel took place .
submit one quality control report to district testing no later than specified .
retain copies of all records documenting the quality control inspections and tests throughout the life of the contract and furnish them to district testing on request .
num mixture deficiencies .
control all production processes to assure the engineer that the mixture delivered to the paving site is uniform in composition within the specification requirements and limits conforms to the jmf and that the placed mixture is free of any defect ex .
segregation tenderness lack of mixture andor texture uniformity raveling flushing rutting holes debris etc .
within the contractors control .
correct obvious pavement problems according to num .
if the department has any suspicion that other mixture composition or pavement problems exist the monitoring team will conduct an initial investigation through review of data andor sampling of the asphalt pavement .
should a department investigation determine that the contractors qcp is not controlling the mixture in a manner to achieve mixture quality as described above the contractor quality control data may be rejected .
in that case the department will conduct a thorough investigation by testing samples from the roadway and use those test results in determining disposition of the nonspecification material .
a mixture is not uniform in composition if multiple random nonspecification individual tests or any four consecutive nonspecification moving accumulative ranges exist .
the mixture can be rejected production can be stopped andor a redesign can be called for by the department .
omm will not approve any redesign it determines is unsatisfactory to provide acceptable mix performance .
submit this new design for approval according to num and at no additional cost to the department .
when any out of specification material based on quality control tests not within the limits of table num is sent to the paving site the engineer will determine disposition of the material according to supplement num .
num acceptance .
the department will base acceptance of the asphalt concrete mix on the item specified in the contract item description .
i.e .
item num item num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course type num num pgnum cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course type num num pgnum cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course type num num pgnumm cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course type num num pgnumm cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course type num num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course type num num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course type num num cubic meter num cubic yard antisegregation equipment cubic meter item num superpave asphalt concrete num description num type a mix design num type b mix design num asphalt binder num quality control num compaction num acceptance num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of gyratory mix design material and quality control requirements for constructing a superpave asphalt concrete pavement surface or intermediate course .
the asphalt concrete pavement course consists of aggregate and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface .
the requirements of item num apply except as modified by this specification .
when specified provide antisegregation equipment for all courses of uniform thickness in accordance with num .
num type a mix design .
design the mixture composition for a type a mix according to num and the most recent asphalt institute manual series no .
num msnum for design procedures and material properties except as modified by this subsection .
include in the jmf submittal the standard department cover and summary page all printouts from the gyratory compactor all gyratory points not necessary and analysis covering the required mix properties .
unless otherwise directed submit one compacted gyratory sample and loose mix for compaction of another sample in addition to a numpound num g loose sample for each jmf .
the contractor may use the marshall flow test in design as an indicator of potential for excess tenderness .
supply aggregate according to the lane current average daily truck traffic lane adtt as follows unless otherwise shown on the plans lane adtt current adt tnum num where current adt current average daily traffic count from the plans tnum percent trucks per day from the plans table num gyration level and material requirements lane adtt nini ndes nmax coarse aggregate angularity fine aggregate angularity flat and elongated particles sand equivalent num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num percent fractured one or more faces according to astm dnum num percent fractured two or more faces according to astm dnum submit aggregate to be used to omm for approval a minimum of num weeks before submitting a jmf for approval .
if fine aggregate is from crushed carbonate stone or aircooled blast furnace slag the department will not require the fine aggregate angularity faa test .
the department will allow a blend of a material not meeting the faa with a material that meets the faa but calculate the faa result based on the individual department faa results and actual blend percentages .
obtain omm approval of any blends .
the restricted zone does not apply .
use control points according to msnum except as specified in table num num .
table num aggregate gradation requirements sieve size num mm mix num mm mix num mm mix total percent passing num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num to num num inch num mm num num to num num max num inch num mm num to num num max no .
num num mm num max num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num num to num num for the no .
num sieve do not exceed num in production .
ensure that the fa ratio is a maximum of num .
use a numhour cure for the mix design .
if more than num percent fine aggregate not meeting faa is used perform a loaded wheel test lwt according to supplement num .
to estimate a lwt sample mix volume use the bulk density from gyratory specimens at ndes .
results less than num inch num mm at num f num c are considered passing .
the contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to num .
test design volumetric properties at ndes .
test nmax for the required criteria .
ensure that the vma is not less than the minimum values of table num .
table num vma criteria mix vma percent minimum num mm num num mm num num mm num num type b mix design .
apply the mix design specified in num for a type a mix except as modified by this subsection modify the coarse aggregate angularity of table num according to table num .
table num lane adtt coarse aggregate angularity num num num num num num num num num num num percent fractured one or more faces according to astm dnum num percent fractured two or more faces according to astm dnum ensure that at least num percent by weight of virgin fine aggregate is aggregate meeting faa or is crushed carbonate stone or aircooled blast furnace slag .
modify the no .
num num mm sieve requirement for a num mm mix in table num to num to num percent .
apply an ft value of num according to num and num .
num asphalt binder .
use a pg numm asphalt binder for surface courses and a pg num asphalt binder for intermediate courses .
the minimum total asphalt binder content for a surface course is num percent .
num quality control .
conform to num except as specified in this subsection .
ensure that plant operation and quality control testing conform to the contractors quality control program qcp .
for nummm mixes ensure the percent passing the no .
num sieve does not exceed num in production .
if two tests in a row or any two tests in two days qc andor num sublot exceed num stop production and notify district testing .
use a gyratory compactor conforming to the requirements of superpave .
if the gyratory compactor was moved to the plant before production calibrate it and present the results to district testing .
determine bulk gravity for air voids determination on specimens compacted to ndes .
for nummm mixes compact one set of samples to nmax a minimum of once each day for the first num production days .
ensure that density at nmax is less than num percent of msg .
the monitoring team will not allow production to continue if nmax is greater than or equal to num percent of msg unless acceptable corrections proven by resample and test are made .
if the design gradation requires an lwt test take a sample sufficient to run a lwt test once each day for the first num days and test it according to supplement num .
the contractor may perform the lwt test in the contractors level num laboratory but must compact the sample the same day the sample was taken cure it overnight and test it the following day .
give the test result and sample density to district testing the day of the lwt test .
report the lwt data on the quality control report .
num compaction .
cease production if compaction causes bumps in the mix or the mix is excessively tender .
num acceptance .
the department will base acceptance of the asphalt concrete mix on the method specified in the contract line item description i.e .
num num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface coursenum mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete surface course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type a num cubic meter num cubic yard asphalt concrete intermediate course num mm type b num cubic meter num cubic yard antisegregation equipment cubic meter item num stone matrix asphalt concrete num description num quality control program num composition num mixing num storage num quality control num construction num acceptance num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a stone matrix asphalt concrete sma course consisting of aggregate asphalt binder and additives .
the requirements of num and num apply except as follows .
do not use the warm mix asphalt method num for this item .
num quality control program .
update the quality control program meeting num to include a section for how the quality control production and placement of sma will meet this specification .
submit the revised program to omm with the sma mix design to be approved .
num composition .
discuss the mix design approach with omm during the mix design process and prior to submittal .
a .
design limits .
submit a jmf to the laboratory which meets the requirements of table num and table num .
table num mix gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num table num mix properties property description specification binder num num to num vma num num to num draindown test num num design air voids num design gyrations num num vca mix vca drc num num tsr num num fa na num by total mix num based on bulk gravity num aashto tnum conducted at mix production temperature not compaction temperature num nini and nmax do not apply num vca volume of coarse aggregate calculated for mix and dry rodded conditions according to aashto ppnum num or newer version .
num unconditioned specimens will have a minimum num psi num kpa retained strength .
compact specimens at num f num c for pg numm and num f num c for pg numm .
b. asphalt binder .
provide asphalt binder conforming to num .
c. coarse aggregate .
use approved coarse aggregates .
ensure coarse aggregates meet num and table num num .
table num aggregate requirements tests description specification astm d num flat and elongated ratio at num max .
to min .
num max .
to min .
num max num max astm d num crushed one two faces num num min aashto t num la abrasion stone or gravel num max d. mineral filler .
conform to num .
use mineral filler in the jmf with a plasticity index aashto t num not greater than num does not apply to hydrated lime .
reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement passing the num inch num mm sieve may be used as filler only .
do not account for reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement binder content .
do not use quicklime cao .
do not premix filler with another aggregate .
cover mineral filler piles to protect from rain .
blend the mineral filler asphalt binder and fiber stabilizer into a homogenous mixture and test the mortar for the following properties of table num .
table num mortar test requirements tests description specification aashto tnum unaged dsr g sin kpa num minimum aashto tnum tnum rtfo aged dsr g sin kpa num minimum aashto rnum tnum pav aged bbr stiffness mpa num maximum e. reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement .
do not use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement except as described in d above .
f. fiber stabilizer .
choose and meet the requirements of one of the following fiber stabilizers .
submit with the jmf submittal the fiber manufacturers most recent actual test data and a certification of compliance for the fiber type to be used .
protect the fiber stabilizer from moisture or other contamination .
cellulose fibers .
add the fiber at a dosage rate of num to num percent by weight of the total mix as directed by district testing to control draindown in production .
num .
fiber length max num inches num mm num .
sieve analysis alpine sieve method sieve size total percent passing no .
num num m num to num sieve analysis rotap sieve method sieve size total percent passing no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num .
ash content num nonvolatiles num num. ph num num num .
oil absorption times fiber weight num num num .
moisture content max num cellulose pellets .
cellulose pellets consist of cellulose fiber and may be blended with num to num percent asphalt binder .
meet the cellulose fiber requirements above .
if no asphalt binder is used add the pellet at a dosage rate of num to num percent by weight of the total mix as directed by district testing to control draindown in production .
adjust the fiber dosage to maintain the desired fiber amount when fiber is preblended with binder .
maximum pellet size num cubic inch num mmnum binder num to num pen .
mineral fiber .
use mineral fibers made from virgin basalt diabase or slag treated with a cationic sizing agent to enhance disbursement of the fiber as well as increase adhesion of the binder to the fiber surface .
add the fiber at a dosage rate of num to num percent by weight of the total mix as directed by district testing to control draindown in production .
average fiber length max num in num mm average fiber thickness max num in num mm shot content astm cnum percent passing no .
num num m sieve percent passing no .
num num m sieve num to num num to num degradation maxnum num percent num georgiadotnummcnett copy available from omm .
num mixing .
conform to the following additional requirements .
a .
fiber stabilizer .
furnish feeder equipment specifically manufactured to uniformly feed fiber into the plant and that is automated through connection with plant controls .
include a low level and noflow indicator print out the feed rate of the feeder supply system and include a transparent pipe section for observing flow consistency .
district testing will approve the fiber feed system prior to the start of production by a trial load of sma and inspection of the bag house collected material .
conduct and document a weekly quick check of the fiber feed calibration according to the quality control plan .
conduct a daily check of fiber usage by calculating and documenting on the te num that fiber usage is within num percent of the intended usage .
in drum plants add the fibers in loose form by an automated calibrated feed system such that the fibers are coated by asphalt binder before being caught in the drum air flow .
in batch plants distribute the fiber uniformly before injecting asphalt binder and increase mixing time a minimum of num seconds .
b .
mineral filler .
filler may be fed through a hopper if consistency of flow is achieved .
if a problem in feeding consistency occurs a pneumatic system will be required .
feed filler into the weigh hopper or pug mill of a batch plant or at a point away from the flame on a drum plant .
num storage .
do not store the sma at the plant for more than num hours .
do not exceed a mix temperature of num f num c. provide sma at a minimum of num f num c when it arrives at the paver unless otherwise approved by omm .
if draindown occurs shorten the storage time and increase the fiber dosage .
num quality control .
ensure an employee of the contractor with a level num rating is at the plant or construction site during production of the sma for any test strips and through at least one full production day satisfactory to the district .
perform quality control tests every num hours of production .
the increased frequency of quality control testing may require additional quality control personnel at the plant .
determine the asphalt binder content gradation moisture content air voids vma and msg of the sma .
for each test series calculate the vcamix vcadrc .
if the limit of num is exceeded stop production until resolved .
perform a draindown test once each day of production and raise fiber dosage num percent if the test limit is exceeded .
do not exceed the no .
num num m sieve design bands by the moving average of three tests .
compact specimens at num f num c for pg numm and num f num c for pg numm .
due to sample variability with sma a larger than usual sample size from which material is obtained for the various tests is required .
num construction .
at least num hours prior to beginning a test strip meet with the engineer and district testing and provide a written summary of steps taken to assure mix quality and construction practices account for the special needs of sma production and placement .
send a copy of the written summary to omm .
a .
test strips and jmf adjustment .
do not begin full production of the sma until receiving authorization from district testing .
this authorization will be based on the successful construction of one or more test strips .
test strips consist of num to num tons of sma produced and placed in accordance with these specifications .
cease sma production that day unless another test strip is needed .
place test strips in one continuous mat .
the test strip will be included in the first lot for determining density for payment .
during the construction of a test strip perform one set of quality control tests as described above and obtain and test num random cores of the compacted pavement .
within num working day after a test strip is completed the laboratory and the contractors level num employee will determine if any changes in the sma jmf production or placement procedures are needed .
a redesign of the jmf or another test strip may be required .
omm will notify district testing of any jmf adjustments .
do not start production until notified by district testing .
b. compaction .
start compaction immediately after the sma has been placed .
use only steel wheel rollers .
vibratory rollers in vibratory mode set at a high frequency and low amplitude can be used as the breakdown roller only .
always operate the breakdown roller immediately behind the paver .
if isolated small fat spots develop apply sand immediately during compaction .
if continuous andor large fat spots develop cease production until resolved .
do not compact sma that is below num f num c. c. hauling .
do not allow trucks to dump any mix on the project mat after delivering mix to the paver .
provide a suitable place for bed cleaning off of the mat .
num acceptance .
after accepting the test strips the department will accept sma according to num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities of stone matrix asphalt concrete complete in place including test strip at the contract price as modified by num as follows item unit description num cubic yard stone matrix asphalt concrete nummm pgnumm num cubic meter num cubic yard stone matrix asphalt concrete nummm pgnumm num cubic meter item num asphalt concrete core density acceptance num description num monitoring num reports num density acceptance num joints num description .
this specification describes the acceptance criteria for asphalt concrete surface and intermediate courses .
the department will base acceptance of the compacted mixture in place on the level of density attained as sampled by the contractor and analyzed by the department .
num monitoring .
if there is poor comparison between the departments comparison samples and the contractors quality control tests the monitoring team may at any time disallow acceptance to continue under num .
in this case accept per num and num .
the department will notify the contractor in writing to stop production .
num reports .
submit the quality control report according to num on the workday following the production day of the material represented by the report .
num density acceptance .
the requirements of num do not apply .
however rollers must fully and satisfactorily provide the required compaction be mechanically sound and meet asphalt industry standards .
the department retains the right to reject the use of rollers which are not in good repair or are not designed to do the work required .
a threewheel roller according to num is not required .
obtain ten numinch cores for the department to test to determine the inplace density of the compacted mixture as a percentage of the average qc maximum specific gravity msg for the production day the material was placed .
if department msg va tests show poor comparison to the average qc msg according to num use department determined msg results in the density calculation for each production day .
compact shoulders using the same equipment and procedures as used on the mainline pavement .
the requirements of num except for the last four paragraphs are waived .
payment for compaction of the completed mainline pavement and ramps is by lot based upon the degree to which density is attained .
payment for shoulders depends on the degree to which the density is obtained on the adjacent mainline pavement lane or ramp .
however when a cold longitudinal joint is made between a mainline pavement lane and an adjoining shoulder payment for the shoulder will be based on the degree to which the density is obtained on the shoulder .
a lot consists of an area of pavement placed during a production day including the shoulders .
if less than num tons num metric tons is produced in a production day then that production day is combined with the next production day into a single lot .
if greater than num tons num metric tons and less than num tons num metric tons are produced on the last day of production for the project then the days production is a separate lot .
if less than num tons num metric tons is produced on the last production day for the project it is part of the previous lot for acceptance provided the previous lot was placed within num days otherwise it is a separate lot .
within num hours after the pavement is placed obtain ten cores for each lot at random locations the engineer determines .
only obtain core samples in the presence of the engineer and immediately surrender each core sample to the engineer for testing .
the engineer will divide a lot into five equal sublots and calculate two random core locations in each sublot as described below using odot tenum procedure .
both mainline pavement and ramps will be included in lot determinations .
the engineer will not give the contractor random core locations early in the lot placement .
the engineer will tell the contractor the method used to determine random locations as noted below before project start and will use the same method for all lots .
cores will be taken from each lot as follows .
three cores will be taken from cold longitudinal joints joint cores and seven cores will be taken from the mat mat cores .
if locations not according to this specification are given immediately inform the engineer .
do not take joint cores from ramp joints .
take joint cores from the first last and randomly from one of the three remaining sublots .
determine by random number the longitudinal location of the joint core and which pavement edge to be cored when the mat placed has both confined and unconfined edges .
except where notched wedge joints are used take joint cores such that the cores closest edge is num inches num mm from the edge of the mat .
obtain the mat cores from at least twelve inches away from the longitudinal joint .
locate cores obtained for contractor quality control qc sister core longitudinally from and within four inches num mm of the random core .
in addition to the qc sister cores three extra cores may be taken from the first lot of a jmf for testing to correlate density gauges .
do not take additional cores beyond what is noted above unless clearly identified in the contractors qcp .
clearly label all cores with mat locations so that they may be readily identified .
any unlabeled cores may be destroyed by the department .
notify the laboratory if any questions arise .
do not store additional cores anywhere project in vehicles or at the plant beyond those required to be taken for testing .
test all contractor qc cores and maintain records of all tests core tests and correlated gauge tests per the qcp .
destroy all cores immediately after testing is complete .
notched wedge joints when notched wedge joint construction is used do not take cores on the sloped face of the wedge before the adjoining lane matching pass is placed .
take cores such that the cores closest edge is six inches num mm from the edge of the joint upper notch .
when a nine inch or wider wedge joint is used take the core three inches from the upper wedge joint notch .
the department will determine the pay factor for each lot cored by the pay schedule in table num for lots with three cold longitudinal joint cores and table num for lots with less than three cold longitudinal joint cores .
the department will verify the mtd if the msg determination has a deviation from the mtd of less than or equal to num .
if the mtd is not verified establish a new mtd according to the procedures established in num .
if less than num cores are available for determining the mean omm will determine disposition of the lot .
fill core holes by the next workday with asphalt concrete .
before filling ensure the holes are dry and tack them with asphalt material conforming to num .
properly compact the asphalt concrete used for filling the hole and leave it flush with the pavement .
table num for lots with num cold joint cores mean of cores num pay factor surface course intermediate course num or greater num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num less than num num num num mean of cores as percent of average msg for the production day .
num for surface courses remove and replace .
for other courses the district will determine whether the material may remain in place .
if the district determines the course should be removed and replaced the contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course .
the pay factor for material allowed to remain in place is num .
num the district will determine whether the material may remain in place .
if the district determines the course should be removed and replaced the contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course .
the pay factor for such material allowed to remain in place is num .
num no incentive will be paid if any single cold joint core is less than num .
table num for lots with less than num cold joint cores mean of cores num pay factor surface course intermediate course num or greater num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num less than num num num num mean of cores as percent of average msg for the production day .
num for surface courses remove and replace .
for other courses the district will determine whether the material may remain in place .
if the district determines the course should be removed and replaced the contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course .
the pay factor for material allowed to remain in place is num .
num the district will determine whether the material may remain in place .
if the district determines the course should be removed and replaced the contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course .
the pay factor for such material allowed to remain in place is num .
num no incentive will be paid for lots where num joint cores are required to be taken but less than num cores are taken .
num joints .
construct joints according to num .
make a hot longitudinal joint between the mainline pavement lane and the adjoining shoulder and all ramps and the adjoining shoulders .
if a hot longitudinal joint is specified between the mainline pavement lanes the contractor may construct a cold longitudinal joint between the mainline pavement lanes and the adjoining shoulders .
cold longitudinal joints in mainline pavement will be tested according to num .
item num asphalt concrete acceptance num description num density num reports num acceptance num description .
this specification describes the acceptance criteria for asphalt concrete surface and intermediate courses .
the department will determine acceptance of the mixture by lot based on the composition of random samples taken and tested by the contractor and verified by the department .
num density .
conduct density gauge quality control testing on the asphalt mat according to supplement num .
conduct density gauge testing on uniform courses of num in nummm or more plan thickness .
conduct density gauge testing on projects of two adjacent lanes or more and with at least one continuous mile num kilometers of paving excepting bridges intersections etc .. do not enter a density gauge offset of any kind into the gauge .
if an offset is already in the gauge remove it .
verify to the engineer daily that no offset is present in the gauge .
all values used in controlling mat density according to supplement num will be as calculated and written on forms supplied in supplement num .
when supplement num density gauge testing is required the requirements of num except the last four paragraphs are waived .
the requirements of num do not apply .
however rollers must fully and satisfactorily provide the required compaction be mechanically sound and meet asphalt industry standards .
the department retains the right to reject the use of rollers which are not in good repair or are not designed to do the work required .
a threewheel roller per num is not required .
num reports .
refer to item num for reporting requirements of asphalt mixtures tested at the asphalt plant .
report density gauge qc testing results according to supplement num .
num acceptance .
refer to item num for acceptance requirements .
if a project includes num density acceptance will include any density deductions according to supplement num .
num rigid pavement item num reinforced portland cement concrete pavement num description num materials num pavement quality control num equipment num setting forms num fine grading of subgrade or subbase num placing concrete num placing reinforcement num joints num finishing num curing num removing forms num surface smoothness num profile grinding num pavement grooving corrections num sealing expansion joints num opening to traffic num pavement thickness and concrete strength num price adjustments num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a pavement composed of reinforced portland cement concrete on a prepared surface .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete either class qc num qc ms num class rca supplement num joint sealer num preformed filler num curing materials num num num type num tiebar steel epoxy coated num reinforcing steel num num num dowel bars and basket assemblies num use of recycled concrete aggregate as part of a concrete mix can be accepted with conformance to supplement num num pavement quality control .
when the concrete pavement bid item includes with qcqa provide complete quality control of the concrete manufacturing placing and curing operations and quality control testing of the work conforming to item num .
the engineer will review and accept the plan prior to beginning of any paving operations .
when the concrete pavement bid item includes with qcqa the engineer will perform quality assurance conforming to item num .
num equipment .
furnish selfpropelled spreading and finishing machines capable of consolidating and finishing the concrete and producing a finished surface meeting the requirements specified .
ensure that all paving equipment is operated in a manner that does not result in segregation of the mixture or loss of air entrainment in the mixture .
construct pavement using either fixed forms or slip form paving equipment that conforms to the following a .
fixed form construction .
spread screed and consolidate concrete using one or more machines between previously set side forms .
furnish an adequate number and capacity of machines to perform the work at a rate equal to the concrete delivery rate .
furnish machines capable of uniformly distributing and consolidating the concrete without segregation .
provide machines capable of operating on two side forms on adjacent lanes of pavement and one side form or on two adjacent lanes as necessary .
when placing concrete adjacent to an existing pavement lane take measures to protect the adjacent pavement from damage .
remove from the work any machine that causes displacement of the side forms from the line or grade or causes undue delay as determined by the engineer due to mechanical difficulties .
finish small areas irregular areas and areas that are inaccessible to finishing equipment using other methods as approved by the engineer .
accomplish vibration of these areas using hand held or machine mounted internal vibrators .
continue vibration to achieve adequate consolidation without segregation for the full depth and width of the area placed .
use straight edge side forms made of steel and of a depth equal to the specified pavement thickness .
do not use bent or damaged side forms or forms with damaged joint locks or pin pockets .
provide forms in sections of not less than num ft num m in length without horizontal joints in the height of the form .
utilize forms with a nominal base width of at least num inches num mm .
ensure forms are capable of supporting the paving equipment without shifting or deforming during paving .
clean and oil all forms each time they are used .
if the radius of the circular pavement edge is num feet num m or less use flexible or curved forms of a design acceptable to the engineer .
provide adequate devices to securely set forms and withstand operation of the paving equipment .
do not use builtup forms except to construct pavement of a specified thickness whose total area for the project is less than num square yards num mnum .
provide forms with adequate joint locks to tightly join ends of abutting form sections together .
b .
slip form construction .
place concrete using an industrystandard slip form paver designed to spread consolidate screed and finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine and with a minimum of hand finishing providing a dense and homogeneous pavement .
consolidate the full width and depth of concrete pavement placed by a single pass of approved internal vibrators .
operate the vibrators at a frequency range of num to num impulses per minute .
attach vibrators to either the spreading or finishing equipment in such a manner that they do not come in contact with preset dowel basket assemblies the subgrade reinforcing mesh or side forms .
do not operate vibrators in a manner to cause a separation of the mix ingredients segregation i.e .
either a downward displacement of large aggregate particles or an accumulation of laitance on the surface of the concrete .
avoidance of segregation may require reduction in the vibration frequency within the range specified when forward motion of the paver is reduced .
connect the power to all vibrators so they stop when the machine motion is stopped .
stop paving operations if any vibrator fails to operate within the above specified range .
provide an electronic monitoring device that displays the operating frequency of each internal vibrator when paving mainline ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes and collector distributor lanes .
ensure the monitoring device has a readout display near the paver operators controls visible to the operator and the engineer .
operate the monitoring device continuously while paving and display all vibrator frequencies with manual or automatic sequencing among individual vibrators .
using the monitoring system record the following minimum information time of day station location paver track speed and the frequency of each individual vibrator .
make recordings after each num feet num m of paving or after numminute intervals of time .
if not using a monitoring system with a recorder make and record readings every num minutes .
provide vibration data in electronic format to the engineer prior to the next concrete placement .
electronic vibration monitoring devices are not required for paving machines used to construct shoulders gores or for any construction project with a total of less than num square yards num mnum of pavement .
when electronic monitoring devices are not required use a tachometer or similar device to demonstrate to the engineer the paving equipment vibration meets specification .
operate the slip form paver with as nearly a continuous forward movement as possible .
coordinate all operations of mixing delivering and spreading concrete to provide uniform progress with minimal stopping and starting of the paver .
if for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver immediately stop the consolidation devices .
unless controlled from the machine do not apply any other tractive force to the machine .
accurately control the finish grade of the pavement from a preset grade line parallel to the finish grade .
use equipment with controls that will trace the grade line and automatically adjust the grade of the screed .
in areas where adjoining concrete pavement is to be constructed ensure that the surface at the edge of the pavement on either side of the longitudinal joint does not vary more than num inch num mm below the typical section .
ensure that the outside edges of the pavement does not vary more than num inch num mm below the typical section .
ensure that all pavement edges are nearly vertical with no projections or keyways exceeding num inch num mm .
in the area of construction joints placed at the end of the days run the engineer will allow a reduction of approximately num inches num mm in overall width .
num setting forms .
set all forms in conformance to the required grade and alignment .
ensure the entire length of the forms is supported on thoroughly compacted material for the entire operation of placing and finishing the concrete .
set side forms with the top face of the form varying not more than num inch in num feet num mm in num m from true plane and the vertical face varying not more than num inch in num feet num mm in num m from true plane .
test the forms for variations from the above requirements and reset as necessary .
do not use loose earth pebbles etc .
to shim the forms .
immediately before placing concrete the engineer will approve the alignment and grade of all forms set .
num fine grading of subgrade or subbase .
a .
fixed form construction .
after side forms have been set to line and grade and securely fastened use a subgrade or subbase planer to remove a slight amount of material and bring the surface to final grade and a smooth dense condition .
check the subgrade or subbase using a multiple pin template operated on the forms or other methods approved by the engineer .
correct and retest all high or low spots .
instead of the above operation the contractor may place forms on subgrade or subbase prepared according to num.b .
b .
slip form construction .
after the subgrade or subbase is placed and compacted to the required density use an automatic subgrading machine to cut the areas for pavement and the areas that will support the paving machine to the plan elevation .
construct the grade sufficiently in advance of placing the concrete to permit the engineer to check the grade .
num placing concrete .
when constructing on subgrade or subbase immediately before placing concrete bring the surface to a thoroughly moistened condition by sprinkling with water as directed by the engineer .
when constructing on asphalt concrete coat the surface with curing membrane at least one day prior to placing concrete .
apply the curing membrane at a minimum rate of num gallon num l for each num square feet num mnum of surface treated using an approved selfpropelled mechanical sprayer .
provide an adequate shield to protect the fog spray from the wind .
thoroughly agitate the curing material before use .
deposit concrete on the grade in a manner that requires as little rehandling as possible .
do not allow workers to walk in the freshly mixed concrete unless wearing clean boots or shoes free of earth or any foreign material .
when using dowel basket assemblies place concrete in such a manner that the assemblies are not disturbed .
do not allow concrete to discharge onto any dowel basket assembly unless the hopper is well centered on the assembly .
use a separate internal vibrator to consolidate concrete around dowel basket assemblies .
do not operate mechanical equipment other than saws on newly placed concrete pavement prior to opening to traffic according to num .
if only finishing equipment is carried on an existing lane paving may be permitted after that lane has been in place for at least num days and after specimen beams shall have attained a modulus of rupture of num psi num mpa .
when the width of pavement being placed in one operation is num feet num m or more and the total area of any given width of pavement on the project exceeds num square yards num mnum use a separate standard manufacture selfpropelled concrete placerspreader that receives concrete into a hopper adjacent to the area to be paved delivers the concrete in front of the slipform paver and uniformly spreads the concrete at the proper thickness for the full width being paved .
when a slipform paver is equipped with a dowel bar inserter the separate placerspreader requirement may be waived provided the concrete is delivered in front of the slipform paver at a consistent and uniform thickness for the full width being paved and the slipform paver is capable of spreading consolidating screeding and float finishing the freshly placed concrete .
provide the engineer documentation that the slipform paver will meet this specification .
do not mix place or finish concrete after dark without operating an adequate and approved lighting system .
when the air temperature is num f num c or below ensure the concrete has a temperature of between num and num f num and num c at the point of placement .
when the air temperature is greater than num f num c before placing maintain a concrete temperature of not more than num f num c. do not place concrete on any surface that is frozen or has frost .
make two test beams from each num square yards num mnum of concrete or fraction thereof incorporated in the work each day .
construct and test concrete beams for modulus of rupture according to supplement num .
num placing reinforcement .
place pavement mesh of the size and at the locations within the concrete slab shown on the standard construction drawings .
when placing reinforced concrete pavement in two layers strike off the entire width of the bottom layer to a length and depth that allows laying the mat of reinforcement on the concrete and in its final position without further manipulation .
after installing reinforcement directly upon the concrete place strike off and screed the top layer of concrete .
when reinforced concrete pavement is placed in one layer and in advance of placing concrete position and securely anchor the reinforcement to the underlying base or pavement .
as an alternative after spreading the concrete and while it is in a plastic condition use mechanical or vibratory means to place reinforcement in the concrete .
where reinforcement is overlapped securely fasten mats of reinforcement together at the edges of the sheets and at two additional points along the lap .
use reinforcing steel free from dirt oil paint and grease .
num joints .
unless otherwise directed construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the pavement lane and of the type dimensions and at locations specified .
determine contraction and longitudinal joint sawing time limits to protect the concrete from early cracking by using hiperpav software .
provided the curing compound damage caused by sawing is repaired according to num and to the engineers satisfaction the contractor may operate the sawing equipment necessary to saw joints on the newly constructed pavement .
obtain hiperpav according to supplement num .
twenty four hours before placing concrete pavement create a hiperpav project date file according to supplement num .
provide the completed file and the printout to the engineer .
when hiperpav predicts early age slab cracking will occur whether due to standard construction practices joint sawing methods mix design or curing either do not start construction until modifications have been made to eliminate hiperpavs predicted slab cracking or do not pave .
perform a hiperpav analysis for each pour .
if software analysis determines joint sawing could exceed num hours ensure all joints are sawed within num hours .
a hiperpav analysis showing paving can proceed does not eliminate the requirements of num .
accurately mark both edges of the pavement with the correct locations of all joints to be saw cut .
ensure the method of marking remains clearly visible after the paver passes and until the joint saw cut is completed .
a. longitudinal joint .
construct longitudinal joints between simultaneously placed lanes by sawing .
when a standard water cooled diamond bladed concrete saw is used to make the longitudinal joint between simultaneously placed lanes saw the joint within the timeframe provided in the hiperpav output but not more than num hours .
for pavement less than or equal to num inches num mm saw the joint to a minimum depth of one fourth the specified pavement thickness .
for pavements greater than num inches num mm thick saw the joint to a minimum depth of onethird the specified pavement thickness .
saw joints num num inch num num mm wide measured at the time of sawing .
when using earlyentry dry cut light weight saws to make the longitudinal joint between simultaneously placed lanes only use saw blades and skid plates as recommended by the saw manufacturer for the coarse aggregate type being used in the concrete .
perform the earlyentry sawing after initial set and before final set .
saw the joint num inch num mm wide and num num to num num inches num to num mm deep .
place deformed epoxy coated steel tiebars epoxy coated hook bolt with epoxy coated couplingor epoxy coated hook bolt alternate wiggle bolt with epoxy coated coupling in longitudinal joints during consolidation of the concrete .
install them at middepth in the slab by approved mechanical equipment .
as an alternate procedure rigidly secure them on chairs or other approved supports to prevent displacement .
provide tie bars hook bolts or wiggle bolts of the size and spaced as shown on the standard construction drawings .
if used securely fasten hook bolts or wiggle bolts with couplings to the form at the longitudinal construction joint as shown on the standard construction drawings .
b. transverse joints .
unless otherwise directed construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the pavement lane and of the type dimensions and at locations specified .
for all transverse joints install round straight smooth steel dowel bars of the size shown in table num .
table num dowel size thickness of pavement diameter of solid dowel tubular dowel outside diameter wall thickness less than num num inches num mm num inch num mm num num to num inches num to num mm num num inches num mm num num inches num mm or num num inches num mm num inches num mm over num inches num mm num num inches num mm num num inches num mm num inches num mm ensure each end of tubular dowel is fitted with a snug fitting plug style insert cap that does not exceed the outside diameter of the tubular dowel to prohibit any intrusion of concrete or other materials .
within num hours prior of placing concrete coat the full length of all dowels with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil as a bondbreaking material .
num .
load transfer assemblies .
use load transfer dowel basket assemblies in transverse contraction joints conforming to and placed according to the standard drawings to hold the dowels in a position parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab at middepth of the slab thickness .
preset all dowel basket assemblies before the days paving unless the engineer determines complete presetting is impractical .
completely install dowel basket assemblies before shipping and spacer wires are removed .
immediately before paving remove all shipping and spacer wires from the dowel basket assemblies check that the assemblies are held firmly in place and check that the dowels are parallel to the grade and parallel to centerline of pavement .
for each load transfer assembly provide a continuous assembly between longitudinal joints or between the longitudinal joint and pavement edge .
drive at least eight numinch num mm diameter steel pins a minimum of num inches num mm long at an angle to brace the assembly from lateral and vertical displacements during the placing of concrete .
drive two of these pins opposite each other at each end of the assembly and drive the remaining pins in staggered positions on each side of the assembly .
where it is impractical to use the numinch num mm length pins such as where hardpan or rock is encountered and provided the assembly is held firmly the engineer may authorize use of shorter pins .
where the dowel basket assembly is placed on material that may allow settlement or distortion anchor the assembly with a combination of pins and steel plates or by some other means satisfactory to the engineer to prevent settlement .
when concrete pavement is placed on an existing concrete pavement or on a stabilized base secure dowel basket assemblies from lateral and vertical displacement during concrete placement using powerdriven fasteners and appropriate clips or pins driven in predrilled holes of a diameter slightly less than the pin diameter .
use either of the above methods or a combination of the two in sufficient numbers to adequately secure the basket assemblies .
where widths other than num feet num m are specified the contractor may use standard dowel basket assemblies with dowel spacings adjusted as follows .
maintain numinch num mm dowel spacing at the longitudinal joint and increase the spacing at the outer edge of the lane up to num inches num mm .
where an odd width of lane occurs and if the standard dowel basket assembly would provide for a space exceeding num inches num mm place a dowel num inches num mm from the outer edge of the lane .
hold such a dowel rigidly in proper position by a method satisfactory to the engineer or cut and splice a dowel basket assembly of greater length than required to attain the required length .
num .
slip form paver with mechanical dowel bar inserter .
the contractor may propose to use a slip form paver with mechanical dowel bar inserter dbi to place dowels in transverse contraction joints the full thickness of pavement and spaced according to the standard construction drawings .
submit details and specifications of the proposed equipment to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to mobilizing the equipment to the project .
the use of any slip form paver with dbi is allowed only after acceptable performance is demonstrated with a test section and approved by the engineer .
continued verification during all contract paving is required for each production day as detailed below .
provide all equipment perform all testing and evaluate the slip form paver with dbi as detailed in the following sections .
a. mit scannum equipment and reporting provide mit scannum equipment to determine the location of dowel bars in either fresh or hardened concrete including horizontal translation longitudinal translation vertical translation horizontal skew vertical tilt and cover .
provide equipment for determining dowel bar alignment that has an onboard computer that runs the test collects and stores the test data on a memory card performs the preliminary evaluation and provides a printout of results immediately after scanning .
provide a copy of magnoproof or other required software to the engineer to analyze equipment data and generate a detailed report of all required alignment parameters in an excel and a graphical color representation .
ensure the equipment is properly calibrated conforming to the manufacturers specifications and for the specific project conditions .
provide calibration documentation to the engineer prior to the start of construction .
establish a standard protocol for scanning direction .
provide trained personnel to operate the equipment and documentation of training prior to start of construction .
provide a print out at the time of scanning for horizontal translation longitudinal translation vertical translation horizontal skew vertical tilt and cover for each bar in each joint scanned .
for each test section and daily for each day of production provide a complete report to the engineer at the completion of scanning along with a digital copy of all data collected in the manufacturers native file format as well as all calibration files .
include the standard report generated using the magnoproof software in excel format and with color graphical representation of each joint .
include in the report project contract number countyroutesection placement date scan date station location and lane joint id number name of operator and all required alignment parameters .
if nonmagnetic dowel bar materials are to be used propose and demonstrate alternative measurement equipment to the engineer showing capability to provide measures equal or similar to the acceptance and rejection criteria of table num .
obtain the engineers approval of alternative equipment prior to paving .
if no alternative equipment can demonstrate the required capability do not use the slip form paver with dbi .
prior to paving review the measurement equipment applicability for the project conditions with the engineer including ambient moisture conditions dowel material metallic concrete aggregate and potential contributors to magnetic interference presence of tiebars reinforcing steel or other embedded or underlying steel items that may affect measurement accuracy .
establish how the measurement device can meet the project conditions .
if the measurement device can not meet the project conditions do not use the slip form paver with dbi .
b. acceptancerejection the required dowel bar tolerances are given in table num .
dowel bar alignment is measured as detailed below .
any dowel bar exceeding any acceptance tolerance in table num is considered misaligned .
rejection criteria is in absolute inches .
table num individual dowel bar alignment tolerances alignment parameter acceptance tolerance inches rejection criteria inches horizontal translation a num num longitudinal translation b num num vertical translation c num tnum horizontal skew d num num vertical tilt e num num cover f num minimum a. horizontal translation the total difference measured horizontally between the actual dowel bar location and the plan required dowel bar location along the transverse contraction joint .
b. longitudinal translation the total difference measured in the longitudinal direction from the center of the transverse contraction joint to the actual dowel bar center .
also termed as side shift .
c. vertical translation the total difference measured vertically between the centerline of the actual dowel bar location and the middepth of the slab .
t pavement thickness in inches d. horizontal skew the total difference measured from end to end of a dowel bar of the dowel in the horizontal plane .
e. vertical tilt the total difference measured from end to end of a dowel bar of the dowel bar in the vertical plane .
f. cover the least distance between the surface of embedded reinforcement and the outer surface of the concrete .
perform a joint score analysis conforming to cptp tech brief best practices for dowel placement tolerances fhwahifnum for every joint .
joint score is a measure of the combined effects of horizontal skew and vertical tilt .
to calculate the joint score calculate the single dowel misalignment sdm by the square root of the sum of the squares of the horizontal skew and vertical tilt of each dowel in the joint determine the weighing factor w for each bar from table num sum the w values for every dowel in the joint and add one num .
     num  num joint score js evaluated for a single transverse joint between adjacent longitudinal joints andor pavement edges i.e .
a typical num ft num m standard lane or up to num ft num m widened lane and calculated as    num   num where n number of dowels in the single joint wi weighting factor table num for dowel i table num weighting factors in joint score js determination single dowel misalignment sdm w weighting factor sdm num in .
num mm num num in .
num mm sdm num in .
num mm num num in .
num mm sdm num in .
num mm num num in .
num mm sdm num in .
num mm num num in .
num mm sdm num joint score trigger jst a scaling of the joint score risk value to account for the actual number of dowels required in a single joint for pavement width other than num ft num m calculated as     num       num include the joint score and joint score trigger for every joint scanned in the report to the engineer .
any joint with a joint score equal to or greater than the joint score trigger is considered locked and rejectable .
num .
test section prior to production use of a dbi slip form paver perform at least a numfoot num m long test section for acceptance of the machine .
measure the alignment and location of each dowel bar in the test section using the mit scannum .
the test section will be considered acceptable if the following acceptance criteria are met a .
each joint score js is less than joint score trigger jst b. ninety percent num of the dowel bars meet the acceptance tolerances of table num c. none of the dowels exceed the rejection tolerances of num .
if the test section acceptance criteria is not met use the data to refine the paving process and reduceeliminate misalignments and mislocations .
modify repair or replace any slip form paver with dbi that does not meet the acceptance criteria and perform another test section .
do not begin production paving until the slip form paver with dbi test section acceptance criteria is met .
perform corrective action of all joints in the test section according to section num below .
perform a new test section for any new slip form paver with dbi that will be used for any contract item of work .
perform a new test section at the beginning of every construction season after major paver maintenancerepairs at mobilization or remobilization to a project for major concrete mix design changes or different concrete mix designs and as required by section num of this specification .
if the length of the section to be paved makes it unreasonable to perform the test section scan all joints for conformance with the requirements of section num acceptancerejection .
correct any joints with dowels found to be rejectable or js greater than jst according to section num corrective action .
determine during the test section if embedded tiebars are affecting the rejection tolerances and jss .
if the test section demonstration shows interference exclude from the js and jst calculations any dowel bars closer than num in .
num mm in any direction to tiebars in the longitudinal joints .
at the engineers discretion establish the location of excluded dowels by another equivalent nondestructive method or by probing .
num .
paving quality control testing qct for dowel bar inserters when using the accepted slip form paver and dbi for any contract item of work perform quality control scans with the mitscan num equipment at the following minimum a .
measure the alignments and location for every numth joint and calculate the js and jst for each measured joint .
acceptable qct is when all measures are within the acceptance tolerances in table num and js is less than jst .
i .
when the daily qct finds more than num percent of the joints scanned have dowels exceeding the acceptance tolerances of table num but the js is less than the jst increase the scanning frequency to every numth joint .
evaluate the paving process to reduceeliminate misalignments and mislocations and continue to pave .
the qct frequency will revert back to every numth joint when two consecutive days of scanning every numth joint show no dowels exceeding the acceptance tolerances of table num and all jss are less than the jst .
ii .
when qct finds any individual dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria of table num or the js is found to exceed the jst the joint is considered to be locked and immediate investigation needs to be made as follows num .
scan joints in front and behind the locked joint location until five num consecutive joints in both directions are found with no dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria of table num and no js is found to exceed the jst .
num .
if the additional scanned joints show no additional dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria of table num and no js exceeding the jst evaluate equipment to determine what caused the original problem .
before continuing paving increase the frequency of qct to conform to num.a.i .
num .
if the additional scanned joints show additional dowel bars exceeding rejection criteria of table num or joints with a js exceeding the jst stop paving .
investigate to determine the cause of the dowel bar rejection issues and provide the causes and alternative corrections to the engineer .
the engineer will determine if the corrections will correct the problem and may allow paving to temporarily continue to validate if the corrections work .
during any evaluation scan all joints to determine if the corrections were successful .
if successful continue qct scanning at the frequency of num.a.i .
if not successful discontinue paving repair or replace the slip form paver and dbi and repeat the test section b .
all dowel bars found beyond rejection criteria of table num or joints with a js exceeding the jst require a corrective action proposal conforming to section num corrective action .
provide report formats as described in section num mit scannum equipment and reporting .
num .
corrective action submit a proposal for corrective action to the engineer for any dowel that exceeds the rejection criteria in table num or any joint that has a js greater than the jst .
as a minimum include the following in the corrective action proposal num .
locations of rejectable dowels with identification information as described in section num mit scan num equipment and reporting .
num .
locked joint identification information as described in section num mit scannum equipment and reporting .
num .
proposed method of remediation for each identified location including supporting documentation of the effectiveness of the means of proposed remediation .
the department may not require corrective action for random dowels that exceed the rejection criteria of table num depending on location what alignment parameter was the cause for the rejection and the frequency of the rejectable dowels .
the department may not require corrective action for all js exceeding the jst if they are random in nature .
up to two num consecutive joints with a js exceeding the jst may be accepted provided that the adjacent three num joints before or after do not have dowels exceeding table num rejection limits and have jss less than the jst .
the department will require corrective action where there are more than two num consecutive joints with a js exceeding the jst .
do not proceed with any corrective action until the engineer approves the proposed methods of correction .
c. expansion joints .
where a pressure relief joint is not provided adjacent to a bridge structure construct expansion joints at the first two regularly spaced joint locations adjacent to the bridge approach slab on each side of the bridge .
if the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes construct the transverse expansion joints in a continuous line for the full width of the pavement and shoulders .
construct expansion joints according to the standard construction drawings .
install the face of the expansion joint perpendicular to the centerline except when expansion joint is installed at a skewed bridge approach slab .
use round straight smooth steel dowels and within num hours of placing concrete coat the dowels with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil as a bondbreaking material to provide free movement .
after coating the dowel install a sleeve of metal or other approved material approximately num inches num mm long with crimped end overlapping seams fitting closely around the dowel and a depression or interior projection to stop the dowel a sufficient distance from the crimped end to allow num inch num mm for longitudinal dowel movement with pavement expansion on one free end of each dowel .
if approved by the engineer use other means to allow for num inch num mm of expansion .
punch or drill proper size dowel holes into the preformed expansion joint filler to assure a tight fit around each dowel .
form a numinch num mm wide and numinch num mm deep opening on top of the expansion joint filler and seal this opening with num joint sealers .
d. contraction joints .
for pavement less than or equal to num inches num mm thick saw contraction joints with a standard water cooled diamond bladed concrete saw to a minimum depth of onefourth of the specified pavement thickness .
for pavement greater than numinches num mm thick saw contraction joints to a minimum depth of onethird the specified pavement thickness .
when cutting joints using a standard water cooled diamond blade saw ensure the joint is num numinch num num mm wide when measured at the time of sawing .
when using the option of earlyentry dry cut light weight saws only use saw blades and skid plates as recommended by the saw manufacturer for the coarse aggregate type being used in the concrete .
perform the early entry contraction joint sawing after initial set and before final set .
saw the contraction joint num to numinches num to num mm deep .
ensure any early entry saw joints are approximately numinch num mm wide at the time of sawing .
if the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes install the joints continuous for the full width of the pavement .
saw the pavement with sawing equipment approved by the engineer as soon as the saw can be operated without damaging the concrete .
provide saws with adequate guides blade guards and a method of controlling the depth of cut .
after wet sawing clean the joint using a jet of water .
after dry sawing clean the joint using air under pressure .
during sawing of contraction joints maintain a standby saw in working condition with an adequate supply of blades .
e. construction joints .
install dowelled construction joints at the end of each days work and when work is suspended for a period of more than num minutes .
use dowels in transverse construction joints .
within num hours prior to placing concrete coat the free half of all dowels with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil .
use an adequate bulkhead with openings provided for dowel bars spaced as specified and shaped to fit the typical section of the pavement to form a straight joint .
during placing of concrete hold dowels rigidly in position .
locate construction joints at or between contraction joints .
if located between contraction joints construct the construction joint no closer than num feet num m to the last contraction joint .
num finishing .
use numfoot num m straightedges to continually check the finished concrete surface for trueness .
if the pavement surface is dragged with a diagonal pipe float machine occasionally check the surface while the concrete is plastic .
do not add water to aid finishing .
before the concrete initially sets round the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints to the radius specified using an approved edging tool .
before texturing the surface eliminate tool marks left by the edging tool .
texture the surface in the longitudinal or transverse direction using a broom to produce a uniform gritty texture .
immediately following the broom drag texture tine the pavement in the longitudinal direction using an approved device that produces uniform tine spacing num inches num mm apart num inch deep num mm and num inch wide num mm .
do not tine within num inches num mm of pavement edges or longitudinal joints .
only use equipment that will tine the full width of the pavement in one operation and uses string line controls for line and grade to assure straight tining texture .
use transverse tining in small areas only with the approval of the engineer .
use equipment that produces a random pattern of grooves num inch num mm to num inch num mm deep and num inch num mm wide spaced at num to num inches num to num mm with num percent of spacings less than num inch num mm .
transverse tining may be used as an option for shoulders of main line or shoulders of ramps and gore areas .
tine all mainline shoulders or all ramp shoulders in a consistent direction if choosing this option .
request the use of transverse tining and identify the locations at least one week prior to paving for approval by the engineer .
demonstrate to the engineer methods to ensure the groove depth meets this specification .
before the concrete finally sets impress complete station numbers into the pavement every num feet num m e.g .
num num .
mark station equations in the pavement as shown on the plans .
ensure that the numerals are num to num inches num to num mm high and num inch num mm deep .
place the station numbers parallel with and facing the right edge of the pavement and centered num inches num m in from the right edge .
on divided highways provide station numbers on both pavements .
when placing concrete shoulders with the traveled lane place station numbers num inches num m in from the outside edge of the shoulder and facing the pavement .
num curing .
immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and after all free water has dissipated spray and seal all exposed concrete surfaces with a uniform application of curing membrane in such a manner as to provide a continuous uniform film without marring the surface of the concrete .
apply a minimum of num gallon num l of material for each num square feet num mnum of surface treated using an approved selfpropelled mechanical sprayer .
provide an adequate shield to protect the fog spray from the wind .
before each use thoroughly agitate the curing material .
on pavement with integral curb or small and irregular areas that are inaccessible to the mechanical spray machine apply the curing material by a handheld sprayer .
as soon as the forms have been removed immediately correct all honeycomb areas and coat the edges of the pavement with the curing material .
respray all areas of curing material film damaged during the sawing of joints .
the contractor may water cure concrete with wet burlap cloth waterproof paper or polyethylene sheeting .
apply curing as soon as possible and without marring the concrete surface .
unless the specimen beams have attained a modulus of rupture of num psi num mpa keep the entire surface of the top and sides of the newly placed concrete covered for seven days .
protect concrete from freezing until beams attain a strength of num psi num mpa .
the above requirements for curing are minimum requirements only .
repair or replace all concrete showing injury or damage due to insufficient curing at no additional cost to the department .
num removing forms .
remove forms in a manner that doesnt damage the pavement .
num surface smoothness .
after final concrete curing and cleaning the pavement surface test the pavement surface for smoothness using a numfoot num m rolling straightedge .
provide a two or fourwheeled device with an indicator wheel at the center that detects high and low areas in the pavement surface .
provide equipment that actuates a pointer scale issues an audio alert or marks the pavement with paint or dye when encountering any high or low areas in excess of a preset tolerance .
tow or walk the rolling straightedge over the completed pavement .
test all wheel paths in the presence of the engineer .
locate wheel paths parallel to the pavement centerline and approximately num feet num m measured transversely from the center of the lane .
maintain alignment of the rolling straightedge with reference to the pavement edge at all times .
other devices such as approved profilers conforming to supplement num and using proval software may be used with approval of the engineer .
correct all surface variations so indicated to within the specified tolerance and in a manner that provides a surface texture conforming to num .
for corrective grinding provide equipment conforming to num .
ensure pavement surface variations do not exceed num inch in a numfoot num mm in a num m length of pavement .
for ramp pavements and for those pavements with curvature greater than num degrees or with grades exceeding num percent ensure the surface variations do not exceed num inch in num feet num mm in num m. repair or replace sections of pavement containing depressions that can not be corrected by grinding as directed by the engineer .
num profile grinding .
to correct surface variations exceeding tolerances specified in num use grinding equipment conforming to item num .
num pavement grooving corrections .
when pavement tining locations are found out of conformance with num correct the tining using power driven selfpropelled machines specifically designed to groove concrete pavement with diamond impregnated blades or diamond impregnated cylinder rings .
furnish blades or cylinder rings mounted on an arbor head so that the resulting grooves comply with num .
furnish grooving equipment with a depth control device that will detect variations in the pavement surface and enable adjustment of the cutting head to maintain the specified groove depth .
if a pavement area was diamond ground to bring the pavements surface smoothness within the tolerances of num that pavement area does not require tining restoration conforming to num .
vary from these requirements only for small areas and only with written permission from the engineer .
num sealing expansion joints .
as soon as feasible after completing sawing but before the pavement is open to construction equipment and traffic seal expansion joints with material conforming to num .
just before sealing thoroughly clean each joint of all foreign material using approved equipment .
ensure the joint faces are clean and dry when the seal is installed .
num opening to traffic .
when num days have elapsed the contractor may use the completed pavement for traffic including construction traffic .
if a modulus of rupture of num psi num mpa has been attained the contractor may open the pavement to traffic when num days have elapsed .
if necessary to open a portion of the pavement in less than num days with the proviso that the pavement will be cured for a minimum of num days use a high early strength concrete composed of additional num or num cement or nonchloride accelerating admixture to obtain a modulus of rupture of num psi num mpa in num days or less .
pavement repairs before department acceptance .
remove and replace or repair diagonal cracks longitudinal cracks transverse cracks spalled pavement surfaces and any pavement panels with cement balls or mud balls as approved by and at no cost to the department .
do not repair single hairline transverse cracks in the middle third of panels with reinforcing conforming to bpnum .
submit a repair plan with the location type of repair materials to be used and procedures to the department for approval .
do not perform any repairs without department approval .
the engineer may approve repair of isolated transverse or diagonal cracks with a full depth repair according to item num and applicable standard construction drawings .
repair cracks by replacing the pavement the full width between longitudinal joints perpendicular to the centerline and at least num feet num m longitudinally .
install smooth dowel bars at the interface between the original pavement and the replaced pavement section .
locate and size the repairs to ensure that the repair limits are at least num feet num m away from any transverse joint .
the engineer may approve repair of isolated longitudinal cracks within num inches num mm of a tied longitudinal joint by routing and sealing the crack according to item num .
for other longitudinal cracks repair the same as for transverse or diagonal cracks stated above .
the engineer may approve repair of isolated spalled pavement with item num bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavement .
repair all cement balls or mud balls by coring out the area full depth with a diamond core bit and replacing the removed concrete with the same concrete as in the pavement .
remove and replace any pavement panel with num or more cement balls or mudballs .
locate the limits of the repair along the longitudinal joints and at least numfoot num m past the transverse joints to remove any existing dowel bars .
install smooth dowel bars at the transverse limits of the repairs .
install type d drilled tied longitudinal joint along the longitudinal limits .
num pavement thickness and concrete strength .
a. thickness .
as determined by measurement of cores cut as specified in this section construct the concrete not more than num inch num mm less than the specified thickness .
core pavement at the direction of the engineer and at locations the engineer determines according to supplement num .
for the purpose of coring the department will consider the entire pavement area of a specified thickness a lot .
to determine the number of cores each lot will be divided into sublots .
a sublot consists of num square yards num mnum of a pavement lot or major fraction thereof .
take one random core for each sublot but not less than num cores for any pavement lot cored .
if a core shows a deficiency in thickness of more than num inch num mm from the specified thickness take additional cores to determine the limits of the deficiency .
follow the procedures below num .
take a core num feet num m longitudinally on both sides of the deficient core .
if both the cores are less than numinch num mm deficient in thickness the zone of deficiency has been determined .
num .
if either or both num.a.num cores are more than num inch num mm deficient in thickness cut a core num feet num m longitudinally from the deficient cores .
if the num foot num m cores is more than num inch num mm deficient cut additional cores at num foot num m longitudinal intervals until a core is less than num inch num mm deficient until the pavement ends or until overlapping an adjacent pavement sublots core in the same lane .
num .
if a pavement sublot has cores more than num inch num mm deficient in thickness and the sublots constructed width is greater than num feet num m obtain cores transverse to the location of the deficient cores .
obtain transverse cores at a location num the distance from the deficient core to the furthest edge of pavement .
obtain a transverse core for each core more than num inch num mm deficient .
num .
the engineer will use the cores that measure less than num inch num mm deficient in thickness to define the limits of the deficiency .
if any deficient core is greater than num inch num mm deficient in thickness determine the limits of over num inch num mm deficiency by following num.a.num thru num to determine the limits .
remove and replace those areas greater than num inch num mm deficient in thickness .
the engineer will calculate average thickness of concrete pavement placed as follows when zones of deficient thickness greater than num inch num mm to num inch num mm are allowed to remain in place the engineer will calculate two average thicknesses .
a project average thickness pat including all cores not more than num inch num mm deficient .
cores that exceed the specified thickness by more than num inch num mm will be considered as the specified thickness plus num inch num mm when calculating the pat .
a second deficient zone average dza will include all cores with thickness deficiency greater than num inch num mm to num inch num mm .
the pavement represented by each of the two averages pat or dza will be calculated and paid separately .
the engineer will determine and apply deductions to each separately placed width of pavement .
for any pavement areas removed and replaced recore those areas following this section of the specifications .
include those core values into the calculations for average pavement thickness .
unless the director requests do not core any widening less than num feet num m in width or any pavement area less than num square yards num square meters .
fill all core holes with concrete of the same proportions and materials used in the pavement .
b .
strength .
obtain an additional core at the same location as the thickness core from each pavement sublot to determine compressive strength. . for concrete pavement bid items with qcqa the aashto accredited laboratory will test the qc cores for compressive strength according to astm c num .
test the qc cores from num to num days of age .
notify the engineer when the qc cores will be tested .
the engineer will require one qa core for every num sublots for verification testing of compressive strength .
obtain the qa core from the same location as the qc core tested for compressive strength .
at least one qa core will be required per lot .
provide the qa cores to the engineer for testing at district testing .
notify the engineer of the date that the corresponding qc core will be tested .
the qa cores will be tested on the same date .
the engineer will verify the qc cores versus the qa cores according to num .
calculate an average and standard deviation for each lot according to supplement num .
determine the pay factors according to table num .
do not calculate an average and standard deviation for highearly strength concrete qc cores .
determine the pay factors for individual sublots according to table num .
for concrete pavements bid items without qcqa the department will perform the strength testing .
provide the engineer with the cores for strength testing .
pay factors for sublot cores will be calculated based on the high early strength concrete pay factors in table num .
num price adjustments .
payment will be made at the unit bid price upon completion of any section of pavement .
final pay adjustments to the bid price will be made upon completion of the pavement operations and all thickness strength and smoothness data is tabulated and pay adjustments applied according to num.a through num.d .
a. pavement thickness .
price adjustments for thickness deficiencies will be calculated according to table num table num concrete pavement thickness pay factor pft deficiency in thickness as determined by cores proportional part of contract price num to num inch num to num mm num percent num to num inch num to num mm    num num to num inch num to num mm    num greater than num inch num mm remove and replace the dca will determine whether pavement areas from num inch num mm to num inch num mm deficient in thickness will be allowed to remain in place at the reduced price or must be removed and replaced .
pat project average thickness pst plan specified thickness dza deficient zone average b .
concrete strength .
record the compressive strength results for each sublot of concrete .
highearly strength mixes qc ms and qc fs mixes are calculated separately .
determine the strength pay factor according to table num .
table num concrete pavement strength pay factor design strength fc from num or as per plan individual sublot core strength x project average strength     num project standard deviation   num num project required strength fcr fc num  strength pay factor pfs  fcr when pfs is greater than num pay the unit bid price for highearly strength sublots determine the pay factor separately as follows if the individual sublot core strength x is greater than fc pfs num of the unit bid price for the quantity represented .
if the individual sublot core strength x is less than fc the pfs fc of the unit bid price for the quantity represented .
c. pavement smoothness .
when the project plans include proposal note num determine a lump sum payment adjustment following the requirements of proposal note num .
d. multiple deficiencies .
when a pavement exhibits multiple deficiencies for thickness and strength the reduced unit price will be calculated for each deficiency and the lowest reduced unit price will be used .
adjustment for smoothness under num.c will conform to the lump sum requirements of num.c .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure reinforced concrete pavement by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted in place .
the width equals the pavement width shown on the typical crosssection of the plans plus additional widening as the engineer directs in writing .
the department will field measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
the department will determine the area based on the above width and length .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including reinforcing steel dowels and joint materials for furnishing the numfoot num m rolling straightedge and for coring and testing the pavement .
for pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength the department will pay a reduced price according to num .
the department will not pay extra for pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square yard reinforced concrete pavement class ____ square meter num square yard reinforced concrete pavement class ____ with qcqa square meter item num nonreinforced portland cement concrete pavement num description num construction num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing a nonreinforced portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared surface .
num construction .
the requirements of item num apply except as follows .
do not comply with the requirements of num .
provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes .
dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes or collectordistributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located within num feet num m of a pressure relief joint .
space contraction joints according to the standard construction drawings .
if item num pavement is specified for shoulders and is tied longitudinally to item num or num pavement match the joints in the shoulder pavement to the spacing and alignment of the adjacent pavement .
do not place construction joints within num feet num m of another parallel joint .
if making pavement repairs before department acceptance under num repair all cracks exclusive of size or location num method of measurement .
the department will measure nonreinforced concrete pavement by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted in place .
the width equals the pavement width shown on the typical crosssections of the plans plus additional widening as the engineer directs in writing .
the department will field measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials for surface testing and for coring the pavement .
for pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength the department will pay a reduced price according to num .
the department will not make additional payment over the contract unit price for any pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square yard nonreinforced concrete pavement class _____ square meter num square yard nonreinforced concrete pavement class ______ with qcqa square meter item num quality control plan testing and assurance for qcqa concrete num general num quality control plan basic requirements num additional quality control plan requirements for structures num additional quality control plan requirements for concrete pavement num department quality assurance num qcp submittal and corrective action num basis of payment num general .
use this specification for items num num num and num when the bid item description requires qcqa .
this specification defines the minimum quality control plan qcp requirements the contractors minimum quality control qc materials testing and the departments quality assurance qa materials verification testing requirements .
develop a qcp to assure that all materials and construction practices for the item will conform to the specifications .
establish the responsibilities duties and frequency for both inprocess controls and quality control testing at the concretes source and at the job site .
num quality control plan basic requirements .
submit a complete qcp that includes at a minimum the following a .
basic information .
provide the following information num .
the name and location of the department inspected and approved concrete producer .
num .
the department accepted job mix formula jmf to be used for each item .
num .
the name and accreditation of the aashto accredited laboratory to be used for testing fresh and hardened concrete properties for structures or pavements .
provide notification to the department immediately when there is a change in accreditation status .
num .
name of the persons who is responsible for compliance with the qcp acts as liaison to the department reports any nonspecification test results and assures that adjustments are made to remedy problems .
num .
names of all technicians from the aashto accredited laboratory who will perform project site inspection sampling and testing .
provide additional technician names when plant sampling and testing is also required .
use aci certified concrete field testing technicians grade i to perform concrete sampling and testing .
provide copies of their aci certificates .
num .
names of all technicians from the aashto accredited laboratory who will perform compressive strength testing .
use aci certified concrete strength testing technicians to perform compressive strength testing .
provide copies of their aci certificates .
num .
calibration records of test equipment to be used on the project .
num .
develop and provide example forms for reporting qc test results to the engineer conforming to num.c or num.g .
b .
minimum quality control at the concrete source .
address how the following items will be controlled in the qcp num .
verify that the material sources are certified for the type of work in which they are to be used .
num .
verify that aggregates cementitious materials and admixtures sources and design weights match the proposed jmf .
num .
describe how aggregates will be hauled stockpiled and handled to minimize segregation avoid contamination and assure a uniform gradation .
num .
describe procedures and frequency used to control and measure aggregate moistures .
num .
provide the batching sequence and mixing procedures to be used to assure that material balling does not occur .
num .
describe how adjustments to the ssd aggregate design weights in the jmf are made to compensate for moisture contained in the aggregates during batching .
num .
describe how adjustments to mix water will be made to compensate for aggregate moistures to assure the jmfs watercementitious ratio wcm is not exceeded .
num .
define how the batching tolerances of num are assured .
num .
provide the information reported on the batch ticket and how it will be validated to meet the requirements of num .
num .
describe the method and frequency of assuring that the combined aggregate gradation remains within zone ii of the coarseness factor chart .
if adjustments are made to the jmf proportions provide the individual aggregate gradations combined aggregate gradation and verification that the proportions remain within zone ii of the coarseness factor chart to the engineer prior to placement .
num .
if using a nonpotable water source describe the procedures and frequency to verify that the water meets the requirements of astm cnum .
a .
if a reclaiming system is used describe the method and frequency of testing to ensure that the water contains no more than num chlorides .
num .
describe how and when the water is removed from the mixer prior to batching a new load of concrete .
num .
describe methods to verify that the storage and dispensing methods for the admixtures comply with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
describe methods to keep the concrete temperature within specifications and how to mitigate effects of changes to the set time .
num .
define the desired slump and tolerance for concrete in each construction item .
num additional quality control plan requirements for structures .
in addition to basic qcp minimum requirements of num provide the following for structures a .
material quality control requirements .
provide the following controls for the concrete materials num .
divide the concrete for the project into lots and sublots and define the placement sequence for each work item as follows a .
division of lots .
a lot consists of concrete of the same jmf .
divide lots by substructure and superstructure items .
include approach slab concrete with the superstructure lot .
combine structural components requiring the same class of concrete with different reference numbers into a single lot .
however one exception is a slipformed parapet may be considered separately from a bridge deck of same class of concrete .
b .
division into qc sublots .
divide each lot into sublots of not more than num ydnum num mnum for obtaining qc samples .
in no case should there be less than num sublots in a lot .
the engineer will approve the sublot division .
num .
determine and define the sampling location based on placement method i.e .
pumping tremie direct chute deliver etc .. a .
define in the qcp plan equipment and methods to be used for num.a.num.b .
num .
perform the following quality control testing for air content and slump at a minimum air content .
sample the concrete to perform the qc testing at the point of placement .
use the following quality control procedures during placement a .
sample and test the air content on at least the first three num loads of concrete delivered for each days placement .
ensure the air content is within the specified parameters in table num prior to extending the testing frequency to each sublot .
b .
for concrete delivered to the point of placement by means of pumping equipment describe the methods that will be used to provide backpressure in the system in order to minimize the amount of air loss and maintain a continuous flow of concrete in the pipe lines and boom during the pumping operation .
obtain concrete samples at the point of placement without interrupting the continuous flow of concrete by either passing the pump line over a sampling container or obtain a composite sample from five different portions of the deposited concrete prior to vibration .
sample and test the air content at the point of placement for the first three num loads to ensure that it is within the specified parameters in table num prior to extending the frequency to each sublot .
c. when the engineer determines concrete can not feasibly be sampled at the point of placement provide a trial placement of concrete to verify that the air content is within the limits of table num .
if a load of concrete is tested and found to have an air content beyond the limits of table num do not accept and place that load unless it can be adjusted to be within the specified limits .
do not adjust the air content using a defoaming agent .
notify the engineer and test at least the next three loads for air content to ensure that the results are again within the limits of table num .
the sampling frequency may then be extended back to one test for every sublot .
slump .
perform slump testing at the point of discharge when strength specimens are obtained .
ensure that the slump is within the specified parameters of table num .
num .
establish who is responsible for reporting air and slump results to the engineer within num day after each placement .
num .
describe the methods for initial curing transporting curing testing and reporting test results of the qc compressive strength specimens to the engineer within five num days or the completion of testing .
a .
define the unique sample identification and tracking method of concrete specimens .
num .
qc compressive strength testing .
perform qc sampling for compressive strength at the point of discharge for each sublot from the load randomly determined by the engineer .
the contractor may sample at the point of placement if air content exceeds the limits of table num at the point of discharge .
for each sublot make one num set of three num num x num inch num x num mm qc compressive strength cylinders .
perform all required making curing transporting capping and testing of the samples to conform to the applicable astm specifications .
have the aashto accredited laboratory perform the compression testing on the cylinders .
num .
field cured strengths .
determine whether field cured cylinders beams or maturity curve acceptance will be used for num and num strength testing .
define how many cylinders or beams will be made per placement .
a .
field cured samples .
describe the methods for transporting testing and reporting the test results of field cured samples for falsework removal and opening to traffic .
b .
define the reporting methods to be used to keep the engineer informed that field cured strength results conform to the requirements for construction falsework removal and opening to traffic .
if developing a maturity curve provide the maturity curve to the engineer with the qcp conforming to supplement num .
b .
construction process quality control requirements .
in addition to the requirements of num provide the following for the construction processes num .
establish and define in the qcp the minimum required rate of concrete delivery for continuous placement for each construction item determine if the plant capacity is capable of providing the concrete at the established rate and determine how many trucks will be used to provide the concrete at the specified rate of delivery .
num .
describe the procedures and equipment to be used for delivering and placing concrete for each item methods of consolidating finishing and grooving the concrete and methods of curing the concrete .
num .
describe methods and frequency of assuring the grade super elevation slab thickness reinforcing steel cover etc .
meets the plan dimensions .
num .
establish the orientation of the finishing machine on a skewed superstructure to conform to num .
num .
describe the methods to be used to meet cold or hot weather procedures as necessary .
num .
describe methods to prevent the evaporation rate from exceeding the specification requirements and actions to be taken when ambient and concrete temperatures exceed the requirements of num .
num .
describe the methods of protecting concrete if inclement weather occurs .
num .
describe how and when the vibrator frequency is verified to conform to num .
num .
describe the placement procedures to be used to assure that the tolerances for slipformed concrete meets the requirements of num .
num .
describe the methods and schedule for providing control joints in parapets according to num .
num .
describe the lighting plan equipment and methods when necessary for placement according to num .
c. reporting .
for the laboratory tested qc air content results report the following information within one day of completing the testing .
for the laboratory tested qc compressive strength results report the following information within five num days of completing the testing num .
sample id as provided by the department num .
project number num .
producer name num .
class of concrete num .
batch ticket number num .
date sampled num .
lot and sublot identification num .
placement and sample location num .
air content num .
slump num .
concrete temperature num .
batch weight num .
unit weight num .
specimen size num .
date tested num .
age num .
individual strength results and average strength num .
type of fracture num .
laboratory name num .
technician name not required when reporting air content test results .
num additional quality control plan requirements for concrete pavement .
in addition to the requirements of num provide the following information a .
division of pavement into lots .
for the purpose of thickness and strength determination a lot consists of the entire pavement area of the same pavement thickness and the same class of concrete .
areas using highearly strength concrete are considered a separate lot .
in the qcp define the lots for the project .
the engineer will approve the lot division .
b .
division of lots into quality control sublots .
provide the placement sequence and placement widths for the pavement work and determine the sublot division conforming to supplement num .
provide the engineer the proposed sublots .
the engineer will approve the sublot division .
c. material control requirements .
during production of the concrete pavement perform the following quality checks num .
check the aggregate stockpile conditions gradation and moisture condition daily .
a .
provide the name and oaima level ii certification of the persons performing the aggregate gradation .
b .
define the methods of reporting results to the engineer including whether the concrete aggregate proportions still conform to the mixs well graded requirements .
num .
for portable plants assure that the plant is inspected by the department prior to placing concrete .
describe the procedures and frequencies to verify the mixer blades condition and the scale gage meter and admixture dispenser operation .
num .
during paving perform the following a .
air slump and temperature .
sample and test the concrete at least each  day of operation at the placement location .
num .
testing for opening the pavement to traffic early according to num .
describe the methods to be used to assure the modulus of rupture obtains num psi num mpa .
define the methods to report results to the engineer .
d. pavement cores for compression and thickness .
define at what age the sublot cores for strength and thickness will be taken .
define the age the cores will be tested for compressive strength .
take strength cores at the same location as the cores for thickness determination .
determine sublot core locations according to supplement num .
num .
pavement thickness measurement .
define who will be measuring the pavement thickness according to supplement num .
define the frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the engineer .
when the sublot cores thickness is deficient follow the requirements of num for additional core locations to determine the deficiencys limits .
num .
define how the engineer will be provided access to witness the measurements .
num .
define the method and frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the engineer e. concrete strength .
for each sublot test the core strengths using an aashto accredited laboratory .
num .
propose the method and frequency of reporting the results to the engineer for acceptance .
f. construction process requirements num .
define the minimum required rate of concrete delivery for continuous placement and assure that the equipment and transportation is adequate to provide the concrete at that rate .
num .
describe the methods of protecting the concrete in the case of inclement weather .
num .
describe the methods and frequency of controlling and checking the plastic thickness during paving and reporting issues to the engineer .
num .
define fine grading methods and equipment num .
define the procedure and frequency of conditioning the subbase or subgrade before pavement placement .
num .
define who will perform the hiperpav analysis required in num and the proposed timeframe the engineer will have to review the report .
num .
describe equipment and methods for consistently delivering and evenly spreading the concrete in front of the paver .
num .
describe the procedure for dowel bar or load transfer device installation and methods for determining proper placement location after concrete placement .
assure methods conform with num.b .
num .
describe the type of tie bar or alternate bolt that will be utilized at each longitudinal joint location and methods of placement .
describe the methods and monitoring frequency that will be utilized to assure tie bars are placed and conform with num.a in the finished pavement .
num .
describe methods of monitoring the vibrator operation and frequency time of day station location and track speed according to num.b .
num .
describe methods that will be used to ensure that in place concrete conforms to the air entrainment and uniformity requirements after placement and finishing are complete .
num .
define materials methods and controls for curing and joint sealing and assuring application requirements .
num .
describe joint sawing methods and proposed timing to the sawing operation .
num .
describe finishing and pavement grooving methods .
num .
pavement smoothness .
a .
define methods to check pavement smoothness conforming to num and reporting to the engineer .
b .
if other smoothness tolerances are required in the contract define the methods to measure evaluate and report the results to the engineer .
g. reporting requirements .
num .
report the following qc testing information to the engineer daily .
a .
project number b .
class of concrete c. jmf number d. batch ticket number e. date and time sampled f. air content g. slump h. concrete temperature i .
aggregate moistures results j .
aggregate gradation results k. laboratory name l. technician name num .
report the pavement thickness measurements conforming to the form in supplement num .
num .
report the compressive strength test results from the qc cores sampled according to num.b with the following information a. pavement lot b .
class of concrete c. jmf number d. sublot number e. core location f. placement date g. age at time of testing in days h. compressive strength .
i .
name of concrete producer j .
name of contractor k. name of laboratory num department quality assurance .
the department will perform quality assurance materials verification sampling and testing as specified or as deemed necessary .
a .
structure concrete .
the engineer will perform and determine random number locations for qc compressive strength testing of each sublot .
num .
random number determination .
the engineer will determine a random number for each sublot to determine from which load the qc sample will be taken using the table in supplement num or a random number generator .
num .
slump and air .
the engineer will perform sidebyside air and slump field testing with the contractor and compare results .
if the difference between the departments and the contractors test result is greater than the tolerances listed below the contractor and engineer will determine the reason for slump or air content differences and make necessary adjustments .
the engineer may stop the placement until the reason for the difference is established and corrected .
the engineer will check one of the first three loads delivered .
once the results are within the tolerances listed below the engineer may reduce the qa sampling and testing frequency to num of the contractors subsequent qc tests .
slump num inch num mm air content num .
num .
compressive strength .
the engineer will obtain compressive strength qa samples from the same location as the contractors quality control samples at a frequency of one qa sample for every num sublots or at least one per lot .
the engineer will make six num num x num inch num x num mm cylinders for each sample .
the engineer will mark the cylinders with identification and the contractor shall provide initial curing at the project .
after the initial curing at the project site deliver three num qa cylinders to district testing and three num qa cylinders to the aashto accredited laboratory for standard curing and testing .
the aashto accredited laboratory will test the qa sample and the qc sample and report the test results on the form accepted by the qcp .
distinguish the qa from the qc results for the sublot .
the engineer will compare and verify that the tested qc and the matching tested qa test results are within num of the department tested qa result .
if the comparison is favorable the contractor qc testing is considered verified .
a .
when the comparison of the results are more than num investigate the results with the engineer to determine the reason for the difference .
if the reason for the difference can not be determined to the engineers satisfaction the engineer will require the contractor to either nondestructively test or core the concrete represented by the cylinder tests to determine compressive strength .
hire a second independent aashto accredited laboratory to perform this additional testing .
the engineer will witness the testing and evaluate the results .
the department will reimburse the contractor for all testing costs when the departments results are in error .
if the qc results are found to be valid use the qc results .
if the qc results are not valid use the core results to determine the compressive strength values for pay factors per num.a .
b. pavement and base concrete .
the engineer will perform sidebyside sampling and testing with the contractor and compare results .
num .
air content and slump .
the department will perform quality assurance testing of the air content on at least num percent of the contractors qc samples .
the results will be compared and if the difference between the departments and the contractors test results is greater than num or num inch the contractor and engineer will determine the reason for difference and make necessary adjustments .
the engineer may stop the placement until the reason for the difference is established and corrected .
make any required modifications or changes to the qcp the technician and equipment before continuing paving .
num .
compressive strength .
the engineer will randomly select num out of every num qc core locations to have an additional core obtained as a qa strength sample according to supplement num .
the qa core sample will be provided to the engineer and district testing will cure and test the qa core at the date specified by the contractor .
the engineer will compare and verify that the department tested qa core and the matching contractor tested qc core test result are within num of the district testing qa result .
if the comparison is favorable the contractor qc testing is considered verified .
if the difference between core results is greater than num the engineer will investigate both the contractors aashto accredited laboratory and district testing for the accuracy of the equipment and procedures for conducting the compressive strength testing of the cores .
if the investigation does not determine the reason for the discrepancy between cores the contractor will recore the sublot in dispute and the core will be tested at omm .
the omm core result will be compared to the contractors qc core result .
if the comparison is within num the contractors qc result will be accepted and considered verified .
if not within the num range the project sublots will be recored by the contractor and tested by the department .
the results will be used for payment under num.b .
num qcp submittal and corrective action .
submit the proposed qcp to the engineer for acceptance at least num days prior to placing concrete .
if the submitted qcp is not accepted by the engineer revise and resubmit the qcp and provide an additional num days for acceptance .
reschedule the concrete placement when necessary to allow time for the review and acceptance of the qcp .
the qcp acceptance is based on the concept that the proposed qcp procedures will provide work meeting all specification requirements .
if the accepted qcp is not being followed the engineer will require compliance or re submittal of any modifications for review and acceptance .
when the actual work produced by the qcp does not conform to specification requirements the engineer will require modification of the qcp to return the work to conformance .
when notified by the engineer propose modifications to the qcp for acceptance .
do not continue work until the engineer has either accepted the revised qcp or determined work can continue .
num basis of payment .
the cost of developing and implementing the qcp is incidental to the cost of the concrete sold with the qcqa requirement .
item num concretegeneral num description num materials num concrete mix design num adjustments and controls num equipment num handling measuring and batching materials num batch plant tickets num mixing concrete num description .
this specification consists of proportioning requirements for portland concrete mix designs mixing and controls of portland cement concrete .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to portland cement num num num num and num or blended cementnum microsilica num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs num fly ash num carbonate microfines num fine aggregate num num coarse aggregatenum num num recycled concrete aggregate rca supplement num airentraining admixture num chemical admixture for concretenum num num if blended cement is used provide mill certification of all the cement and pozzolanic components and final product for approval by the office of materials management num num natural sand or sand manufactured from stone as specified in item num.a.num is required in num num num num num and num deck slabs .
num aggregates may be standard gradation sizes from num and table num or they may be a modified gradation defined with the mix design submittal and certified by the office of materials management under supplement num .
num applies only to num num and num concrete .
num admixtures shall contain no more than num parts per million chloride ions by weight of cement except for type c accelerating admixtures or calcium chloride for qcfs only use water for concrete mixing free from sewage oil acid strong alkalis vegetable matter clay and loam .
potable water is satisfactory for use in concrete .
nonpotable water will meet the requirements of astm cnum .
water from a reclaiming system will contain no more than num chlorides .
test the nonpotable water monthly and maintain data verifying that the water meets the requirements .
provide the data at the engineers request .
num concrete mix designs .
develop concrete mix designs with num inch maximum nominal size coarse aggregate according to aci num section num meeting the requirements of table num .
limit the pozzolan content of any mix design according to table num .
the design air for concrete with num nominal maximum size aggregate is num percent .
develop concrete mix designs per this specification and supplement num .
only use mix designs accepted by the department and issued a jmf number .
table num concrete mix design requirements quantities per cubic yard cubic meter provide concrete with num air content class design strength psi mpa permeability num maximum coulombs cementitious content num minimum .
lbs kg aggregate requirements qc num num num at num days num num num wellgraded qc num num num at num days num num num wellgraded qc num special as per plan num or as per plan num num or as per plan wellgraded or as per plan qc num mass concrete num num or as per plan num num or as per plan num num num num or as per plan wellgraded or as per plan qc num num num num at num days na num num num inch or num inch nominal maximum size qc ms see supplement num na num num num inch nominal maximum size qc fs see supplement num na num num num inch nominal maximum size qc misc num num num at num days na num num num inch nominal maximum size num aashto tnum modified .
num cementitious content includes cement pozzolan and carbonate microfines materials denoted as cm .
num strength for mass concrete qc num may be tested at either num or num days .
num do not use type iii cement or accelerating admixtures in mass concrete .
num the maximum fly ash or ggbfs content may be increased up to num .
num for qc misc mixes only watercementitious ratio limited to num maximum .
num cement or a combination of cement and up tonum fly ash or up to num ggbfs .
num for qc num mixes with num inch nominal size provide an air content of num .
determine the permeability by testing according to aashto tnum except moist cure the permeability samples for num days at num f num c followed by num days of moist curing at num f num c. perform permeability testing at num days .
limit pozzolan materials as a percent of total cementitious content according to table num table num pozzolan materials material maximum content fly ash num ggbfs num microsilica num carbonate microfines num num when using multiple pozzolan materials do not exceed the individual maximum contents above for each material .
a combination of pozzolan materials may not exceed num of the total cementitious content by weight .
num not for use in qc num or qc num concrete .
a .
slump .
maintain slump within the nominal slump range in table num .
if below the maximum water cementititous ratio of the job mix formula jmf adjust the quantity of water to meet slump requirements .
do not use concrete with a slump greater than the maximum shown in table num .
conduct tests on the plastic concrete for pavement at the point of placement or at an engineerdesignated location .
table num concrete slump type of work nominal slump inch mmnum maximum slump inch mmnum concrete pavement num num num num num to num num to num num num structural concrete num num num num to num num to num num num superstructure concrete num num num to num num to num num num nonreinforced concrete num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num this nominal slump may be increased to num inches num mm provided the increase in slump is achieved by adding a chemical admixture conforming to the requirements of num type f or g. num this maximum slump may be increased to num inches num mm provided the increase in slump is achieved by adding a chemical admixture conforming to the requirements of num type f or g. b .
air content .
ensure that the air content in all concrete at the point of placement is within the percentage range specified in table num .
num adjustments and controls .
provide the following adjustments and controls during batching and placement of the concrete a. batch the concrete to the proportions of the accepted jmf .
provide a workable and finishable mix .
adjustments to the jmfs aggregate proportions up to num lbs num kg for workability may be made .
adjustments greater than num lbs num kg may be made if approved by the engineer .
maintain an absolute volume of num cubic feetcubic yard for the adjusted concrete mix .
for well graded jmf adjustments maintain the combined aggregate gradation within the optimal zone ii requirements for wellgraded mixes as defined in supplement num .
if outside the optimal zone ii of the coarseness factor chart adjust the jmfs proportions to maintain the combined gradation within zone ii and report the jmf changes to the engineer .
b .
handle haul and store aggregates to minimize segregation avoid contamination and assure a uniform grading within the specified gradation .
do not combine aggregates from different sources or of different gradings in the same stockpile .
do not use segregated or contaminated aggregates .
c. remove all wash water by reversing each truck drum at the plant immediately prior to reloading .
d. adjust the ssd aggregate design weights in the jmf to compensate for the moisture contained in the aggregates and moisture the aggregates will absorb during batching .
adjust the mix water to compensate for the aggregate moistures .
e. use only compatible admixtures in the concrete .
dispense all admixtures according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish a volumetric dispenser for the type f or g admixture or ensure that there is a gage on each truckmounted type f or g admixture dispensing tank .
if any admixture is added at the job site mix the load for a minimum of num minutes .
f. do not exceed the maximum watercementitious ratio of the accepted jmf .
use a waterreducing admixture conforming to num proportionately increase the cementitious content or develop and submit for acceptance a new jmf .
adjust the absolute volume of the aggregates if the cement content is increased .
g. if during placement of concrete cement or microsilica balling is observed take corrective action with further mixing .
if after corrective action balling continues reject the load .
revise the mixing process andor loading sequence to prevent further balling .
h. if slump loss occurs before placement of the concrete the concrete may be replasticized with an admixture to restore plasticity .
the engineer will recheck the slump range and air content to ensure conformance to the specifications .
if after replasticizing the components of the load are segregated the department will reject the load .
i .
completely discharge the concrete from each delivery truck within the time requirements of num .
j .
provide sufficient quality control at the plant to assure conformance with this specification and project requirements .
k. use an approved setretarding admixture conforming to num type b or d when the concrete temperature exceeds a nominal temperature of num f num c. num equipment .
use a department approved batch plant and trucks .
provide batching and mixing equipment meeting the following requirements a. batching plants .
operate each plant so that aggregate materials are not segregated and there is no intermingling of the materials before batching .
use weighing mechanisms that allow a visible means of checking weights and produce a printed record .
use dispensing mechanisms for water and admixtures that allow a visible means of checking quantities and produce a printed record .
use cement and aggregate weighing mechanisms that are accurate to within num percent of the correct weight .
ensure that devices for weighing or metering water are accurate to num percent throughout the range used .
maintain a certification from a sealer of weights and measures or a scale servicing company attesting to the accuracy of the weighing and metering devices .
a certificate of performance issued by the national ready mixed concrete association may be used instead of the sealer of weights and measures or a scale servicing company .
do not use plants with a certification or certificate older than num months maintain the services of a scale servicing company or ten standard test weights to reach a capacity of num pounds num kg for testing the weighing devices at the batch plant .
ensure all devicetesting weights are sealed by the ohio department of agriculture every num years .
the engineer may test weighing and dispensing devices as often as necessary to ensure continued accuracy .
b. mixers .
provide mixers and agitators conforming to aashto m num sections num num num and num except that the department will allow mechanical counters .
for bodies of nonagitating concrete hauling equipment provide smooth mortartight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a satisfactory controlled rate without segregation .
provide covers when required by the engineer .
the engineer will allow trucks having dump bodies with rounded corners and no internal ribs or projections for nonagitating hauling .
c. concrete pumping and conveying equipment .
provide concrete pumping and conveying equipment in accordance with aci numr and aci numr .
conduct a preplacement meeting to discuss concrete pumping and conveying procedures to maintain air content within specified limits per table num .
num handling measuring and batching materials .
do not stockpile aggregates from different sources or different gradations together .
do not use aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with foreign material .
the engineer may direct reworking or cleaning or may reject aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material .
prior to and during batching maintain all coarse aggregates at a uniform moisture content .
for all slag aggregates or other aggregates with a reported absorption above num percent maintain the moisture contents at or above the odotreported ssd for that aggregate as follows a .
use appropriate stockpile watering systems capable of raising and maintaining aggregate moisture at or above ssd .
test the moisture content of the watered aggregate stockpiles at least five num locations to assure the stockpile is at or above ssd .
b .
have processes to maintain the aggregate stockpile at ssd until stockpile draining for ssd consistency has begun .
twentyfour num hours before batching concrete with the aggregate shut down the stockpile watering process to allow drainage and to establish a uniform moisture content .
c. test aggregate moisture content at least once per half day but not less than twice per day during concrete production .
if the moisture content varies between tests by more than num percent increase the moisture testing frequency to assure correct batching information .
d. provide the moisture content test results as part of all quality control plant ticket information .
separately weigh the amounts of fine aggregate and coarse aggregate .
use a separate weighing device for cementitious materials .
batch each material to ensure weights are within the tolerance specified in table num based on the amount specified in the approved jmf .
table num concrete batching tolerances material batching tolerance cement num pozzolan num carbonate microfines num aggregates num waternum num chemical admixtures num nummeasured by weight or volume num batch plant tickets .
furnish a concrete batch plant ticket to the engineer for each load of concrete incorporated into the project .
provide computer generated batch tickets .
at a minimum include the information listed in table num on each ticket table num every batch ticket name of readymix batch plant batch plant no .
batch plant location serial number of ticket date truck number class of concrete jmf number batch time batch size ydnum mnum actual weights of cementitious material cement lb kg fly ash lb kg ggbfs lb kg microsilica lb kg carbonate microfines lb kg other lb kg actual weights of aggregates coarse lb kg intermediate lb kg fine lb kg other lb kg actual weight of water lb kg actual volume of admixtures airentrainer fl oz ml superplasticizer fl oz ml waterreducer fl oz ml retarder fl oz ml other fl oz ml aggregate moisture contents coarse aggregate intermediate aggregate fine aggregate watercementitious ratio leaving the plant provide the information in table num with batch tickets for each days first load of concrete and for each jmf .
include table num information on the batch ticket or furnish the information on a separate computer generated or handwritten form attached to the batch ticket .
if during the concrete manufacturing process any of the information listed in table num changes resubmit table num information with the first batch ticket supplied with the changed concrete .
table num first ticket each day each jmf cementitious materials source grade or type cement fly ash ggbfs microsilica carbonate microfines other admixtures brand type airentrainer retarder superplasticizer waterreducer other the provided concrete batch ticket information is according to astm c numc numm section num .
the engineer may require supporting data to validate the basis for furnished aggregate moisture contents .
num mixing concrete .
use a central mix plant or in truck mixers to mix the concrete .
when using a central mix plant mix the concrete not less than num seconds begin the mixing time when all materials are in the drum and end the mixing time when discharge begins .
include transfer time in multiple drum mixers in the mixing time .
remove the contents of an individual mixer drum before a succeeding batch is emptied into the drum .
when concrete is mixed using a truck mixer for complete mixing mix each batch of concrete at the rotation rate designated on the mixer as mixing speed for not less than num revolutions of the drum .
transport mixed concrete from the central mixers in truck mixers truck agitators or trucks having nonagitating bodies .
within num minutes after cement and water are combined deliver and completely discharge concrete .
when concrete is delivered in transit mixers and before discharging any of a batch the engineer may allow adding water within the specified watercement ratio limits .
perform sufficient mixing a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed to adjust the slump and to regenerate the specified air content throughout the batch .
when approved by the engineer the contractor may use approved admixtures num type f or g for retempering the load to adjust the slump after the start of discharge .
mix for a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed after addition of the admixture .
use admixtures containing no more than num parts per million chloride by weight of cement only when specified in the contract documents the accepted jmf or with the engineers written permission .
ensure that the temperature of all concrete does not exceed num f num c until incorporated into the work .
num structures item num structuresgeneral num general num verification of dimensions num notification of fabricator num shop drawings num submittal of engineered drawings num test reports num welded attachments num general .
this specification includes the general requirements for building the various items that constitute the completed structure .
perform the work including fabrication erection and construction so that the entire structure and all its component parts will function as designed .
num verification of dimensions .
verify that all dimensions established by the engineer are correct .
num notification of fabricator .
when furnishing materials under items num num num num and num select a fabricator from the prequalified fabricators list in effect the date of the contract letting .
before or at the preconstruction conference provide a written notification to the dca and omm of the selected steel fabricators and precast concrete fabricators .
num shop drawings .
provide shop drawings detailing structural steel metal structural elements prestressed concrete members precast concrete structural elements and other similar materials requiring either shop or field fabrication .
include the pid project identification number .
a .
contractor acceptance of shop drawings for items num and num .
submit shop drawings to the omm and the district office of planning and engineering before the start of fabrication on item num uf level or at least num days before the prefabrication meeting per num or num as follows for structures carrying railroad traffic submit four copies of the prepared shop drawings at least num days prior to the pre fabrication meeting to each railroad company involved for review and approval .
resolve all railroad comments prior to submitting drawings to omm .
the submission to omm shall include one set of shop drawings accepted by each railroad company involved copies of all documentation between the railroads and the contractor four sets of contractor accepted shop drawings and the contractors written acceptance letter .
also furnish the fabricators quality control specialist with one additional set of these drawings before the prefabrication meeting .
for all other structures the submission to omm shall include a written acceptance letter and four copies of each drawing unless additional copies are requested .
also furnish the fabricators quality control specialist with one additional set of these drawings before the prefabrication meeting .
have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings the preparers and checkers shall initial each sheet and shall be different individuals .
provide on the cover sheet or submittal letter the first name last name and initials of each preparer and checker performing work on the shop drawings .
have an ohio registered engineer sign seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter according to orc num and oac num confirming that the shop drawings meet the intent of the contract .
if multiple preparers or multiple checkers created the drawing then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicated the portions for which each person is responsible .
have all questions and comments addressed before submitting the shop drawings .
the contractors written acceptance letter shall document acceptance of the shop drawings including confirmation of field verification as required and descriptions of issues resolved between the contractor the fabricator or the department .
by accepting these shop drawings the contractor represents to the department that all dimensions and elevations of existing conditions shown on the plans have been field measured and verified and that these shop drawings comply with all the materials requirements construction requirements contract requirements and performance criteria .
the contractor further represents that these drawings have been coordinated and verified with the details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project .
the department will not make any allowance for additional cost or delays to the contractor for incorrect fabrication as a result of failure to coordinate or perform this acceptance .
if the department requests changes on these shop drawings or the contractor makes changes in addition to those expressly requested revise the shop drawings and submit a new cover sheet signed sealed and dated by an ohio registered engineer with suitable revision marks to identify the changes .
schedule the prefabrication meeting after omm receives the drawings .
fabrication may begin after the pre fabrication meeting is complete or after receipt of item num uf level drawings .
b. fabricator coordination of shop drawings for items num num and num .
the contractor and fabricator must coordinate these shop drawings .
ensure that shop drawings meet requirements for materials field measurements construction requirements contract requirements performance criteria and similar data .
the coordination must also include details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project .
the department will not make allowance for additional cost or delays to the contractor for incorrect fabrication as a result of failure to coordinate or perform this coordination .
submit two copies of the shop drawings to the engineer and one copy to the district office of planning and engineering with the materials delivered to the project .
do not incorporate material into the work until after submitting the drawings .
department approval of these shop drawings is not required .
c. shop drawing general requirements .
specific requirements are specified in item num num num num or num .
shop drawings shall be neatly and accurately drawn on num x num inch or num x numinch num x num mm or num x num mm sheets .
submit the shop drawings electronically in pdf format .
num submittal of engineered drawings .
design and perform all procedures as directed by the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges or the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications except as modified below perform daily inspections to ensure the work governed by the engineered drawing is functioning as designed .
report malfunctioning work to the engineer immediately .
a .
projects with railroad involvement .
prepare and provide engineered drawings listed in this section as follows have competent individuals prepare check and initial each engineered drawing .
the preparer and checker shall be different individuals .
provide on the cover sheet or submittal letter the first name last name and initials of each preparer and checker performing work on the engineered drawings .
have an ohio registered engineer sign seal and date the cover sheet or submittal letter according to orc num and oac num .
if multiple preparers or multiple checkers created the drawing then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicate the portions for which each person is responsible .
submit engineered drawings to all involved railway companies at least num days before planned construction begins .
obtain acceptance from all involved railroad companies .
furnish the engineer copies of all correspondence with the railroad documentation of railroad acceptance and the engineered drawings accepted by the railroad .
schedule an engineered drawing meeting to be held num days or less after submitting railroad accepted drawings to the engineer .
the signatory engineer responsible for the engineered drawing design the superintendent the engineer and the inspector will participate in the meeting in person via conference call or via video conference .
the engineer will invite the responsible designer of the plans for assistance .
the purpose of the meeting shall be to review the drawings resolve all issues to the engineers satisfaction and ensure all parties are in agreement with the work to commence .
at the conclusion of the meeting the engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in accordance with num .
do not begin work until the engineers acceptance has been received .
perform all work in accordance with the odot accepted engineered drawings .
immediately cease all operations that deviate from the odot accepted engineered drawings .
if a deviation is necessary prepare revised engineered drawings as noted above and furnish the engineer a copy of a revised engineered drawings including documentation of acceptance from all involved railroad companies .
schedule an engineered drawing meeting as noted above to be held num hours or less at the discretion of the engineer after submitting the revised railroad accepted drawings .
at the conclusion of the meeting the engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in accordance with num .
do not begin work until the engineers acceptance has been received .
the department will consider delays resulting from engineered drawing deviations as nonexcusable in accordance with num.e .
this section applies to engineered drawings for the following num .
bracing adjacent to the railroad tracks .
perform work according to num.b.num .
num .
demolition of structures over or within num feet of railroad tracks .
perform work according to num.b.num .
num .
erection of structural members over or within num feet of railroad tracks .
perform work according to num.b.num .
b .
projects without railroad involvement .
prepare and provide engineered drawings listed in this section as follows have competent individuals prepare check and initial each engineered drawing .
the preparer and checker shall be different individuals .
provide on the cover sheet or submittal letter the first name last name and initials of each preparer and checker performing work on the engineered drawings .
have an ohio registered engineer prepare sign seal and date the cover sheet or submittal letter according to orc num and oac num .
if multiple preparers or multiple checkers created the drawing then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicated the portions for which each person is responsible .
schedule an engineered drawing meeting to be held num days or less after submitting drawings to the engineer .
the signatory engineer responsible for the design the superintendent the engineer and the inspector will participate in the meeting in person via conference call or via video conference .
the engineer will invite the designer of the contract plans for assistance .
the purpose of the meeting shall be to review the drawings resolve all issues to the engineers satisfaction and ensure all parties are in agreement with the work to commence .
at the conclusion of the meeting the engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in accordance with num .
do not begin work until the engineers acceptance has been received .
perform all work in accordance with the accepted engineered drawings .
immediately cease all operations that deviate from the accepted engineered drawings .
if a deviation is necessary prepare revised engineered drawings as noted above and furnish the engineer a copy of revised engineered drawings .
schedule an engineered drawing meeting as noted above to be held num hours or less at the discretion of the engineer after submitting the revised drawings .
at the conclusion of the meeting the engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in accordance with num .
do not begin work until the engineers acceptance has been received .
the department will consider delays resulting from engineered drawings deviations as nonexcusable in accordance with num.e .
this section applies to engineered drawings for the following num .
cofferdams and excavation bracing .
if a complete design is not provided in the plans provide engineered drawings for excavations when the edge line of a roadway used to maintain traffic is located within a distance of onehalf times the excavation height or for excavations that expose any side of an excavation to a height exceeding eight feet .
the contractor may construct the designs shown on the plans without an engineered drawing submittal or prepare an alternate design .
submit engineered drawings for all alternate cofferdam and excavation bracing designs .
perform all work as specified below a .
locate cofferdams and excavation bracing according to the contract if shown .
b .
maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract .
c. include the effects of aashto live dead and temporary construction load surcharges as necessary .
d. design cofferdams and excavation bracing to support the sides and bottom of an excavation for all phases of work in accordance with the latest aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works section num and the latest edition of either the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications or the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num .
demolition of bridges or portions of bridges in which the work endangers the public welfare or life health or property .
perform all work as specified below a .
provide temporary devices or structures necessary to protect traffic during all demolition activities .
provide traffic protection when demolition is located less than num horizontally from active traffic on structures of less than num vertical clearance .
increase the num minimum horizontal distance num foot for each num feet of additional height greater than num. b .
never lift the portions of structure being removed over active traffic .
before releasing traffic make the remaining structure stable .
c. design traffic protection devices or structures when over live traffic for a minimum load of num pounds per square foot plus the weight of equipment debris and any other load to be carried .
include any portion of the deck that cantilevers beyond the fascia beams or girders .
d. in lieu of temporary devices or structures required in a above provide a vertical barrier .
design the vertical barrier with rigid or flexible materials specifically designed for demolition containment .
extend the enclosure up to the bottom of the deck and down to the ground .
maintain all materials free of tears cuts and holes .
e. maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract .
f. locate structural members to be reused before performing any removal operations .
g. do not damage structural members being reused during any removal operation .
h. perform work so that all members are stable during all operation and loading conditions .
i .
provide the method and sequence of the removal operations .
include the type and location of equipment to be used during the demolition .
j .
perform work according to num.b.num .
num .
falsework for castinplace concrete slab bridges .
perform all work according to num and as specified below a .
provide a camber table to account for the deflection of the falsework loaded with its self weight and the weight of wet concrete .
also include in the table the specified camber to compensate for slab deflection after the falsework is released .
b .
maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract .
c. as a minimum design falsework over waterways for a five year flood or with num percent of the effective waterway opening of the proposed structure .
the contractor is responsible for any damages caused by upstream flooding due to insufficient temporary structure size or the accumulation of debris or sediment in the channel .
d. support falsework foundations located within the ten year flood limits on rock shale or piles driven to a minimum depth of num feet and to sufficient penetration to carry superimposed loads or until refusal on rock .
e. the incorporation of structural steel shapes used as temporary support members into a finished concrete slab superstructure is prohibited .
f. design falsework in accordance with the latest aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works section num .
num .
erection of steel or precast concrete structural members as specified below a .
never lift structural members over active traffic .
before releasing traffic make structural members stable .
b .
supply any temporary supports or braces necessary to maintain structural stability and prevent lateral movement until completion of all construction activities .
c. perform work according to num.b.num num or num. d. do not field weld temporary members to permanent steel members .
e. maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract .
f. provide drawings with at least the following information num site plan of the work area showing permanent support structures piers and abutments roads railroad tracks waterways overhead and underground utilities and other information pertinent to erection .
num erection sequence for all members noting any temporary support conditions such as holding crane positions temporary supports falsework etc .
member reference marks when reflected on the erection plans should be the same used on the shop drawings .
num primary member delivery location and orientation .
num maintenance of traffic during erection operations .
num location of each crane for each primary member pick showing radius and crane support barges mats etc .. num capacity chart for each lifting equipment configuration and boom length used in the work .
num center of gravity locations for primary member .
num rigging weights capacity and arrangement for primary member picks .
num lifting weight of primary member picks including all rigging and preattached elements .
num details of any temporary lifting devices to be bolted or welded to permanent members including method and time shop or field of attachment capacity and method time and responsibility for removal .
num blocking details for bridge bearings .
num .
jacking and support of existing structures as specified below a .
support the structure on temporary supports and brace as necessary to maintain structural stability and prevent lateral movement until completion of the permanent supports .
do not rely on jacks lifting system alonee.g .
hydraulic system to support the structure except during the actual jacking operation .
remove all temporary supports upon completion of the jacking procedure .
b .
maintain a maximum differential jacking height of num inch between any adjacent beam lines .
c. maintain a maximum differential jacking height of num inch between any adjacent abutments or piers .
d. place jacks and any load plates at least num inches from the edges of any concrete substructure seats .
e. do not field weld temporary members to permanent steel members .
f. maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract .
num .
when the total load applied to a structure during construction new or structure being rehabilitated exceeds num percent of the legal limit the legal limit is num lbs .
or percentage thereof if posted the load effects on the structure shall be analyzed based on the operating level calculated by the load factor rating method as given in the aashto manual for bridge evaluation .
num .
structures for maintaining traffic in accordance with item num. a .
for structures located over or within num feet of railroad tracks submit plans in accordance with num.a .
b .
perform work according to num.b.num .. c. corrective work .
unless otherwise noted before performing corrective work on structure items num num num num num num and num prepare a corrective work plan cwp .
submit three copies of the cwp to the engineer for acceptance num days or less at the discretion of the engineer before construction begins .
have an ohio registered engineer prepare sign seal and date each cwp .
obtain department acceptance before beginning corrective work .
perform all work in accordance with the accepted cwp .
immediately cease all operations that deviated from the accepted cwp .
if a deviation is necessary furnish the engineer three copies of a revised cwp .
the revised cwp shall be signed sealed and dated by an ohio registered engineer .
obtain department acceptance of revised cwp prior to performing corrective work .
perform all corrective work including the preparation of the cwp and revisions at no expense to the department .
the contractor shall reimburse the department for all cwp review costs of the designer of record .
the department will consider delays resulting from all corrective work as nonexcusable in accordance with num.e .
num test reports a .
contractor acceptance of materials for item num .
submit certified test data to the director showing compliance with the requirements of item num .
accompany all certified test data with copies of mill shipping notices or invoices showing the quantity and size of material being accepted .
check this material data and provide a letter of written acceptance .
submit the material data and letter of written acceptance to the director so that the director receives them at least num days before final shop inspection item num levels num through num or before final shop inspection item num uf level .
submit a single copy of this material data for each structure except where the structure carries railway traffic .
submit one additional copy to each railway company involved .
additionally for item num levels num through num structural steel members submit one copy of main material certified test data with a letter documenting the qcfs acceptance to the qa shop inspector before the material passes check point one .
the department will not accept materials for final inspection at the fabrication shop until the director receives the contractor accepted material data .
b. fabricator certification of materials for items num num and num .
ensure that a letter of certification accompanies the fabricated material shipped to the job site in a format approved by the director stating all materials conform to contract requirements .
for these materials the fabricator must retain certified test data copies of mill shipping notices or invoices showing the quantity and size of material being accepted .
this data shall provide complete traceability to the producing mill and proof of domestic origin as required by orc num .
do not deliver materials to the project without the certification letter .
num welded attachments .
prepare and provide a detailed request showing weld size length type and location for welding permanent or temporary attachments to main structural members not shown or permitted by contract .
submit request to the office of structural engineering at least num days before construction begins .
obtain acceptance before performing work .
perform work according to num .
item num structures for maintaining traffic num description num design and construction num maintenance num removal num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing plans providing maintaining and subsequently removing temporary structures .
num design and construction .
as a minimum design the temporary structure for a numyear flood or with num percent of the effective waterway opening of the proposed structure .
the contractor is responsible for any damages caused by upstream flooding due to insufficient temporary structure size or the accumulation of debris or sediment in the channel .
provide a clear roadway width of at least num feet num m measured from face to face of guardrails .
if the existing structure or approaches or both have sidewalks provide at least one sidewalk at least num feet num m wide with adequate connections to existing walks and in compliance with accessibility standards .
design the temporary structure according to the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications except that the design live loading hlnum may be reduced by num percent .
submit working drawings in accordance with num .
drive piling to sufficient penetration to carry the superimposed loads according to item num but not less than num tons num metric tons per pile .
perform dynamic load testing to determine required blow count if piles are not driven to rock .
if the plans state that the existing superstructure may be used instead of new construction do not alter it to meet either the above width or strength requirements .
instead move or dismantle and reerect with sufficient care to avoid any reduction of capacity .
if the superstructure has been restricted by posting to loads less than permitted by statute move the posting signs to the temporary road unless the superstructure is strengthened to a legal load capacity .
if planning to use the existing superstructure on the temporary road notify the engineer at least num days before the superstructure is moved to allow the department to establish a detour .
complete the bridge within num hours after traffic has been routed over the detour .
num maintenance .
maintain all portions of the temporary structure in good condition with respect to both safety and smoothness for travel as long as it is needed for maintenance of traffic .
satisfactorily maintain the channel and waterway opening .
num removal .
if the temporary structure is no longer needed take ownership and remove it from the site according to item num .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for erection maintenance performing dynamic load testing and subsequent removal of temporary structures .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num lump sum structure for maintaining traffic item num excavation for structures num description num classification num cofferdams and excavation bracing num protection for excavation num footings in rock num approval of foundations num disposal of excavated material num backfill num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of designing cofferdams and excavation bracing and excavating materials not removed under other items of work that must be removed to enable construction of bridges and other structures .
included in this work are a. constructing maintaining and subsequently removing cofferdams and excavation bracing b. dewatering and backfilling the excavation c. protecting the excavation against collapse and d. disposing of materials not required or suitable for backfill .
num classification .
excavation is classified as unclassified excavation unclassified excavation including rock or shale or rock or shale excavation .
num cofferdams and excavation bracing .
this item includes the preparation of an engineered drawing according to num and the construction maintenance and subsequent removal of all cofferdams and excavation bracing .
a cofferdam is an enclosure within a water environment constructed to allow dewatering for the purpose of creating a dry work environment .
excavation bracing is that required to safely support the sides of excavations embankments adjacent buildings tracks or other premises .
construct cofferdams and excavation bracing such that support members clear the top of the footings by at least num foot num m. if this is not practical support members shall be structural steel and left it in place .
if bracing is to be left in place and the ends would not be visible when the structure is completed burn off the steel ends flush with the concrete surface .
if ends would be visible form a num inch num mm deep recess around the steel embedment and remove the external portion of the embedment to provide at least num inches num mm of clearance to the finished concrete face .
completely fill the resulting recess with concrete .
where water is not encountered the contractor may place excavation bracing at the plan dimension of the footing and use it as formwork for footing concrete .
leave this sheeting in place at least to the top of the footing or properly separate it from the footing concrete so that it may be removed without damaging the concrete .
where water is encountered and cofferdams are necessary construct them practically watertight before excavating below water level .
make provisions outside the footing to drain collect and remove water .
when placing concrete keep the excavation dewatered until the concrete is above the prevailing water level .
effectively protect footing concrete from erosion .
if using a concrete seal to stop the flow upward from the bottom of a cofferdam place the seal below the planned footing and consider it as a part of the cofferdam .
the department will not pay for a seal unless it is shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown in the plans design and construct cofferdams to accommodate a water elevation num feet num m above the ordinary high water mark shown on the plans .
if the actual water elevation exceeds num feet num m above the stated ordinary high water mark the department will reimburse the contractor for any resulting damage to the work protected by the cofferdam provided the contractor has exercised normal due diligence .
if the actual water elevation exceeds num feet num m above the ordinary high water mark and causes a delay to the project the department will grant the contractor an excusable noncompensable delay in accordance with num.b .
establish a monument upstream of all proposed cofferdams to visually monitor the water elevation in the waterway .
maintain the monument throughout the project .
provide a visual mark on the monument that identifies the required high water elevation as defined above .
ensure that the monument can be read from the bank of the waterway .
have this elevation set and certified by an ohio registered surveyor .
cofferdams may be designed and constructed to accommodate a lower water elevation however the department will not reimburse the contractor for repairs to work damaged nor grant additional time unless the water elevation exceeds num feet num m above the ordinary high water mark shown on the plan .
submit any request for reimbursement for repair to work damaged or for delay to the engineer with information substantiating that the water elevation was more than num feet num m above the ordinary high water mark shown on the plans .
num protection for excavation .
protect all excavations from caving .
do not disturb the material below the bottom of footings .
perform blasting in a manner that avoids damage to the material supporting the structure vertically or laterally and that avoids subsequent slides that damage the structure road or adjacent property .
if the material below the bottom of footings not supported by piles is disturbed remove it and fill the entire space with concrete at no expense to the department .
under footings supported on piles replace and compact the over excavated or disturbed material as the engineer directs .
if backfilling is necessary to correct caving or slides backfill according to num .
excavation adjacent to railroad tracks are subject to the supervision of the involved railway company .
provide sufficient bracing to ensure the proper support of the roadbed and tracks .
num footings in rock .
where rock or shale excavation is a separate pay item fill the portion of the excavation into rock or shale that is below the top of footing with concrete .
if removing rock or shale as part of unclassified excavation and the footing is designed to be keyed into the bedrock confine the excavation into bedrock for the minimum specified depth of keying within the area bounded by the outer edge of the footing .
fill excavation outside these limits and within and below the keyed depth with concrete .
num approval of foundations .
notify the engineer when the excavation is to be completed to the depth shown on the plans .
do not place footings until the engineer has approved the subfoundation .
num disposal of excavated material .
dispose of excavated material not needed or not suitable according to num and num .
use other suitable excavation material for backfill .
num backfill .
backfill all excavations made under this item with materials conforming to num.r except behind abutments and below the approach slabs use materials conforming to item num granular material type b .
place and compact the backfill materials according to num and num except as modified by this subsection .
do not place backfill material against any structural element until the engineer has approved the element .
in bridge abutment areas compact backfill material to meet the compaction requirements in num .
elsewhere compact backfill material to num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
when a test section method is used for compaction acceptance use compaction equipment with a total weight or a centrifugal force of least num ton num metric tons .
supply the manufacturers information to verify this information .
use at least six passes to construct the production areas .
use at least num percent of the test section maximum dry density for acceptance of the production areas .
the contractor does not have to place backfill material around piers that are not within the embankment area or adjacent to a roadway or a railway in thin layers or compact it but should leave the backfill material in a neat condition with a compensating allowance made for settlement .
backfill in front of abutments and around piers to the ground lines shown on the plans .
backfill all structural foundation units as soon as practical after the required conditions of this subsection are met to avoid the ponding of surface water and the accumulation of debris .
simultaneously backfill in front of and behind abutments piers wing walls and retaining walls .
carefully backfill against waterproofed surfaces to avoid damage to the waterproofing material .
num method of measurement .
after the requirements of items num num and num have been met the department will measure excavation on a lump sum basis or by the number of cubic yards cubic meters as follows a. bounded on the bottom .
bounded bottom plane of the footing crossbeam or wall .
b. bounded on the top num .
in cut sections by the surface of the remaining ground .
num .
in fill sections a .
if excavation is performed before embankment is placed by the surface of the original ground .
b .
if excavation is performed after embankment is placed by the surface of the embankment .
c. bounded on the sides num .
for unclassified excavation num foot num m outside the outer edge of the footing crossbeam or wall .
num .
for rock excavation or shale excavation a .
if rock excavation is included in the contract by the outer edge of the footing or wall .
b .
if rock or shale is removed as part of unclassified excavation including rock andor shale num above the minimum specified depth of keying the same as described in num.c.num .
num for the remainder of the excavation the same as described in num.c.num.a .
for keys below footings the department will determine the volume of keys by the number of cubic yards cubic meters shown on the plans .
the department will measure cofferdams and excavation bracing on a lump sum basis .
num basis of payment .
if an item for cofferdams and excavation bracing is not included in the contract for payment perform work according to num and the department will pay for cofferdams and excavation bracing under the contract unit price for excavation .
the elevations shown on the plans for the bottoms of footings are considered as approximate .
when excavation below plan elevation for footings is required the department will pay for the num feet num m immediately below the plan elevation within the lateral limits described in num.c.num at the unit price bid for the class of excavation .
the department will consider additional excavation to a maximum depth of num foot num m within the lateral limits described in num as incidental to the lump sum price .
excavation deeper than num foot num m below plan elevation may be provided for as extra work as described in num .
if cofferdams and excavation bracing is a separate pay item the lump sum price includes any extra cost involved for cofferdams for additional depth up to num feet num m below plan elevation .
excavation deeper than num feet num m below plan elevation and the additional cofferdams necessitated by this excavation may be provided for as extra work as described in num .
the contractor shall provide additional fill material and subsequent excavation to provide the minimum cover over culverts to accommodate heavy earth moving equipment at no expense to the department .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum cofferdams and excavation bracing num cubic yard unclassified excavation cubic meter num lump sum unclassified excavation num cubic yard unclassified excavation including rock cubic meter num cubic yard unclassified excavation including shale cubic meter num cubic yard unclassified excavation including rock andor shale cubic meter num cubic yard rock excavation cubic meter num cubic yard shale excavation cubic meter item num sheet piling left in place num description num materials num driving num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and driving steel sheet piling to be left in place including furnishing and installing any specified anchors or other attachments to structures .
num materials .
furnish new sheet piling conforming to num .
the contractor may use used sheet piling in good condition that conforms to project requirements provided it is inspected and approved by the engineer .
num driving .
drive steel sheet piling to the tip elevation shown on the plans .
thread each sheet pile with adjacent sheets .
use corner piles junction piles and interlocking connectors as necessary so that all sheet piles are interlocked .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure steel sheet piling left in place minimum section modulus of ____ cubic inches per foot ____ mmm of wall by measuring the number of square feet square meters in the plane of the face of the sheeting completed and accepted in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square foot steel sheet piling left in place minimum section modulus square meter of____ cubic inches per foot ____ mmm of wall item num pile driving equipment mobilization num description num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of mobilizing pile driving equipment to and from the project site and as necessary to install the required piling .
this work includes the fixed costs that are related to the installation of the required piling .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities after the first service pile is installed at the contract price as follows item unit description num lump sum pile driving equipment mobilization item num static load test num description num general num test procedure num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of applying a static load to a driven pile and furnishing instruments and facilities to obtain loaddisplacement data required to determine the ultimate bearing value of the pile .
when subsequent static load tests are specified the office of geotechnical engineering will determine whether subsequent static load tests are to be performed and the location of all piles to be tested .
num general .
perform the static load test according to astm dnum procedure a quick test except as modified below .
use the hammer selected for driving the test pile to drive all piles represented by the test .
if the contractor finds it necessary to use a different hammer the office of geotechnical engineering will determine if an additional static load test is necessary .
if using anchor piles to apply the load to the test pile locate the anchor piles to provide a minimum clear distance of num feet num m from the test pile .
the contractor may use battered piles as anchor piles provided the horizontal forces in the anchor system are balanced and excessive bending stresses are not induced in the piles .
the contractor may also use bearing piles meeting these requirements as anchor piles .
after the test has been completed remove or cut off at least num foot num m below the bottom of the footing or finished surface of the ground all anchor piles outside the limits of the footing .
cut off anchor piles other than bearing piles within the limits of the footing num inches num mm above the bottom of the footing .
redrive all bearing piles used as anchor piles that are displaced upward during the application of the test load according to the plan requirements .
for the duration of the test provide adequate facilities to record load and displacement readings .
to avoid column buckling of the pile ensure that tested piles are substantially vertical and that the load is applied to the pile at a point as near the ground surface as possible .
provide equipment and loading apparatus to apply a maximum test load of twice the ultimate bearing value .
have a registered engineer design the loading apparatus .
determine if piles on the plan order list for castinplace reinforced concrete piles have a pile wall thick enough to support the maximum test load of twice the ultimate bearing value .
the minimum pile wall thickness to support twice the ultimate bearing value is t inch num r lb t mm num r n num d inch num d mm where t pile wall thickness in inches mm r ultimate bearing value in pounds n d diameter of pile in inches mm if the pile wall thickness for the test pile is less than t before performing the static load test either drive a test pile with a thicker pile wall or fill the pile with concrete and allow the concrete to cure for num days .
the static load test is unacceptable if the pile fails internally during the test due to improper installation or procedure by the contractor .
num test procedure .
apply the load at least num days after placing concrete in the pile or num hours after driving both the test pile and the anchor piles .
use displacement indicators as the primary system to measure axial movement of the test pile top with a redundant secondary system as described in astm dnum .
apply the test load in increments of approximately onetenth the ultimate bearing value .
between each load increment keep the test load constant for num minutes .
add load increments until the test load reaches twice the ultimate bearing value or until continuous jacking is required to maintain the test load .
remove the test load in five approximately equal decrements keeping the test load constant for num minutes between decrements .
if it is necessary to remove and reapply the load during the test use the same loading procedure to reapply the test load .
record test readings taken at num num num num and num minutes after completing application of each load increment .
record test readings taken at num and num minutes after each load decrement and after removing all load from the test pile .
determine the load test ultimate bearing value qf using the davisson criteria .
first plot the displacement versus load on the pile q .
next draw a line representing the theoretical elastic deformation of the pile using the following equation .
d q l a e where d elastic deformation of pile in inches mm q test load in pounds n l length of pile in inches mm a crosssectional area of pile in square inches mm e elastic modulus of pile in lbin mpa for steel enum lbin num mpa draw the davisson criteria line parallel to the theoretical elastic deformation but offset by the following formula num inch numd num mm numd where d diameter or width of the pile in inches mm .
the test load ultimate bearing value qf is the load corresponding to where the davisson criteria line crosses the loaddisplacement curve .
see the figure below .
within four days of completing the static load test submit a report to the engineer which contains the information required according to astm d num and the load displacement graph described above .
num basis of payment .
if the contractor subsequently finds it necessary to use a different hammer the office of geotechnical engineering will determine if an additional static load test is necessary the contractor shall complete any such additional test at no additional cost to the department .
the cost of furnishing test piles with thicker pile walls is included under static load test .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum static load test num each subsequent static load test item num bearing piles num description num general num materials num driving of piles num determination of required driving criteria num castinplace reinforced concrete piles num steel hpiles num timber piles num splices num defective piles num prebored holes num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and driving bearing piles .
num general .
install piles of the specified type length and sizes shown on the plans .
furnish the piles according to the itemized order list shown on the plans .
if additional length is needed to obtain bearing furnish the additional length as determined by the engineer .
the length of the piles given in the order list is not necessarily based on available or practical lengths but the estimated length from the bottom of each pile to the elevation of the cutoff .
the contractor may increase or decrease the pile lengths to suit the lengths available to facilitate the method of operation which may involve providing fresh heading as a result of hammer misalignment or a worn hammer cushion or to provide lengths determined practical to have delivered to the project site and driven .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to the following reinforcing steel num concrete class qcnum num chemical admixture for concrete type f num steel hpiles num steel pile points num steel for reinforced concrete piles num galvanized steel num timber num provide a concrete slump from num to num inches num to num mm with the use of a superplasticizer .
num driving of piles .
drive piles to refusal on bedrock until obtaining the required ultimate bearing value which may include a modification for scour setup or negative skin friction or to the minimum penetration pile tip elevation shown on the plans .
if piles begin to crush immediately cease driving and repair or replace the pile .
the counting of blows will cease until the crushed pile is either repaired or replaced .
for piles subject to scour notify the dge if the required ultimate bearing value is obtained before the pile has penetrated num percent of its estimated depth before appreciably overdriving the pile .
the dge will study the conditions and determine the final penetration the driving requirements the use of another pile type and the use of prebored holes .
all piles raised during the driving of adjacent piles shall be driven down again .
use a hammer that will achieve the required ultimate bearing value for the pile and large enough to permit a dynamic load test to verify that the ultimate bearing capacity shown on the plans can be achieved .
the ram of an airoperated or diesel hammer shall weigh at least num pounds num n. the ram of a drop hammer for permanent piles shall weigh at least num pounds num n. the height of fall for drop hammers shall not exceed num feet num m. do not use drop hammers to drive piles that are to be driven to an ultimate bearing value in excess of num tons num kn .
when using open ended diesel hammers provide electronic equipment such as a saximeter or equivalent for the engineers use to accurately measure and record the stroke for each unit of length driven .
attach a gage to closed end diesel hammers accessible to the engineer to monitor the pressure in the bounce chamber .
include a graph with the gage to convert pressure to energy .
attach an impact energy monitor or a method to accurately measure the stroke within num inches num mm to hydraulic hammers accessible to the engineer to monitor the energy of each blow .
use securely anchored driving leads and a cap device with sliding jaws to engage the leads to guide the pile and maintain the pile alignment with the stroke of the hammer .
accurately align the travel of the hammer with the axis of the pile .
cushion the hammer and pile to prevent the impact of driving forces from damaging the top of the pile .
shape the cap and pile top to uniformly distribute the hammer blow to the top surface of the pile .
do not use a follower unless approved by the office of geotechnical engineering .
if the office of geotechnical engineering does approve the use of a follower account for the increased energy loss when determining the required driving criteria .
if a static load test is required the contractor may not drive piles except the test and anchor piles before conducting the test and the required depth of penetration has been determined .
do not use water jets .
after being driven cut off the piles at the elevation and angle shown on the plans .
ensure that the actual pile embedment into the concrete is within num inches nummm of the embedment shown in the plans .
maintain a minimum radius of num feet num m between simultaneous work of placing concrete and driving piles .
if concrete is placed within the numfoot num m radius suspend driving operations until the concrete has cured for num days .
num determination of required driving criteria .
determine the required driving criteria to achieve the ultimate bearing value of a driven pile as if the pile was a single isolated pile using the results of dynamic pile testing as specified in item num .
the driving criteria may consist of a minimum blow count with a minimum hammer stroke a minimum depth of penetration or both .
to determine the minimum blow count for battered piles divide the minimum blow count for vertical piles with the same ultimate bearing value by an efficiency factor d that is less than one .
this will result in an increased minimum blow count for the battered piles .
compute the efficiency factor d as follows d num u g numgnum where u coefficient of friction use num for doubleacting air operated or diesel hammers use num for singleacting air operated or diesel hammers and use num for drop hammers .
g amount of batter hv num num etc .
num castinplace reinforced concrete piles .
provide castinplace reinforced concrete piles conforming to one or more of the types described below .
measure the pile diameter as follows a .
plain cylindrical casing the outside diameter .
b. cylindrical casings with vertical fluting the diameter of a circle circumscribing the outermost points or ridges .
c. cylindrical casing with circumferential corrugations the average of the outside diameters measured at the bottom and top of the corrugations or continuously welded helical corrugations with diameters measured at tops of the corrugations .
d. tapered piles the top diameter as determined in num.a num.b or num.c but the pile tip diameter shall not be less than num inches num mm .
ensure that the pile casings are watertight after being driven .
if furnished shoes or points shall not project more than num inch num mm outside the vertical surface of the casing .
for plain cylindrical casings the minimum pile wall thickness t is the greater of either num inches num mm or the thickness determined using the following formula t inches r lb t mm r n num num num num where r ultimate bearing value in pounds newtons for fluted piles the minimum pile wall thickness shall be tnum .
for castinplace piles containing reinforcing steel place reinforcing steel as stated in the second and third paragraph of num and place concrete according to num .
after installation cover the tops of driven casings until the concrete is placed .
before placing concrete remove accumulated water or other foreign matter in a driven casing .
place concrete for castinplace piles using methods that prevent voids however do not vibrate the concrete .
num steel hpiles .
steel hpiles shall consist of structural steel shapes of the kind and size specified .
the engineer may allow installation of steel piles of the specified type which the contractor has from previous projects or stock if the contractor furnishes mill certifications and the pile sections are identified with the material specification number grade and heat number .
this identification may be in the form of information painted on the steel piles or a tag physically attached to the steel .
num timber piles .
provide timber piles of sufficient length to remove broomed or split portions caused by driving .
symmetrically trim piles right truncated cone at the tip .
if steel shoes or points are specified carefully shape the tip of the pile so that the steel shoe or point fits snugly and symmetrically .
handle and store timber piles to prevent warping .
if specified provide creosoted piles conforming to num .
num splices .
to the fullest extent practical avoid splicing steel casings and structural shapes .
splice pile casings and structural shapes either before or after driving a segment .
if spliced after driving a segment splice the piles at least num feet num m above the ground and inspect the splice while the pile is driven a minimum of num blows .
align segments to make the axis of all segments common .
use full penetration butt welds to splice steel pile casings according to aws dnum and structural shapes according to aws dnum .
nondestructive testing is not required .
do not splice timber piles .
pile points .
when specified in the plans select a product from the departments approved list .
weld the pile points to the pile according to aws dnum or the manufacturers written welding procedure supplied to the engineer before the welding is performed .
submit a notarized copy of the mill test report to the engineer .
num defective piles .
install the piles so that after driving they are within num inches num mm from the location shown on the plans for piles capped below final grade and within num inches num mm from the plan location for pile caps above the ground surface .
piles not meeting these location tolerances are defective piles .
pipe piles are defective if not water tight or if damage reduces the crosssectional area by more than num percent .
provide the engineer with a light that allows inspection of the entire length of the interior of a driven casing .
replace repair or drive a substitute pile beside the defective pile .
the location tolerance for underground piles does not apply to substitute piles beside defective underground piles .
the offlocation limits do apply to the substitute pile that project above the ground .
if a defective pile is removed fill the hole remaining in the ground with sand .
cut off a defective pile left in place under a footing num inches num mm above the elevation of the bottom of the footing .
cut off a defective pile left in place but not under a footing at least num foot num m below ground level .
fill defective pipe piles left in place with concrete .
when the outside rows of bearing piles are not located within tolerances specified above increase the size of the footing to provide a minimum distance between the pile and footing edge of at least num percent of that shown on the plans .
num prebored holes .
locate prebored holes as shown on the plans .
provide augured hole diameters a .
for round piles from num inches num mm less to num inches num mm more than the pile diameter .
b .
for steel hpiles from num inches num mm less to num inches num mm more than the piles diagonal dimension but shall be such as to produce satisfactory pile driving results .
backfill voids between the pile and the prebored hole with a granular material satisfactory to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure piles driven by the number of feet meters .
the department will determine the sum as the lengths of all nondefective piles measured along the axis of each pile from the bottom of each pile to the elevation of cutoff .
unless a separate pay item is specified in the contract the department will include steel points or shoes in the measured length of driven piles .
if a separate pay item is specified in the contract the department will measure steel points or shoes by the number of each .
the department will measure piles furnished by the number of feet meters of plan specified order length plus any additional order length specified by the engineer .
the engineer will include the length of undriven piles as furnished but the contractor will not receive additional compensation for hauling the piles off the project .
for plan specified prebored holes the department will measure prebored holes by the number of feet meters of prebored hole lengths for nondefective piles measured from the surface of ground at the time of boring to the bottom of the hole .
the department will not measure preboring to facilitate the pile driving operation .
num basis of payment .
when the contractor elects to prebore to facilitate the pile driving operation include the cost for preboring in the unit price bid for piles driven .
the department will consider the cost of furnishing and installing the reinforcing steel to be included in the unit price bid for piles driven .
the department will not pay for any splices due to the contractor furnishing pile lengths shorter than plan order lengths .
the department will not pay for increased pile lengths made by the contractor unless the engineer determines that the additional lengths are needed to achieve bearing .
if additional penetration is necessary in order to achieve the required bearing the department will pay for required splices at a negotiated price .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter steel piles hp________ furnished num foot meter steel piles hp________ driven num foot meter ___ ___ mm castinplace reinforced concrete piles furnished num foot meter ___ ___ mm castinplace reinforced concrete piles driven num foot meter timber piles creosoted num foot meter timber piles untreated num foot meter prebored holes num each steel points or shoes item num falsework and forms num description num falsework num forms num oiling forms num basis of payment num description .
this work consist of designing and building of falsework and forms for the purpose of holding concrete in place until it has set up .
num falsework .
provide substantial and rigid falsework that does not unduly obstruct any waterway highway or railway .
arrange intermediate supports in the completed structure to produce the camber necessary to conform to the plan profile of the roadway .
do not allow the maximum deflection in the longitudinal falsework members at the edges of the concrete deck to exceed num inch num mm or the amount obtained by the following formula whichever is greater .
num d s num num num s d where d the maximum deflection in inches millimeters s the distance between supports in inches millimeters for transverse falsework members and for longitudinal falsework members other than those near the edges of the deck increase the permissible deflection obtained from the above formula by num percent .
to compensate for falsework deflection build camber into the falsework .
in addition to falsework defection build the following amounts of camber into the falsework to compensate for slab deflection after falsework is released a .
equal to num of the span for continuous spans .
b .
equal to num s num s for simple spans where s is the length of the slab span in feet meters for camber expressed in inches millimeters .
provide camber to conform to the profile grade .
if the falsework does not rest in rock shale or other firm foundation material support falsework on piling driven to sufficient penetration to carry the superimposed loads according to item num but not less than num tons num metric tons per pile .
perform dynamic load testing to determine required blow count if piles are not driven to rock .
do not use expansion anchors to support falsework on piers or abutments .
use double hardwood wedges as necessary to facilitate vertical adjustment .
remove and replace any part of the structure made unsatisfactory by incorrect camber settlement or form deformation .
construct falsework for arches so it may be released gradually .
remove falsework only after the concrete conforms to num and before final acceptance of the structure .
cut off or pull falsework piling .
cut off piles to at least the slope line riprap line or stream bed .
locate the lower contact point of overhang falsework within num inches num mm of the top of the rolled beam or steel girders bottom flange .
submit falsework plans for castinplace concrete slab superstructures according to num .
if a thickened edge is shown on the plans the contractor may develop the edge by sloping the bottom of the slab for a minimum of num feet num m from the edge instead of the section shown .
do not place spandrel walls decks of arches sidewalks and curbs or any superimposed concrete to be completed after constructing the main supporting member or the deck until the falsework for the main supporting member has been removed or released .
for continuous concrete slab or beam superstructures do not place concrete on a span until the falsework and forms are complete for the adjacent spans .
do not release or remove falsework from a span until the concrete in adjacent spans has been placed a sufficient length of time to meet all requirements for the removal of falsework as set forth in num .
inserts cast into prestressed members for the purposes of falsework support shall be galvanized according to num and shall be shown in the shop drawings according to num .
num forms .
place all concrete in proper forms .
do not use unprotected sides of the excavation instead of forms unless as specified in num for rock or shale excavation .
for dry excavation specified in num the contractor may use the sheeting as forms for footings .
construct substantial unyielding and mortar tight forms designed to produce a finished concrete conforming to the proper dimensions and contours .
make forms for exposed surfaces of approved material requiring a minimum number of joints or of dressed lumber of uniform thickness using form liner approved by the engineer .
use forms and form liners to reduce the joints showing on the finished surface to a minimum .
arrange joints to coincide with rustication grooves shown on the plans .
properly brace or tie forms together using approved form ties that do not allow metal within num inches num mm of an exposed surface of the finished structure after the forms are removed .
for ties in the region of exposed surfaces use an approved insert .
remove all forms and do not allow material except reinforcing supports specified in num to remain in the concrete .
in forming pier intermediate or end diaphragms for prestressed or posttensioned concrete members do not damage reinforcing steel strands or precast concrete in the placement of post installed anchors in these members .
properly brace diaphragm forms externally or use approved form tie inserts cast into these members .
for concrete decks separated by an open median or temporarily separated by a closure section construct falsework and forms for each deck or section of deck independent of the adjacent structure or remaining superstructure .
immediately before placing concrete provide temporary openings at the base of column and wall forms and in the bottom of all narrow deep members where necessary to facilitate cleaning or inspection .
provide a numinch num mm bevel on all exposed edges using a triangular strip built into the forms .
if rustication is used fasten molding that is surfaced on all sides to the forms in such a manner that the molding remains in the concrete when the forms are removed .
do not remove this molding until the concrete has set sufficiently to prevent damage to the edges of the concrete .
if weep holes through abutments or retaining walls are shown on the plans form weep holes to obtain a smooth circular opening between num and num inches num and num mm and a straight gradient of num through the wall .
num oiling forms .
before placing reinforcing steel coat the inside of forms with nonstaining mineral oil or other approved material .
num basis of payment .
the department will not separately pay for falsework and forms .
the cost of this work is included for payment in the price bid for the item for which falsework and forms are used .
the department will not pay for removal and replacement of any part of the structure made unsatisfactory by settlement or form deformation .
the department will not pay for dynamic load testing required in num to determine blow count if piles are not driven to rock .
item num reinforcing steel num description num materials num care of material num method of placing num bending num approval of placing num splicing num supports num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing supports mechanical connectors tie wires and reinforcing steel of the quality type size and quantity designated including steel dowels .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to epoxy coated reinforcing steel num reinforcing steel deformed bars num num num spiral reinforcing steel num or num bar mats and wire fabric num num num plastic supports num for metal bar supports used at or near the surface of the concrete furnish either galvanized steel stainless steel epoxy coated steel or plastic coated steel .
provide sufficient additional reinforcing steel to replace reinforcing steel removed by the department for sampling .
replace random samples in the structures with additional steel spliced according to num .
when providing reinforcing steel for spiral cages galvanized steel conforming to astm anum class num may be provided only for the spiral reinforcing steel in lieu of epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
the galvanized coated reinforcing steel will meet all other requirements of num .
where a sample splice is needed use the lap length requirements for epoxy coated .
the galvanized coating will be applied after the reinforcing has been fabricated .
if the galvanized surface becomes damaged during handling in the field repairs will conform to astm anum .
use bar supports and tie wires which are plastic coated or epoxy coated .
only suppliers certified under supplement num may provide this reinforcing .
num care of material .
upon delivery to the project and before use stack reinforcing steel off the ground and keep it free from dirt oil grease or avoidable rust .
before placing in the concrete ensure the reinforcing steel is clean and free of loose rust .
num method of placing .
place reinforcing steel in the positions shown on the plans and firmly secure the steel during the placing and setting of concrete .
tie bars in the superstructure at all intersections except tie bars at alternate intersections where bar spacing is less than num foot num m in any direction .
the contractor may place up to num percent of the upper longitudinal bars in a bridge deck slab beneath the upper transverse bars to support the top mat .
do not drive or force reinforcing steel into concrete after its initially set .
welding on reinforcing is prohibited except as permitted by num and num .
the engineer will allow the contractor to fabricate reinforcing bar cages for prestressed beams if fabrication is done in a manner satisfactory to the director .
install reinforcing steel with at least the following clearances from the concrete surface a .
num num inches num inch num inch num mm num mm num mm to the top of sidewalks .. b .
num inches num inch num mm num mm at the faces of footings placed against rock or earth .
c. num num inches num inch num inch num mm num mm num mm to the bottom of a castinplace deck slab .
d. num num inches num inch num inch num mm num mm num mm between the reinforcing steel and the top surfaces of castinplace concrete deck slabs .
e. num inches num inch num inch num mm num mm num mm at all other surfaces .
num bending .
bend reinforcing steel to the dimensions shown on the plans and in table num num numm .
reject reinforcing steel showing transverse cracks .
table num standard bends bar a d dimension a d dimension a d dimension nominal dimensions num bend num bend num bend bar diameter area weight d a d a d a size in in lbft in in in in in in num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tolerances for diameter of bends d the tolerance may be plus or minus the diameter of the bar .
standard fabricating tolerances shall be in accordance with the crsi manual of standard practice .
no weight allowances will be made for tolerances .
table numm standard bends bar a d dimension a d dimension a d dimension nominal dimensions num bend num bend num bend bar diameter area weight d a d a d a size mm mm kgm mm mm mm mm mm mm numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num tolerances for diameter of bends d the tolerance may be plus or minus the diameter of the bar .
standard fabricating tolerances shall be in accordance with the crsi manual of standard practice .
no weight allowances will be made for tolerances .
num approval of placing .
before placing concrete obtain the engineers approval of reinforcing steel in place .
num splicing .
splice reinforcement only as specified or determined by the engineer .
splice spiral reinforcement by lapping num num turns .
do not replace spiral reinforcement removed for a material sample if the sample is from the end of the spiral and less than or equal to num inches num m long .
mechanical connectors shall be capable of developing num percent of the yield strength of the connected bars .
for threaded connections do not reduce the nominal area of the bars shown in the plans without increasing the grade of the reinforcing bar shown in the plans .
the total slip of the bar within the splice sleeve of the connector after loading in tension to num ksi num mpa and relaxing to num ksi num mpa shall not exceed the following measured displacements between gage points clear of the splice sleeve a .
for bar sizes up to no .
num num in .
num mm b .
for no .
num bars num in .
num mm splice nos .
num and num nos .
numm and numm reinforcing steel bars with mechanical connectors .
the department will not permit lap splices for these size bars .
splice nos .
num and num nos .
numm and numm reinforcing steel bars with mechanical connectors .
the department will not permit lap splices for these size bars .
splice additional steel used to replace random samples as follows table num table numm bar lap length inches bar lap length mm size uncoated epoxy coated size uncoated epoxy coated num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num num num numm num num num supports .
use precast mortar blocks metal supports or plastic supports of adequate strength of the proper depth and in sufficient number to support reinforcing steel .
space supports for reinforcing steel no more than num feet num m apart transversely and longitudinally .
metal supports shall have a shape that is easily enveloped by the concrete .
mortar blocks may only be used to support the lower matt of reinforcing steel in concrete that is cast directly against bedrock or soil .
num epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
use plastic coated or epoxy coated bar supports and tie wires to protect the epoxy coating from physical damage as specified in num during placement and to prevent electrical coupling between mats .
carefully handle and install bars to perform minimal patching at the job site .
repair physical damage to the epoxy coating with a patching material all damaged coating areas greater than numinch num mm square or numinch num mm diameter approximately numinch num mm square or numinch num mm diameter if the opening is within numinch num mm of an equal or larger opening or a length of num inches num mm regardless of area .
coating damage in cases where the damaged area is less than specified above need not be repaired .
use patching material of the same composition and quality as the original coating .
prepare the surface to a near white metal .
if repair is required clean and repair the damaged areas and allow adequate cure time before placing concrete .
the engineer will approve the installation once patching has been done as outlined above .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure epoxy coated reinforcing steel by the number of pounds kilograms shown on the plans .
additional measurements or calculations are not required .
if the contractor believes the pay weight as shown on the plans is in error the contractor is responsible to prove this discrepancy by recalculating the total weight for the reference number involved .
the contractor shall submit its figures to the engineer for review and approval .
the number of pounds kilograms of reinforcing steel shall be the actual number of pounds kilograms of the various sizes incorporated in the concrete as shown on the plans completed and accepted .
if the weight of the reinforcing steel is recalculated determine the number of pounds kilograms from the number length and weight of the bars as shown on the steel list of the plans based on the weight per foot meter shown in the table num numm with deductions for bars not used and addition for extra bars used as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the department will not include the supports mechanical connectors and tie wires in the calculated weights but will consider them incidental to the price bid .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num pounds kilograms epoxy coated reinforcing item num dowel holes num description num materials num drilling of holes num placement num curing and loading num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of drilling holes into concrete or masonry and furnishing and placing grout into the holes .
the furnishing and placing of steel for dowels is included in item num .
num materials .
cement grout consists of one part of hydraulic cement conforming to item num and three parts sand conforming to num by volume and water .
furnish nonshrink nonmetallic grout conforming to num .
num drilling of holes .
drill holes at the location and the depth shown on the plans without spalling the concrete .
drill holes for cement grout at least num inch num mm larger in diameter than the dowel bar .
drill holes diameters for nonshrink nonmetallic grout at least num inch num mm larger in diameter than the dowel bar .
drill hole for encapsulated type nonshrink nonmetallic grout as recommended by the manufacturer .
instead of drilling holes the contractor may install formed holes with laitance removed .
num placement .
do not install grout if the temperature of the concrete into which the grout is being placed is below num f num c. force dowel bars into the holes to the specified depth spreading the grout around the bar and solidly filling the hole .
before installing cement grout and dowels saturate cement grout dowel holes with water then blow out all excess water .
place enough cement grout to completely fill the holes during dowel installation .
if cement grout does not completely fill the hole remove the dowel pour additional grout into the hole and reinstall the dowel .
before installing nonshrink nonmetallic grout and dowel clean and dry the grout holes .
immediately after mixing place a sufficient amount of nonshrink nonmetallic grout to provide complete coverage around the dowel to ensure anchorage .
if nonshrink nonmetallic grout does not completely fill the hole pour additional grout in until the hole is filled flush .
obtain the correct protrusion of the anchors or dowels and hold dowels in the plan position within the holes until the grout has initially hardened .
if horizontal holes are specified provide a means of retaining the grout in the hole flush with the vertical face and remove this material after the grout has hardened .
do not use material for retaining the grout that bonds to the grout .
num curing and loading .
before applying any stresses to dowels cure nonshrink nonmetallic grout as follows daily minimum ambient temperature minimum curing time num to num f num to num c num hours num to num f num to num c num num hours above num f above num c num hour num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each dowel holes with cement grout num each dowel holes with nonshrink nonmetallic grout item num concrete for structures num description num materials num concrete num quality control requirements and mass concrete num mixing of concrete num slump num placing concrete num slipform construction of bridge railing num construction joints num work stoppage num depositing concrete under water num depositing and curing concrete during cold weather num removal of forms num curing and loading num surface finish num roadway finish num bridge deck grooving num sidewalk finish num joints cracks scaling and spalls num compressive strength num air content num pay factors num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of providing falsework and forming furnishing placing consolidating finishing and curing portland cement concrete .
this work also includes diamond saw cutting longitudinal grooves into the surface of superstructure concrete .
construct falsework and forms as required in item num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num except as modified below .
use the same kind and color of aggregate for all concrete above the ground line in a given substructure unit and for all concrete in a given superstructure .
use high molecular weight methacrylate resin sealer conforming to num .
use curing materials conforming to num num white opaque or numtype num or numd .
use numinch num mm gray sponge joint filler conforming to num or use preformed filler conforming to num .
use preformed elastomeric compression joint seals conforming to num .
num concrete .
provide concrete for structures according to num using class qc num qc num qc num or qc num as specified in the contract .
at least num days before placing concrete submit in writing the department accepted job mix formula jmf to the engineer .
the engineer will review the mix design for conformance to contract requirements otherwise the mix design is for the engineers information .
num quality control requirements and mass concrete .
when the concrete bid item requires qcqa develop and submit a quality control plan qcp for the work and perform quality control testing of the concrete conforming to item num .
when the concrete bid item requires qcqa the engineer will perform quality assurance conforming to num .
when the concrete bid item does not require qcqa the engineer will make acceptance test cylinders as follows structures of numfoot num m span or less .
at least one set of test cylinders for each num cubic yards num m of concrete .
structures over numfoot num m span .
a set of test cylinders from each num cubic yards num m of concrete or fraction thereof that is incorporated into the work each day .
with any num concrete bid item provide and maintain a concrete cylinder curing box cccb capable of holding at least num num num inch num num mm cylinders at a temperature of num to num f num to num c degrees no matter what the ambient temperature .
the box will have a sealed lid .
if the project has numerous num concrete bid items cccb are not required for each bid item .
locate the cccb at a site that is convenient to the concrete work and will eliminate handling damage to both the contractor qc or qa cylinders and the department cylinders .
move the cccb as needed during the project when the distance from the concrete work increases the possibility of cylinder handling damage .
a .
mass concrete requirements .
for concrete components with a minimum dimension of numft numm or greater develop a concrete mix design qcnum for mass concrete according to num .
develop a thermal control plan tcp to control placement of the mass concrete so that the highest maximum internal temperature of the placed concrete is not greater than num f num c and the maximum differential concrete temperature does not exceed num f num c over num days from time of placement .
for drilled shafts with a dimension of numft numm diameter or greater develop a concrete mix design qcnum for mass concrete qc num according to num .
develop a tcp to control placement of the mass concrete so that the highest maximum internal temperature of the placed concrete is not greater than num f num c .
submit the tcp to the engineer for acceptance at least num calendar days prior to placement along with the approved jmf s. as a minimum the tcp shall include the following information num .
duration and method of curing .
num .
procedures to control concrete temperature at the time of placement .
the mix shall contain no frozen pieces of ice after blending and mixing components .
num .
methods and equipment used for controlling temperature differentials .
num .
temperature sensor types locations and installation details .
as a minimum concrete temperatures shall be monitored at the calculated hottest location on at least num outer faces num corners and top surfaces .
num .
temperature monitoring and recording system operation plan recording and reporting plan with example output and a remedial action plan .
num .
criteria for form removal to control the maximum temperature differential .
as an alternative to the maximum differential concrete temperature specified above the contractor may propose maximum differential temperature limits based on strength gain with time .
the tcp for the alternative proposal shall include the methods used to determine the temperature and supporting data and design to support the accuracy of the method chosen .
provide complete calculations and basis for increasing the maximum differential temperature specification .
the tcp for the alternative proposal shall also provide the engineer with tables that define ambient temperatures for acceptable concrete placement the required temperature of the concrete for the ambient air temperature the maximum predicted concrete temperature the maximum predicted differential temperature the time for removal of forms the allowable air temperature for form removal and the predicted maximum and differential temperature from placement to age of num days .
the department will consider all cracking of a mass concrete placement where the differential temperature exceeded num f numc the responsibility of the contractor .
upon the engineers acceptance of the tcp continuously monitor all temperature sensors over the required age of the concrete .
if the maximum limit or differential temperature limits are exceeded at any time immediately take action to retard and reduce the outofspecification temperatures .
if a mass concrete placement temperature exceeds the specification limits of the currently accepted tcp reengineer revise and resubmit the tcp .
do not place additional mass concrete until the revised tcp is accepted .
the department will consider inplace mass concrete that exceeds the temperature limits or that cracked as defective and resulting delays as nonexcusable .
determine the extent and effect of the damage and submit a proposed repair plan to the engineer to return the concrete to acceptable quality .
the department will determine if the proposed repair methods are acceptable or if removal is required .
num mixing of concrete .
mix concrete according to num .
num slump .
within the slump ranges specified in num provide a slump that produces concrete that is workable in the required position flows around reinforcing steel and coats individual particles of coarse aggregate with mortar containing the proportionate amount of sand .
num placing concrete .
submit to the engineer a description of proposed placing procedures and notify the engineer at least num hours in advance of placing concrete .
if the concrete bid item requires qcqa include the submittal as part of the qcp .
place and finish concrete to the lines and grades shown in the plans .
unless otherwise noted the proposed beam seat elevations shown in the plans for prestressed beam superstructures are based on the design midspan camber for prestressed beams which are num days old dnum .
adjust each beam seat elevation using measured midspan camber data provided by the fabricator if available .
in the absence of measured midspan camber adjust each beam seat elevation using the following y dt dnum num where y distance that each seat elevation shall be lowered from plan elevation to account for midspan camber growth rounded to the nearest numinch dt num  dnum dnum design midspan camber at day num provided in the plans inch dnum design midspan camber at day num provided in the plans inch  num ks kf ktd ks num num vs num vs ratio of the prestressed concrete members volumetosurface area exposed to the atmosphere .
for each of the standard ibeam sections this ratio is provided on psidnum inch kf num fci fci compressive strength of prestressed concrete at release provided in the plans ksi ktd tnum num fci t t age of prestressed concrete measured between release of prestressing force eg .
num days and time of deck placement days provide the engineer with revised plan sheets and design camber calculations or measured camber data signed sealed and dated by an ohio registered professional engineer at least num days prior to constructing the beam seats .
the revised plan sheets shall include the measured camber data if available design camber dt and beam age t assumed for establishing the revised elevations .
provide haunch reinforcement for prestressed ibeam members according to the odot bridge design manual figure num as necessary to extend the beams composite reinforcement at least two inches into the deck thickness .
all revisions resulting from adjusted beam seat elevations shall be clearly marked as revised .
do not begin work until the engineer approves the revised plan .
provide coverage over or around reinforcing steel as described in num .
conform to the following tolerances from plan dimensions table num placement tolerances deviation from plumb for exposed surfaces  inch num mm vertical alignment deviation from a line parallel to the grade line  inch in num feet num mm in num m max .
num inch num mm longitudinal alignment deviation from a line parallel to the centerline or baseline  inch in num feet num mm in num m max .
num inch num mm width dimensions of walls for exposed surfaces  inch num mm bridge slab thickness  inch num mm elevations of beam seats num inch num mm slope vertical deviation from plane num slope horizontal deviation from plane num until discharged in the work ensure that the temperature of all concrete does not exceed num f num c. when placing superstructure and approach slab concrete assure the ambient air temperature is num f num c or less and not predicted to go above num f num c during the concrete placement and evaporation rates determined according to figure num in aci num do not exceed num lbsftnumhour num kgmnumhour .
determine and document the ambient air temperature concrete temperature deck surface temperature relative humidity and wind velocity subject to verification by the engineer .
measure data required in figure num from within num feet num m of the area where the superstructure concrete is placed .
figure num does not apply to substructure items and formed parapets .
figure num applies to slipformed parapets and approach slabs .
to meet favorable atmospheric conditions may require the contractor to place concrete at night .
at least num hours before placing concrete at night submit a lighting plan for the work area to the engineer .
obtain the engineers approval of the lighting plan before placing the concrete .
direct lights so that approaching traffic is not affected or distracted .
before placing a concrete deck on continuous steel beams or girders complete all of the main beam or girder splices at least two piers beyond the pier or piers supporting the concrete .
before placing concrete for backwalls above the approach slab seat with steel expansion joints backfill the abutments to within numfeet num m of the bridge seat elevation erect structural steel or prestressed concrete beams and place superstructure concrete in the adjacent span .
use the steel expansion joint as a template for the top of the backwall .
if temporary bolts are used to support the backwall portion of an expansion device during the placing of the backwall concrete remove the bolts after the concrete has taken its initial set and before a change in temperature causes superstructure movement sufficient to damage the backwall .
before placing concrete assure the engineer of an adequate and uniform source of supply of concrete to allow proper placing and finishing and of the availability of coverings to protect the concrete from rain .
do not add or apply water to the concrete after it has left the truck and before applying curing materials according to num .
before placing concrete thoroughly clean all forms and structural steel that contact the concrete and ensure that the space to be occupied by the concrete is free of laitance silt dirt shavings sawdust loose and builtup rust and other debris .
deposit concrete using methods that ensure reinforcing steel is completely enveloped in concrete mortar and that allow inspection of concrete enveloping the reinforcing steel .
use a method or device to convey the concrete from the mixer to the work that prevents coarse aggregate separating from the mortar .
if depositing concrete in shallow members such as slabs place it with as short a vertical drop as possible .
place the concrete over a section to maintain a practically horizontal surface .
if using a chute slope the chute to allow concrete to flow without segregation .
place concrete as near as possible to its final position .
drop concrete into the forms with a freefall distance of num feet num m or less .
as necessary use drop chutes to limit the free fall to num feet num m and to ensure the delivery ends as vertical as possible .
for concrete delivered to the point of placement by means of pumping equipment ensure the air content at the point of placement is within the specified parameters of table num .
adjust the pumping pressure boom angles and use pumping aids to lower the friction in the piping to meet the specified parameters .
provide a hose at the end of the line that is at least num inch num mm smaller in diameter than the line on the boom to minimize freefall and maintain a continuous flow of concrete in the pipe lines and boom during discharge .
deliver and distribute the concrete at a uniform and adequate rate no more than num feet num m directly in front of the finishing machine by suitable mechanical equipment .
for structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen num degrees orient the finishing machine according to num .
for structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen num degrees and up to fifty num degrees load the concrete at the skew angle .
for structures with a skew angle greater than fifty num degrees load the concrete as close to the skew angle of the structure as possible but do not allow the leading edge of the concrete placement to exceed twenty num feet num m ahead of the finishing machine .
place concrete in structures using vibration .
furnish and use sufficient vibration equipment of the type and size approved by the engineer to properly compact the concrete immediately after it is placed in the forms .
the vibrators shall generally be of a type that is applied directly to the concrete and have a frequency of at least num impulses per minute .
if the concrete is inaccessible for this method of vibration apply the vibrators to the outside of the forms .
do not move concrete using a vibrator .
vibrate freshly deposited concrete at the point deposited .
slowly insert and withdraw the vibrators vertically into the concrete until the concrete is thoroughly compacted but not segregated .
during vibration do not disturb partially hardened concrete .
as necessary spade along form surfaces in corners and in locations impossible to reach with vibrators to ensure smooth surfaces and dense concrete .
closely observe the results obtained on the first concrete placed and if necessary modify the mix according to this specification to secure the best results .
figure num aci num num slipform construction of bridge railing .
if slipforming provide finished concrete conforming to the following tolerances from plan dimensions table num slipformed bridge railing tolerances reinforcing steel cover num inch num inch num mm num mm top width dimension num num inch num mm bottom width dimension num num inch num mm surface flatness num inch in num feet num mm in num m vertical alignment deviation from a line parallel to the grade line num inch in num feet num mm in num m max .
num inch num mm tie all joints and splices in bridge railing reinforcing steel .
before placing concrete perform a slipforming dry run to verify reinforcing clearance and rigidity of the reinforcing cages .
adjust and stabilize the cage as necessary to establish the required clearances and to ensure the cage will not move during slipforming .
the contractor may add any additional diagonal reinforcing steel between the front and rear vertical reinforcing faces to establish the required rigidity .
repair or patch honeycombing cracking tearing and other defects immediately after concrete exits the slipform equipment .
completely fill defects with concrete without using water to smooth or close the surface .
if the slipforming exhibits more than infrequent defects stop work and make adjustments to produce a slipformed surface that does not require repairs .
do not broom finish the surface of the bridge railings .
after the concrete initially sets but before any shrinkage cracks develop saw control joints num num inches num mm deep into the perimeter of the parapet .
generally initial set is within num hours of batching of the concrete .
ensure that all joints are sawed within num hours of placement .
saw control joints using an edge guide fence or jig to ensure that the joint is straight true and aligned on all faces of the parapet .
the joint width shall be the width of the saw blade a nominal num inch num mm .
after the concrete curing period specified in item num has been reached sawcut at least num inches num mm deep around the perimeter of the front face top and back face of the top portion of parapet no lower than num and  inches num mm above the top of the concrete deck slab .
caulk the control joints with a polyurethane or polymeric material conforming to astm c num type s. slip formed concrete requires different slumps than those listed in item num or other plan specified concrete .
provide a slump such that the concrete exiting the slipform does not pull but is stiff enough to prevent waviness and sags in the finished surfaces .
cure slipform concrete according num method a .
because slipformed concrete has a low watercement ratio timely application of the water cure is critical in helping control shrinkage cracks .
furnish platforms as necessary to protect traffic passing under the bridge from falling debris during the slipforming operation to allow access for completing the finishing operation and to allow the engineer access to the outside of the parapet .
the engineer will inspect the slipformed surface for horizontal cracking no earlier than num days after completion of the slipforming operation .
repair all horizontal cracks by epoxy injection .
if a concrete sealer was applied repair damage to the sealer after completing the epoxy injection .
num construction joints .
if construction joints are shown on the plans place all concrete between consecutive joints in a continuous operation .
follow the requirements of num when placing concrete against a construction joint .
obtain the directors approval before placing any construction joint not shown on the plans or required by num .
before placing concrete determine the location where the days concrete placing ends .
if practical end placing the days concrete perpendicular to the lines of principal stress and in regions of small shear .
do not install horizontal joints in concrete girders and beams .
form construction joints using bulkheads with keyways .
locate keyways clear of exposed surfaces by approximately onethird the thickness of the joint .
construct transverse or longitudinal construction joints in deck slabs with keys located between the reinforcing mats and having a depth of  inch num mm .
where practical avoid horizontal joints in piers abutments and retaining walls otherwise locate horizontal joints num feet num m or more above the normal water level .
for construction joints not shown on the plans and above ordinary low water in abutments and in retaining walls that retain earth fills install a numinch num m strip of type num membrane waterproofing according to item num to the back of the joint .
avoid joints in cantilevered members .
dampen the surface of the concrete of the horizontal construction joints immediately before placing adjoining concrete .
place and protect horizontal construction joints between bridge slabs and superimposed curbs parapets sidewalks and median strips in the same manner as the remainder of the slab .
cure the construction joints according to num .
avoid disturbing the bond between protruding reinforcing steel and the deck concrete .
if using the curb areas to place the deck tie and brace the reinforcing steel to prevent its movement .
where walls or columns support slabs or beams place concrete in wall or column to the bottom of the slab or beam and allow the concrete to settle for at least num hours before placing concrete in the slab or beam .
num work stoppage .
if the work is unexpectedly interrupted by breakdowns storms or other causes rearrange the freshly deposited concrete to provide a suitable construction joint .
if this joint occurs at a section with shear stress prevent a plane of weakness by providing an adequate mechanical bond across the joint by forming a keyway inserting reinforcing steel or by some other means satisfactory to the engineer .
num depositing concrete under water .
except for cofferdam seals and drilled shafts do not place concrete under water .
num depositing and curing concrete during cold weather .
if placing concrete when the atmospheric temperature is num f num c or less or if weather forecasts predict these temperatures during the curing period follow the procedures of this subsection .
heat the water or aggregate or both as necessary to produce concrete with a temperature when placed of at least num f num c but not greater than num f num c. place concrete against materials with a temperature of greater than num f num c. if necessary heat the forms reinforcing steel and foundation materials before placing the concrete .
maintain the concrete surface temperature between num and num f num and num c for a period of not less than num days except as modified in num.c .
after the minimum cure period of num days reduce the concrete surface temperature at a rate not to exceed num f num c in num hours until the concrete surface temperature is within num f num c of atmospheric temperature .
install sufficient highlow thermometers to readily determine the concrete surface temperature .
for deck slabs install highlow thermometers to measure deck bottom surfaces deck fascia surfaces and deck top surfaces .
maintain the concrete curing temperature using a heated enclosure insulated forms or by flooding except cure deck slabs less than num inches num mm thick using more than just insulated forms .
remove falsework and open cold weather concrete to traffic according to num .
a .
heated enclosure .
construct the heated enclosure to surround the top sides and bottom of the concrete .
construct strong and wind proof enclosures that contain adequate space to allow free circulation of air around the forms and concrete .
before placing concrete construct the enclosure and heating devices to the extent allowed by the concrete operation .
as the concreting operation progresses and as soon as possible after placing concrete complete construction of the enclosures and apply heat .
supply heat by a method that continuously maintains a reasonably uniform temperature throughout the enclosures and does not discolor the concrete .
vent combustiontype heating devices outside the enclosure .
if dry heat other than free steam maintains the enclosure temperature immediately cover exposed concrete with two thicknesses of burlap .
continuously wet the burlap and except for required rubbing of the concrete do not remove the burlap during the heating period .
if wood forms without liners are left in place more than num days after the placing of concrete thoroughly wet the forms at least once each day for the remainder of the heating period .
if forms are removed during the heating period thoroughly drench the concrete with water and for the remainder of the heating period cover and wet the concrete with burlap as specified above .
b .
insulation .
install sufficient thermometers to readily determine the concrete surface temperature .
if the surface temperature approaches num f num c loosen or otherwise vent the forms or insulation to keep the surface temperature within the limits specified above .
if insulation does not maintain the minimum required temperature promptly enclose the concrete as specified in num.a or flood the concrete as specified in num.c .
use a wind and water resistant insulating material .
ensure edges corners and other points of extreme exposure are adequately insulated .
place a tarpaulin or other engineer approved waterproof cover over the insulation to protect the concrete top surface .
c. flooding with water .
the contractor may flood the concrete with water provided flooding does not damage the concrete .
heat the water to a temperature from num to num f num to num c. the contractor may stop using heated water after num hours if the concrete remains flooded to a depth of num foot num m above its highest elevation for at least the next num hours .
num removal of forms .
to facilitate finishing remove forms from vertical surfaces that receive a rubbed surface finish as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently that rubbing will not damage it .
num curing and loading .
remove falsework and open structures to traffic only after the concrete has reached the strength specified by table numa for concrete bid items requiring qcqa .
use table numb for concrete items not requiring qcqa .
do not shorten the minimum required method a curing time regardless of strength test results .
table numa loading requirements for concrete requiring qcqa spannum required strength num removing falsework any span compressive strength num fc or flexural strength center point num psi num mpa all pier caps traffic num any num span is defined as the horizontal distance between faces of the supporting elements when measured parallel to the primary reinforcement .
num field cured samples .
the maturity curve method may be used for determining the strength according to supplement num in lieu of field curing samples num when placing concrete for a superstructure between october num and march num open the deck to traffic no sooner than num days after placement .
table numb loading requirements for concrete not requiring qcqa spannum age of concrete in days no beam test beam test num removing falsework over num feet num m num num num feet num m or less and all pier caps num num traffic num any num num num span is defined as the horizontal distance between faces of the supporting elements when measured parallel to the primary reinforcement .
num applicable only when the average modulus of rupture for two tests is not less than num psi num mpa .
num when placing concrete for a superstructure between october num and march num open the deck to traffic no sooner than num days after placement .
take enough specimens to verify compliance with the strength requirements of table numa .
obtain samples from the first and last sublots of continuously placed concrete for quantities of num ydnum or less and one extra set of specimens for each additional num ydnum or fraction thereof .
obtain samples in equally spaced increments throughout the placement as directed by the engineer .
delays in placements of more than num hours are not considered continuously placed and are to be treated as separate placements .
if the air temperature surrounding the concrete is maintained between num and num f num and num c and if the provisions of num do not apply maintain the concrete above num f num c for num days or until a successful strength test conforming to table numa except this time shall not be less than num days .
do not apply loads to or perform work on new concrete until workers and construction materials will not damage the concrete or interfere with its curing .
allow at least num hours and until the field cured compressive strength cylinders or maturity results reach num fc or if using flexural beams the average of two beam tests is greater than num psi num mpa before loading new concrete .
do not interfere with curing of new concrete .
cure concrete as follows table num curing requirements location curing method num superstructure concrete method a concrete to which sealer is applied method a construction joints method a top surface of concrete deck superstructure concrete method a followed by method b concrete with waterproofing method a or method b all other concrete method a or method b num method a is water curing .
method b is membrane curing .
if using method b on areas to be waterproofed remove the curing membrane .
concrete curing methods are as follows a .
method a water curing .
with the exception of the top surface of deck superstructure concrete protect surfaces not covered by forms immediately after final finishing with two thicknesses of wet burlap .
keep burlap wet for at least num days by the continuous application of water .
if forms are removed before num days immediately drench the exposed concrete with water and cover it with burlap .
continuously apply water to the burlap for the remainder of the curing period .
instead of continuous application of water with the exception of the top surface of deck superstructure concrete the contractor may cover the wet burlap with white polyethylene sheeting or plastic coated burlap blankets conforming to num .
place plastic coated burlap blankets wet and with the burlap side against the previous layer of wet burlap .
sufficiently lap and secure adjoining plastic coated blankets or polyethylene sheets at the laps and edges to form a seal that maintains the concrete wet at laps and edges .
cover white polyethylene sheeting or plastic coated blankets containing holes or tears with an additional covering of plastic sheeting or blankets as directed by the engineer .
cover the top surface of deck superstructure concrete with a single layer of clean wet burlap after it is bull floated if necessary and finished .
keep the burlap wet by a continuous flow of water through soaker hoses and cover the hoses with a num mils num m white opaque polyethylene film for num days .
after num days allow the surface of the deck to dry .
after curing the top surface of the deck superstructure concrete for num days remove the burlap and standing water .
within num hours after removing the burlap apply a curing membrane and cure the concrete according to method b .
b .
method b membrane curing .
immediately after the free water has disappeared on surfaces not protected by forms apply curing material conforming to num type num or numd .
if forms are removed before the end of the numday curing period apply curing material on the concrete exposed by removing the forms .
thoroughly mix curing material immediately before use .
apply the membrane curing material at the rate of at least num gallon per num square feet num lnum mnum of surface and in a fine mist to provide a continuous uniform and water impermeable film without marring the concrete surface do not allow workers materials and equipment on the concrete during the curing period unless adequately protecting the membrane curing material from damage . .
if the film is broken or damaged during the specified curing period reapply curing material as specified above to the damaged or affected areas .
num surface finish .
for concrete that is to be sealed according to num perform surface profiling according to num.f immediately after removing forms .
clean dampen and fill with mortar all cavities produced by form ties honeycomb spots broken corners or edges and other defects .
use a mortar of the same proportions used in the concrete being finished .
finish other contiguous exposed surfaces on the structure in a similar manner and to the extent required to produce a uniform appearance .
on all exposed surfaces remove fins and irregular projections with a stone or power grinder taking care to avoid contrasting surface textures .
a. grout cleaning .
if grout cleaning is shown on the plans or necessary for corrective work wet the concrete surface and then uniformly cover the concrete with a grout consisting of one part cement num num parts fine sand conforming to num and sufficient water to produce a mortar with the consistency of thick paint .
use white portland cement in the grout in the quantity determined by the engineer necessary to match the color of the concrete .
uniformly apply the grout with brushes or spray guns completely filling air bubbles and holes .
immediately after applying the grout vigorously scour the concrete surface with a cork or other suitable float .
while the grout is still in a plastic condition and while the grout does not pull from the holes or depressions finish the surface with a sponge rubber or other suitable float removing excess grout .
after the grout thoroughly dries vigorously rub the surface with dry burlap removing dried grout until there is no visible film of grout remaining on the surface .
perform the entire cleaning operation of each area on the same day .
remove dark spots or streaks that remain after the cleaning operation using a fine grained silicon carbide stone .
stop rubbing with the silicon carbide stone before the surface texture changes .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer perform grout cleaning during the final project clean up .
b .
rubbed finish .
if a rubbed finish is shown on the plans if possible remove forms within num days after placing concrete .
finish the surface as specified above to correct defects .
after the mortar used for finishing is thoroughly set and for a minimum of num hours before starting the rubbed finish thoroughly saturate the concrete with water .
rub surfaces to be finished with a medium coarse silicon carbide stone until all form marks projections and irregularities are removed all voids are filled and a uniform surface is obtained .
leave the paste produced by rubbing in place .
other than water do not apply additional material to the surface .
after placing concrete above the finishing area obtain the final finish by rubbing the concrete with a fine silicon carbide stone and water until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform in color .
protect surfaces with a rubbed finish from damage caused by subsequent construction operations .
if damaged clean and refinish the surface as specified above .
num roadway finish .
finish and test concrete deck slabs according to num .
do not groove or broom finish a strip of surface num to num inches num to num mm wide adjacent to curbs and barriers .
provide a broom drag finish on concrete deck slabs in the longitudinal or transverse direction .
the engineer will approve the finishing machine .
provide a selfpropelled machine with forward and reverse drive mechanisms that enable precise control of machine velocity in both directions .
the machine shall have two rotating rollers leveling augers and either a vibrating pan or vibrating rollers .
field verify that the vibrating frequency of the pans or rollers are from num to num pulses per minute .
do not use vibrating rollers that have fins protruding more then num inch num mm from the roller .
use a finishing machine capable of finishing transversely while traveling in both directions across the deck .
provide screeds capable of rising above the concrete surface .
provide a finishing machine capable of finishing the full width of the decks between curbs or parapet walls .
the wheels of the finishing machine shall run on temporary riding rails adequately supported on the structural steel or falsework of the deck .
make the rail and rail supports of steel and arrange the rail and rail supports so that the weight of the finishing machine and the operator cause zero vertical deflection while traveling across the deck .
ensure the rail is straight with no sections exceeding a tolerance of num inch in num feet num mm in num m in any direction .
elevate support rails a sufficient distance above the slab to allow the simultaneous hand finishing of areas not machine finished .
fabricate and install rail supports to allow removal to at least num inches num mm below the top of the slab .
fill holes formed by the removal of rail supports during the final finishing of the slab .
for structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen num degrees and up to fifty num degrees place the finishing machine within numof the skew angle of the structure .
for structures with a skew angle greater than fifty num degrees place the finishing machine at fifty num degrees .
num bridge deck grooving .
after water curing the concrete and either before applying curing compound or some period after applying curing compound and before opening the bridge to traffic saw longitudinal grooves into the deck unless specified otherwide in the plans .
if sawing grooves after applying the curing compound and the concrete deck is less than num days old reapply the curing compound after removing standing water within num hours after sawing grooves in the deck .
use diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on selfpropelled machines that were built for grooving of concrete surfaces .
the groove machines shall have depth control devices that detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified depth of the groove .
the grooving machines shall have devices to control alignment .
do not use flailing or impact type grooving equipment .
more than one size grooving machine may be required in order to saw the grooves as specified .
maintain a minimum of  inch num mm to a maximum of num  inches num mm transverse distance between adjacent passes of the grooving machine head .
provide an experienced technician to supervise the location alignment layout dimension and grooving of the surface .
saw grooves parallel to the bridge centerline in a continuous pattern across the surface .
begin and end sawing num to num inches num to num mm from any device in place in a bridge deck such as scuppers or expansion joints .
stop sawing a minimum of num inches num mm to a maximum of num inches num mm from skewed expansion joints .
maintain a clearance of a minimum of num inches num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm from the grooves to longitudinal joints in the deck .
maintain a minimum clearance of num inches num mm to a maximum of num inches num mm clearance between the grooves and the curb or parapet toe .
however at no point shall ungrooved portions of deck extend beyond edge line and into the temporary or permanent travelled lanes .
saw grooves in a uniform pattern spaced at num inch minus num inch or plus num num mm minus num mm or plus num .
saw grooves approximately num inches num mm deep and num inches num mm wide .
for staged or phase bridge deck work saw the grooves parallel to the final permanent bridge centerline .
if the different stages or phases of the bridge deck work occur within one construction season any stage opened to traffic shall receive an interim coarse broom finish during placement then saw the longitudinal grooves after the final stage .
the interim broom finish will not be allowed as a surface texture when opened to traffic over a winter season .
saw longitudinal grooves in the deck prior to opening to traffic for a winter season .
for bridge decks that widen from one end to the other saw the longitudinal grooves parallel to the centerline of the roadway .
on the side of the bridge that widens saw the longitudinal grooves to follow the edge line .
saw longitudinal grooves in the gore areas avoiding the overlapping of grooves .
at the beginning of each work shift furnish a full complement of grooving blades with each saw that are capable of cutting grooves of the specified width depth and spacing .
if during the work a single grooving blade on a machine becomes incapable of cutting a groove continue work for the remainder of the work shift .
the contractor is not required to cut the groove omitted because of the failed blade .
should two or more grooving blades on a machine become incapable of cutting grooves cease operating the machine until it is repaired .
continuously remove all slurry and remaining residue from the grooving operation and leave the deck surface in a clean condition .
prevent residue from grooving operations from flowing across shoulders or across lanes occupied by public traffic or from flowing into gutters or other drainage facilities .
remove solid residue before the residue is blown by passing traffic or by wind .
provide water as necessary to saw grooves according to this subsection .
num sidewalk finish .
after placing strike off the concrete with a template and finish the concrete with a float to produce a sandy texture .
num joints cracks scaling and spalls .
after completing all curing operations and allowing the deck to thoroughly dry seal the following areas with a high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm sealer .
flood the areas and squeegee off the excess material as specified in item num before opening the deck to traffic a. transverse joints in the deck .
b .
joints between the concrete deck and steel end dams .
c. longitudinal joints in the deck .
d. longitudinal joints between the deck and safety curb barriers and parapets etc .
e. cracks discovered in the deck of the top and bottom surfaces before opening the deck to traffic that are num mils or num inches num mm or less in width .
for deck cracking on the top and bottom surface area on more than num of the surface area or that is num mils or num inches num mm or more in width or deck scaling that is greater than num inches num mm deep or on more than num of the deck surface area or deck spalling on more than one area or an area greater than num square yards num square meters an investigation will be performed by omm and proceed according to num to resolve the issue .
num compressive strength .
sample and test concrete strength according to num .
a .
concrete requiring qcqa .
when the bid item requires qcqa the engineer will evaluate the qc compressive test sublot results according to supplement num and as follows if a single reported compressive strength test result for a sublot of concrete is less than num fc reevaluate the in place concrete as follows .
the engineer will determine the location for evaluating the strength of the sublot represented by the low compressive strength concrete .
evaluate using either nondestructive testing or cores .
the engineer will accept the concrete if the reported nondestructive test results are greater than the specified fc .
the department will use the original cylinder results for calculating the compressive strength pay factor pfc if non destructive testing is used .
if cores are tested the core results will be used in place of the original cylinder results for pay factor determination .
if the nondestructive test results are less than the specified fc the department will require the concrete to be cored .
the engineer will determine the locations for the required concrete cores .
provide all concrete cores to the engineer for testing by the department .
patch core holes with approved patching material .
if the core results are above num fc the department will use the core strength results for calculating the compressive strength pay factor pfc .
if the core results indicate that the compressive strength of the concrete is below num fc submit a plan for corrective action to the engineer for approval .
if the corrective plan is not approved the engineer will require the contractor to num .
remove and replace the unacceptable sublot and retest the new sublot at no cost to the department or num .
leave the unacceptable material in place and pay for the sublot with a pay factor of num .
if three or more sublot compressive strength acceptance test results are less than fc but greater than num fc the engineer will require an investigation of the reasons for the consistent low strengths .
until the investigation is completed to the satisfaction of the engineer no additional placements of the concrete jmf will be made .
investigations should include all facets of the concrete operation including batching mixing delivery clean up sampling testing quality control plan etc .
if the engineer is unsatisfied with the results of the investigation the jmf and the quality control plan will become not approved .
develop and submit a new jmf and quality control plan conforming to the requirements of num and num .
pay factors under num for these low strength sublots will be based on the original reported cylinder strengths .
b .
concrete not requiring qcqa .
when the bid item does not require qcqa the engineer will evaluate the strength results following the requirements of table num and as follows if a single compressive strength test result is less than fc the material will be considered unacceptable material and the department will determine acceptance according to item num .
if three or more compressive strength test results are less than fc the engineer will require an investigation of the reasons for the consistent low strengths .
until the investigation is completed to the satisfaction of the engineer no additional placements of the concrete jmf will be made .
investigations should include all facets of the concrete operation including batching mixing delivery clean up sampling testing etc .
if the engineer is unsatisfied with the results of the investigation the jmf will become not approved .
develop and submit a new jmf conforming to the requirements of num .
num air content .
for concrete that requires qcqa test the air content of the concrete according to item num .
when qcqa concrete is not required the department will test the air content as directed by the engineer .
a .
concrete requiring qcqa .
any concrete with air results outside the requirements of table num that is placed into the structure is unacceptable material according to item num .
the amount of unacceptable material will be the amount represented by the test result .
reevaluate the unacceptable material at no cost to the department as follows num .
core the location containing the unacceptable concrete .
patch the core hole with approved material .
a .
for concrete with high air content test a core for compressive strength .
concrete with a minimum strength of fc may be left in place .
b .
for concrete with low air content test the core to determine the inplace hardened air content specific surface and spacing factor according to astm c num .
remove and replace unacceptable materials with specific surface results less than num innum num mmnum or spacing factor results are more than num in num mm .
hire an independent laboratory acceptable to the department to perform the testing .
b .
concrete not requiring qcqa .
any concrete with air results outside the requirements of table num that is placed into the structure is unacceptable material according to item num .
the amount of unacceptable material will be the amount represented by the test result .
reevaluate the unacceptable material at no cost to the department as follows num .
the department will core the location containing the unacceptable concrete .
patch the core hole with approved materials .
a .
for concrete with high air content the department will test a core for compressive strength .
concrete with a strength of fc may be left in place .
b .
for concrete with low air content the department will determine the inplace hardened air content specific surface and spacing factor according to astm c num .
remove and replace unacceptable materials with specific surface results less than num innum num mmnum or spacing factor results of more than num in num mm .
num pay factors .
apply pay factors as follows a .
concrete requiring qcqa the department will use pay factors based on the percent within limits pwl to establish a final adjusted price .
the pwl will be established per lots accepted in the qcp for each bid item quantity of concrete .
the department will calculate a pwl according to supplement num using either the contractors verified qc compressive test results or core results when the qc could not be verified .
the compressive strength pay factor pfc from table numfor the lot will be applied to each bid item represented in the lot .
the department will combine approach slab and deck concrete test results in the same lot to determine final pay factors .
table num pay factors for concrete requiring qcqa pwl pfc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num see below if the pwl value determined for the lot of concrete is below num submit a plan for corrective action to the engineer for approval .
if the corrective plan is not approved the engineer will require the contractor to num .
remove and replace the lot of unacceptable material at no cost to the department or num leave the unacceptable material in place and pay for the lot of with a pay factor of num .
b .
concrete not requiring qcqa for concrete items that the department performs compression testing the department will use pay factors based on the individual compressive strength results for the quantity represented by the test results to establish an adjusted price to the items .
the pay factors from table num will be applied to items represented by the tests .
table num pay factors for concrete not requiring qcqa individual test results pay factor pfc fc num fc follow num num method of measurement .
the department will measure the appropriate concrete item by the number of cubic yards cubic meters determined by calculations from plan dimensions in place completed and accepted .
the department will make deductions for portions of primary structural members embedded in concrete .
the department will not make deductions for the volume of reinforcing steel conduits or embedded piles .
superstructure concrete includes the concrete in deflective parapets not having a metallic railing .
the department may measure deck concrete by either volume or area using plan dimensions .
the department will calculate separate quantities of concrete due to unacceptable compressive strength num and air content num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities of concrete as follows .
work necessary to adjust seat elevations and deck haunches for prestressed beam members is incidental to the affected structural concrete items .
the department will pay for final quantities as measured and field verified .
the department will not pay for additional reinforcing steel required to adequately stabilize the cages .
the department will not pay for repairs to horizontal cracks by epoxy injection or if a concrete sealer was applied for repairs to the sealer after the completing the epoxy injection .
the department will not pay extra for any type of surface finish specified in num the cost being considered as included in the price bid for concrete .
if the contractor elects to saw the deck after applying the curing compound the department will not pay to reapply the curing compound .
all costs for sealing as specified in num are incidental to the appropriate concrete item .
the department will not make separate payment for sealing .
the department will not pay separately for the concrete cylinder curing box cccb .
the department will not pay for the reevaluation of low strength test results num.a .
the department will initially pay the full bid price to the contractor upon completing the work .
the department will calculate the final adjusted payment for each item as follows pfnum the final adjusted pay per cubic yard cubic meter or square yard square meter for accepted quantities of concrete pfnum contract bid price x pfc pfnum the final adjusted pay per cubic yard cubic meter or square yard square meter for unacceptable quantities of concrete due to compressive strength or low air content and allowed to stay in place according to num or num .
pfnum contract bid price x num calculate the adjusted price per bid item by multiplying pfnum or pfnum by the appropriate quantities of concrete then sum the values .
subtract the full bid price paid to the contractor from the adjusted price to determine the difference .
the department will execute final adjustments by change order upon receipt of all test data .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard class ___ concrete _____ cubic meter num cubic yard class ___ concrete _____ with qcqa cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete substructure cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete substructure with qcqa cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete bridge deck cubic meter square yard square meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete bridge deck with qcqa cubic meter square yard square meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete bridge deck parapet cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete bridge deck parapet with qcqa cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num concrete _____ with qcqa cubic meter num cubic yard class qc num mass concrete substructure with qcqa cubic meter item num treating concrete num description num materials num sealing of concrete surfaces num sealing concrete bridge decks with hmwm resin num soluble reactive silicate srs concrete treatment num treating concrete bridge decks with gravityfed resin num sealing cracks by epoxy injection num waterproofing num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of sealing and treating concrete surfaces sealing cracks in concrete and applying waterproofing to structures .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to asphalt cement num pg num num asphalt primer for num rcnum or rcnum waterproofing num hmwm resin num epoxyurethane sealer num.a nonepoxy sealer num.b soluble reactive silicate srs num gravity fed resin num epoxy injection materials num sand num with the following exceptions maximum moisture content of num of the percent of absorption when treated according to california test num .
gradation sieve size total percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num emulsified asphalt primer num msnum ssnum asphalt for waterproofing num hot applied joint sealer num type num membrane primer num waterproofing fabric num sheet type num membrane waterproofing num sheet type num membrane waterproofing num num sealing of concrete surfaces .
this work consists of applying an approved sealer on existing and new concrete surface areas after the concrete is cured and repairs completed and cured .
apply the sealer to locations described in the plans .
apply the sealer listed in the pay item description .
choose a type of sealer if no sealer is listed in the pay item description .
a .
equipment .
use application equipment recommended by the sealer manufacturer .
use spray equipment tanks hoses brooms rollers coaters squeegees etc .
that are clean free of foreign matter oil residue and water .
b. mixing .
mix the sealer according to the manufacturers recommended procedures .
furnish the engineer with the manufacturers application instructions .
do not mix or apply the sealer until the manufacturers written recommendations are supplied to the engineer .
mix and maintain materials at a uniform consistency during application .
c. storage .
store all sealer components in tightly sealed containers in a dry location and as recommended by the manufacturer .
deliver unopened drums or containers of the sealer or sealer components to the job site with the manufacturers numbered seal intact .
d. application submittals .
at least five num days before sealing provide the engineer the sealer manufacturers written requirements for application equipment mixing equipment mixing procedures mixing time storage requirements recoat times and temperatures and msds sheets .
e. surface condition .
apply sealers only to surfaces which are dry free from dust dirt oil wax curing compounds efflorescence laitance coatings and other foreign materials .
visually inspect all surfaces before applying sealer .
remove all structurally unsound surfaces and weak sections .
perform all concrete patching prior to surface profiling .
perform concrete patching on areas identified by the engineer according to num .
cure repaired areas for at least seven num days .
air dry all concrete surfaces for at least ten num days after completion of required curing .
for accelerated cure of precast concrete obtain the required num day strength and air dry the surfaces at least ten num days after completing accelerated cure .
f. surface preparation and profiling .
remove dust dirt oil wax curing compounds efflorescence laitance coatings and other foreign materials from surfaces to be sealed .
for epoxyurethane sealers use one or both of the following methods to produce a surface profile that feels and looks like num grit sandpaper or coarser .
provide the engineer sandpaper for comparison .
perform the astm dnum method b standard test method for replication and measurement of concrete surface profile using replica putty to obtain a replica coupon of the prepared concrete surface on a flat test section on the first day of production and as requested by the engineer .
with a micrometer measure the surface profile obtained on the coupon and provide the coupon to the engineer .
num .
water blast at num psi num mpa minimum or num .
abrasive blast followed by air brooming or power sweeping to remove dust and sand from the surface and opened pores .
num. or use a combination of water blast and abrasive blast .
install suitable traps filters drip pans and other separation devices in the cleaning equipment so oil and other foreign material are not deposited on the surface .
if the concrete surface had curing compound applied acid test the surface after blasting to see if the curing compound was removed .
perform the acid test for every num square feet num square meters .
use a num by weight solution of hydrochloric acid .
apply num to num drops to the concrete surface .
if foamingfizzing occurs the curing compound is removed .
rinse the tested location with an ammonia solution to neutralize the concrete area tested num cup ammonia to num gallons water .
note muriatic acid and ammonia can be bought in a hardware store .
muriatic acid is used to clean masonry .
only dilute by pouring the acid into the water .
do not pour the water into the acid .
when surfaces show intermittent or no foaming use chemicals or other cleaning compounds to remove the curing compounds .
only use products approved by the sealer manufacturer .
furnish the engineer documentation of the sealer manufacturers approval and method to test if materials are removed .
ensure that all wastes generated by the surface preparation operation are managed in accordance with num .
g. application and coverage .
apply the sealer between twelve and num hours and num hours after surface preparation by water blasting methods .
apply the sealer within num hours after surface preparation by abrasive blasting methods do not apply sealer if rain is anticipated within six num hours after application .
clearly mark where the sealer application stops if not continuous .
num .
epoxyurethane sealers a .
apply the epoxy coat of the epoxyurethane sealer at the coverage rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
use a coverage rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter when the laboratorys qualified products list for the epoxy authorizes it .
apply the urethane coat of the epoxyurethane sealer at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
when surfaces are not smooth and flat adjust the given coverage rates by the following formulas to determine the correct coverage rate .
num for surfaces using large stone liners and standard concrete specified coverage rate sq ftgal sq ml num num for surfaces using large stone liners and porous concrete specified coverage rate sq ftgal sq ml num num for surfaces using fluted liners and standard concrete specified coverage rate sq ftgal sq ml num b .
provide documentation to the engineer that the ambient surface and material temperature is num f num c or above num f higher than the dew point and the relative humidity is num or below during the application of the sealer .
c. apply with a brush squeegee roller or spraying equipment and as recommended by the manufacturer .
d. apply one coat of epoxy and one coat of the urethane top coat .
time between coats shall meet the manufacturers written recommendation provided to the engineer during num.d .
use epoxy and urethane from the same manufacturer .
achieve specified coverage regardless of the number of passes per coat .
e. tint so the final color is federal color standard no .
num light neutral .
pigment content shall be limited so as not to reduce sealing effectiveness of the second coat .
refer to the plans for colors for specific projects .
f. sags and runs are not acceptable in the sealer .
g. for sealed sidewalks or other horizontal surfaces with repetitive foot traffic or vehicular traffic integrate num num lbs per square yard num kgm of silica sand into the surface of the second coat to produce a nonskid surface satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
nonepoxy sealer a .
apply the sealer according to the manufacturers recommended mode of application and under the observation of the engineer .
b .
coverage .
num surfaces subject to abrasive wear bridge decks bridge deck shoulders and sidewalks minimum one gallon num liter of sealer for each num square feet num square meters .
num curbs vertical surfaces of beams and deck slabs subject to direct roadway drainage minimum one gallon num liter for each num square feet num square meters .
num other surfaces for example parapets abutments pier caps and median dividers minimum one gallon num liter for each num square feet num square meters .
stone or fluted formed concrete surfaces may require additional sealer materials for coverage .
c. apply sealer on horizontal surfaces in a onepass operation at the required coverage .
an acceptable application procedure consists of saturating the surface and waiting a few seconds for the sealer to completely penetrate the concrete surface .
broom in the sealer if recommended by the manufacturer .
d. apply sealer on vertical surfaces to saturate the surface .
the surface is saturated when runs of num to num inches develop .
apply additional passes in num to num minute intervals until the coverage rate is achieved .
apply sealers with brush or roller if recommended by the manufacturer .
e. after num to num minutes squeegee off excess material on smooth finished or dense concretes where the required coverage is not absorbed .
f. tint clear nonepoxy sealers with a vanishing dye that will not damage the concrete .
g. do not apply sealer if the ambient temperature is below num f num c or will fall below num f num c within num hours after application .
h. test siteapplication .
apply epoxyurethane or nonepoxy sealer to measured coverage areas both on horizontal and vertical surfaces and on different concrete types demonstrating num .
the projects visual effects for the epoxyurethane sealer application at the required coverage rate .
num .
visually the absorption necessary to achieve the specified coverage rate for the nonepoxy sealer .
use at least num gallon num liter of sealer following the manufacturers recommended method of application for the total of the test surfaces .
num .
apply to the deck safety curb or sidewalk for the horizontal test surfaces and use an abutment parapet or pier face for the vertical test surface so different textures are tested .
i .
appearance .
epoxyurethane sealers uniform appearance and the final color shall visually match the test section .
recoating removal and reapplication or other methods recommended by the manufacturer will be required to correct final appearance .
nonepoxy sealers the sealer shall result in a uniform appearance .
j .
traffic .
allow traffic on deck shoulder areas after num hours of drying time for an epoxyurethane sealer .
keep traffic off a nonepoxy sealer until the sealer is dry .
k. safety precautions .
follow precautions defined on the manufacturers msds .
provide the engineer a copy of the msds sheet for information before any work commences .
l. protection of adjoining surfaces and the public .
protect the public during all operations especially when applying sealer to the fascia or the underside portions of a bridge that spans an area used by the public .
during sealing mask off or use other means of protection for surfaces not being sealed .
protect asphalt and mastic type surfaces from spillage and heavy overspray .
do not apply sealers to joint sealants which have not cured according to the manufacturers instructions .
joint sealants traffic paints and asphalt overlays may be applied to the treated surfaces num hours after the sealer has been applied .
protect nearby steel aluminum or glass surfaces when nonepoxy overspray could be deposited on those surfaces .
m. environmental requirements .
protect plants and vegetation from overspray by covering with drop cloths .
n. superintendent .
in addition to the requirements of num the superintendent must successfully complete a sealing of concrete surfaces training prequalification course offered by the department .
the course must have been completed within the past four years and an individual course certificate must have been received by the superintendent .
present certificate to the engineer prior to beginning the sealing of concrete surfaces work .
work will not be permitted to begin until after the superintendent provides a valid course certificate .
num sealing concrete bridge decks with hmwm resin .
this work shall consist of preparing and treating the concrete wearing surfaces of bridge decks with a penetrating sealer in accordance with these specifications in reasonably close conformity with the plans and the manufacturers recommendation and as directed by the engineer .
a .
limitations .
do not perform this work during the period beginning november numst and ending march numst .
b .
surface preparation .
remove roadway dirt and debris from the area of the deck to be treated .
sweep abrasive blast then with the use of a manual or power broom sweep and blow with compressed air so that the surfaces to which the sealer is to be applied is dry and free of dust and dirt .
use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose material from visible cracks .
fit the cleaning equipment with suitable traps filters drip pans driers and other devices to prevent oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface .
do not allow traffic on the clean surface prior to application of the sealer .
remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified in num.g.num.a .
the cost of removal is incidental to the work .
remove all traces of asphalt or petroleum products and concrete curing seals by abrasive blasting prior to air sweeping .
c. installation .
provide a compatible promoterinitiator system capable of providing the same physical qualities of the hardened resin as if promotedinitiated with num percent cobalt naphthanate num percent and num percent cumene hydroperoxide .
store materials at num to num f num to num c. provide a system that has a resin gel time of not less than num minutes to not more than num num hours at the time and temperature of application .
adjust the gel time to compensate for the change in temperature throughout the day .
the temperature of the surfaces to be treated may range from num f num c to num f num c. arrange to have a technical representative on site to provide mixing proportions equipment suitability and safety advice .
any conflict between these provisions and representatives advice shall be resolved at the job site .
the technical representative shall remain at the job site until such time as he and the engineer agree that the contractor is qualified in all aspects of the application of the sealer .
do not allow the promoter and initiator if supplied separate from the resin to contact each other directly .
do not store containers of promoter or initiators together in a manner that will allow leakage or spillage from one to contact the containers or materials of the other .
machine application of the resin may be performed by using a twopart resin system utilizing a promoted resin for one part and an initiated resin for the other part .
this twopart resin system may be combined at a spray bar through positive displacement atomization of the resin .
do not use compressed air to produce the spray .
use appropriate cleaning and flushing of equipment tools etc .
with an appropriate solvent as approved by the engineer in such a manner to minimize personal and environmental hazards .
advise workman that the resin will soften gum rubber soles and a facemask should be used to protect from accidental splashes .
clothing and leather saturated with resin will harden and become useless .
prior to resin application the surface to be treated shall be visibly dry and its temperature between num f num c and num f num c. do not apply the resin within num hours after a rain or when rain is forecast within num hours or when the ambient air temperature is below num f num c. premark the deck to control mixed material usage and to provide a rate of application of approximately num square feet per gallon numml .
the exact rate shall be determined by the engineer prior to commencing fullscale deck treatment operations .
before using the material submit to the omm copies of the manufacturers certified test data showing that the material complies with the requirements of this specification .
the test data shall be developed by an independent approved testing laboratory and shall include the brand name of the material name of manufacturer number of the lot tested and date of manufacture .
when the material has been approved by the omm further testing by the manufacturer will not be required unless the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed in which case new certified test results will be required .
the manufacturer shall certify that the formulation is the same as that for which data has been submitted .
the state reserves the right to sample and test delivered lots for compliance .
flood the deck surfaces resin allowing penetration into the concrete and filling of all cracks .
limit the initiated mix of promoted resin to num gallons num l at a time for manual application .
a significant increase in viscosity shall be cause for rejection .
apply the treatment within num minutes after complete mixing .
redistribute excess material by squeegee or brooms within num minutes after application .
take all steps necessary to prevent the resin from flowing into lanes open to traffic .
broadcast sand over the entire treated area of the bridge deck by mechanical means to affect a uniform coverage of num to num pounds per square yard num kgm to num kgm .
the sand shall be uniformly graded aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of num and shall conform to the following limits for grading sieve size total percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num it is the intention of the specification to allow the use of commercially available blast sands applied by a common lawn broadcast type seederspreader .
place sand between num to num minutes behind the resin spreading front and before any jelling of the resin occurs .
if the surface contains large deep cracks the lowviscosity liquid could run completely through the concrete slab .
apply a second coat in these areas after the first coat has started to cure .
before the monomer hardens fill imperfections or spalls with standing liquid with commercial quality concrete or sandblast sand and finished to a uniform surface .
the sand shall have a maximum moisture content of num of the percent of absorption when tested in accordance to a california test num .
do not permit traffic and equipment on the tested deck until it is tack free and a minimum of num hours have elapsed since treatment and the sand cover adheres sufficiently to resist brushing by hand .
protect the treatment from moisture for not less than num hours after placement .
num soluble reactive silicate srs concrete treatment .
this item consist of the necessary labor materials and equipment to prepare and treat portland cement concrete surfaces with a reactive silicate sealer meeting these specifications .
a .
equipment .
use application equipment that is recommended by the manufacturer .
use spray equipment tanks hoses brooms rollers coaters squeegees etc .
that are thoroughly clean free of foreign matter oil residue and water prior to applying the treatment .
b .
cleaning and surface preparation. . do not begin sealing until all concrete repairs have been completed and reached the design strength of the patch material .
thoroughly clean the surface to remove dust dirt oil wax curing components efflorescence laitance coatings and other foreign materials .
sweep abrasive blast then with the use of a manual or power broom sweep and blow with compressed air so that the surfaces to which the sealer is to be applied is dry and free of dust and dirt .
use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose material from visible cracks .
obtain the approval of the manufacturer or its representative before the use of chemicals and other cleaning compounds to facilitate the removal of these foreign materials .
apply the treatment within num hours following surface preparation .
fit cleaning equipment with suitable traps filters drip pans and other devices to prevent oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface .
c. test application .
treat a measured test coverage area on horizontal and vertical surfaces of the different components of the structure to be treated for the purpose of demonstrating the desired physical and visual effect of an application or of obtaining a visual illustration of the absorption necessary to achieve the specified coverage rate prior to final application .
in the latter case use at least num gallon num l of treatment following the manufacturers recommended method of application for the total of the test surfaces .
locate horizontal test surfaces on the deck and on the safety curb or sidewalk and locate vertical test surfaces on an abutment parapet and pier face so that the different textures are displayed .
d. application .
apply the concrete treatment to concrete surfaces as designated on the plans .
apply the srs by thoroughly saturating the concrete surfaces at an application rate specified by the manufacturer .
apply the srs when the concrete surface temperature is above num f num c. use a surface thermometer on the concrete to establish the temperature of the concrete if the air temperature at the time of application is num f num c or below .
spread the srs from puddles to dry areas .
if unable to complete the entire application continuously note and clearly mark the location where the application was stopped .
e. protection of adjoining surfaces and the public .
protect by masking off or by other means adjoining surfaces of the structure which are not to be sealed when applying a treatment .
make provision to protect the public when treating the fascia of a bridge andor portions of the underside of the deck of a bridge that spans an area used by the public .
protect asphalt and mastic type surfaces from spillage and heavy overspray .
do not apply joint sealants traffic paints and asphalt overlays to the treated surfaces until num hours after the treatment has been applied .
cover adjoining and nearby surfaces of aluminum or glass where there is a possibility of the treatment being deposited on the surfaces .
protect plants and vegetation from overspray by covering with drop cloths .
follow precautions as indicated on the manufacturers msds .
f. opening to traffic .
only allow traffic on deck after the treated area does not track .
if there is any unreacted material on the surface after applications flush with fresh water as recommended by the manufacturer .
contain all waste according to num .
num treating concrete bridge decks with gravityfed resin .
this work shall consist of preparing and treating the concrete bridge deck with a gravityfed crack welding system in accordance with these specifications in reasonably close conformity with the plans and the manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
a .
limitations .
do not perform this work during the period beginning november numst and ending march numst .
prior to resin application insure that the surface to be treated is visibly dry with a temperature between num f num c and num f num c. do not apply the resin within num hours after a rain during rain when rain is forecast within num hours or when the ambient air temperature is below num f num c. b .
surface preparation .
first remove roadway dirt and debris from the area to be treated .
sweep abrasive blasted surfaces to which the sealer is to be applied then manual or power broom swept and blown with compressed air so that they are dry and free of dust and dirt .
use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose material from visible cracks .
use a high pressure water blast followed by an air blast if particles are highly embedded in the cracks to clean cracks .
fit the cleaning equipment with suitable traps filters drip pans dryers and other devices to prevent oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface .
do not allow traffic on the clean surfaces prior to application of the sealer .
remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified in num.g.num.a .
the cost of removal is incidental to the work .
remove all traces of asphalt or petroleum products and concrete curing by the abrasive blasting prior to air sweeping .
c. application premark the deck to control mixed material usage and to provide a rate of application of approximately num to num square feet per gallon num to num ml .
the engineer will determine the exact rate but will not exceed num square feet per gallon num ml .
flood the area to be sealed with resin .
allow the resin to penetrate into the concrete and fill all cracks .
mix the resin to a limit of num gallons num l at a time for manual application .
reject resin with a significant increase in viscosity .
redistribute excess material by a squeegee within num minutes after application .
front and back movement with the squeegee is recommended over cracks and patch perimeters to enhance penetration .
take all steps necessary to prevent the resin from flowing into lanes open to traffic .
broadcast sand over the entire sealed area of the bridge deck by mechanical means to effect a uniform coverage of num to num pounds per square yards num kgm to num kgm .
protect the treatment from moisture for not less than num hours after placement .
d. traffic .
do not permit traffic on the treated deck until the resin is tack free a minimum of num hours has elapsed since treatment and the sand cover adheres sufficiently to resist brushing off by hand .
num sealing cracks by epoxy injection .
this specification covers the repair of dry moist or wet cracks or fractures that are num to num mils num to num m in thickness in reinforced concrete members .
the repair is by means of an epoxy injection system .
this system shall consist of a paste epoxy used to seal the surface cracks and an injection epoxy used under low pressure num psi num kpa max .
to penetrate and fill the cracks and bond the crack surfaces together .
material for each epoxy shall consist of a twocomponent modified resin bonding system .
the unmodified resin shall be known as component a and the hardener as component b .
arrange to have a manufacturers representative at the job site to familiarize him and the engineer with the epoxy materials application procedures and recommended pressure practice .
this representative shall direct at least one complete crack or area injection and be assured prior to his departure from the project that the personnel are adequately informed to satisfactorily perform the remaining repairs .
furnish the engineer a copy of the manufacturers comprehensive preparation mixing and application instructions which have been developed especially for use with the proposed epoxy injection system .
ensure that any significant changes to these instructions which are recommended by the representative for an unanticipated situation have been approved by the engineer prior to the adoption of such changes .
clean concrete surfaces adjacent to the cracks to be sealed only to the extent necessary to achieve an adequate bond with the paste epoxy and only by procedures which will not cause abrasive grits or concrete dust to penetrate the cracks .
do not permit the use of solvents or thinners in cracks or on bonding surfaces .
install injection ports or tees in cracks to be injected .
space injection ports or tees at num to num inches num to num mm vertically and num to num inches num to num mm horizontally but in no case closer together than the thickness of the concrete member if full depth penetration is desired unless otherwise specified or directed .
set ports or tees in dust free holes made either with vacuum drills or chipping hammers .
seal all surface cracks in the area to be repaired after injection ports or tees have been inserted into the holes with paste epoxy between ports to ensure retention of the pressure injected epoxy within the confines of the member .
the department will allow an alternative procedure of sealing the cracks before the injection holes have been made .
limit the application of paste epoxy to clean and dry surfaces .
limit substrate temperatures to not less than num fnum c during epoxy applications .
begin the epoxy injection at the bottom of the fractured area and progress upward using a port or tee filling sequence that will ensure the filling of the lowermost injection ports or tees first .
establish injection procedures and the depths and spacings of holes at injection ports or tees .
use epoxy with flow characteristics and injection pressure that ensure no further damage will be done to the member being repaired .
ensure that the epoxy will first fill the innermost portion of the cracked concrete and that the potential for creating voids within the crack or epoxy will be minimized .
remove the injection ports or tees flush with the concrete surface after the fractured area has been filled and the epoxy has partially cured num hours at ambient temperature not less than num f num c otherwise not less than num hours .
roughen the surfaces of the repaired areas to achieve uniform surface texture .
remove any injection epoxy runs or spills from concrete surfaces .
obtain two numinch num mm diameter core samples in the first num linear feet num m of crack repaired and one core for each num linear feet num m thereafter .
take the core samples from locations determined by the engineer and for the full crack depth .
cores will be visibly examined by the engineer to determine the extent of epoxy penetration .
repair the core holes in the concrete with material specified in num .
num waterproofing a .
general .
apply an even and uniform coating of asphalt materials using brushes squeegees or spray equipment .
if using spray equipment provide portable power pressure type spraying equipment capable of being moved to the location of the waterproofing operation .
protect concrete surfaces not covered with waterproofing from overspray spilling or otherwise marring of the surface with the asphalt materials .
ensure that the edge of any exposed application is sharply defined true to line with a uniform exposure .
do not apply waterproofing fabric or membranes over attachments and hardware .
seal the discontinuities in waterproofing with asphalt num or hot applied joint sealer num .
b .
preparation of surface num .
asphalt materials .
remove concrete projections .
using wire brushes and clear water remove dirt and the outside film of cement .
before applying asphalt materials ensure that the concrete is clean and dry and the concrete temperature is at least num f num c. num .
membranes .
remove protrusions from the concrete .
sweep off dirt and dust and blow the concrete clean .
fill joints or cracks greater than num inch num mm wide with portland cement mortar .
in addition to the above remove oil and grease from surfaces for type num membranes using water and a detergent designed to remove oil and grease from concrete .
flush residual detergent from the surface .
do not allow traffic on the cleaned surface .
c. primer coat .
apply the primer coat at the rate of num to num .
num gallon num to num l of asphalt material per square yard square meter .
for primer coats applied between june num and september num use asphalt primer for waterproofing or emulsified asphalt primer conforming to num .
for primer coats applied between september num and june num use asphalt primer for waterproofing conforming to num .
if practical apply asphalt emulsion using spray equipment .
if subjected to traffic spread sand on the primer coat for protection .
broom off excess sand before applying asphalt waterproofing .
d. type a waterproofing .
this type of waterproofing consists of one primer coat and at least two coats of asphalt material conforming to num to provide a total of at least num gallon num l of asphalt per square yard m on flat areas and at least num gallon per square yard num lm on vertical or sloping surfaces .
start applying the waterproofing at the lowest point and progress to a higher elevation .
uniformly cover the surface except apply more asphalt in corners and over construction joints .
apply the asphalt material at a temperature from num to num f num to num c. e. type b waterproofing .
this type of waterproofing consists of one primer coat three coats of asphalt material conforming to num and two layers of waterproofing fabric conforming to num applied as follows num .
on a clean dry and wellprimed surface apply a thorough coating of asphalt at a temperature from num to num f num to num c. num .
apply the coating at a rate of at least num gallon per square yard num lm of surface .
num .
while the asphalt is hot enough to penetrate the fabric lay the fabric according to the following a .
surfaces wider than normal fabric strip .
for the first strip lay a halfwidth normally num inches num m wide strip of fabric .
for the second strip use a fullwidth strip of fabric and lap the entire width of the first strip .
lap each succeeding strip num inches num mm more than half its full width .
lap the fabric strips in the direction of water flow .
b .
surfaces with same width as fabric strip .
for the first strip lay a fullwidth strip .
for the second strip lay another fullwidth strip covering the first .
lay each strip without wrinkles folds or pockets .
thoroughly coat the strip with asphalt for the full width of the lap before laying the succeeding strip .
each application shall entirely conceal the texture of the fabric .
num .
apply a final coat of asphalt to provide a thorough covering for the fabric .
num .
for all three coats use a total of at least num gallon num l of asphalt waterproofing material per square yard m .
lap ends of fabric strips at least num inches num m and stagger the end joints .
f. type e waterproofing .
this type of waterproofing consists of a cold applied liquid membrane waterproofing material conforming to num .
apply the coating when the air temperature is num f numc or above on a clean and dry surface at a rate of num to num square feet per gallon num to num ml to achieve a total thickness of num to num mils num to num m .
cover after cured according to the manufacturers recommendation and within num days of application .
g. type num membrane waterproofing .
this type of waterproofing consists of a rubberized asphalt and peeland stick waterproofing membrane num .
follow manufacturers written recommendations for application of this product which shall be provided to the project .
after installing the primer coat if required remove the membranes release liner and place the adhesive side on the prepared concrete surface .
lay the membrane smooth and free of wrinkles .
lap joints in membranes by at least num inch num mm .
store membrane materials indoors at temperatures not to exceed num f num c. for precast concrete three and foursided structures install type num membrane on the exterior vertical and exterior top horizontal surfaces .
h. type num membrane waterproofing .
this type of waterproofing consists of a primer coat conforming to num and a waterproofing membrane consisting of a high density asphalt mastic between two layers of polymeric fabric conforming to num .
the application of this product shall follow the manufacturers written recommendations which shall be provided to the project .
keep membrane and primer materials dry before installation .
heat the membrane primer in an oil primer heated doublejacket kettle .
use a kettle that is clean and free of other materials with any obvious buildup scraped out .
the contractor may use a singlejacket kettle if the primer is capable of being heated in direct fire to the application temperature .
heat primers within the manufacturers recommended temperatures .
on bridges with curbs apply the primer and membrane num inches num mm up the curb face .
on prestressed box beam bridges with no approach slab apply the primer and membrane num inches num mm over the ends of the beams .
on prestressed and slab bridges with approach slabs apply the primer num feet num mm out onto the approach slab .
if the plans require a type num membrane on the top exterior surface of precast concrete three or foursided structures apply the primer and membrane to overlay the vertical exterior sides of the structure by num inches num mm .
apply primer no further than num feet num m in front of the membrane using a squeegee to fill all voids and imperfections .
apply membrane from the low to the high side of the surface .
apply an extra bead of primer at the edge of the membrane .
lap joints in membranes by at least num inches num mm .
after installing the membrane over the entire surface seal joints in the membrane by applying primer and smoothing with a vsqueegee .
if asphalt pavement is to be placed directly over the water proofing membrane first apply tack coat as specified in num without damaging the membrane .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure waterproofing of the type specified by the number of square yards square meters or on a lump sum basis .
the department will measure sealing of concrete surfaces by the number of square yards square meters of coated area projected to a twodimensional surface .
the department will measure the removal of existing coatings from concrete surfaces in square yards square meters removed .
the department will measure the sealing of concrete bridge decks with hmwm resin and treating concrete bridge decks with srs as the actual area in square yards square meters of surfaces treated .
the department will measure the actual length in linear feet meters of crack repaired by epoxy injection .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows the department will consider the cost for the obtaining and repairing the two cores used by the engineer to determine the extent of the epoxy penetration as incidental to the work of repairing the concrete by epoxy injection .
the department will consider the removal of dust dirt oil wax curing compounds efflorescence laitance and other foreign materials as incidental to the surface preparation of the concrete surfaces to be sealed .
when the surface to be sealed contains an existing coating the department will consider all materials equipment and labor to remove the existing coating as incidental to the removal of existing coatings .
item unit description num square yard sealing of concrete surfaces square meter num square yard sealing of concrete surfacesnonepoxy square meter num square yard sealing of concrete surfacesepoxy urethane square meter num square yard sealing of concrete bridge decks with hmwm resin square meter num square yard treating concrete bridge decks with srs square meter num square yard treating concrete bridge decks with gravityfed resin square meter num foot concrete repair by epoxy injection meter num square yard type a waterproofing square meter or lump sum num square yard type b waterproofing square meter or lump sum num square yard type e waterproofing square meter or lump sum num square yard type num waterproofing square meter or lump sum num square yard type num waterproofing square meter or lump sum num square yard removal of existing coatings from concrete surfaces square meter item num structural steel members num description num fabricator approval procedure num levels of fabricator qualification num general num fabricator documentation responsibility num shop drawings num levels num through num prefabrication meeting num materials num material control num care of material num workmanship and straightening num finish num stiffeners num fillers num horizontally curved beams and girders num joints and splices num pin holes num pins and rollers num holes for highstrength and bearing bolts num highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers num welding num stud shear connectors num threads for bolts and pins num shop assembly num nondestructive testing num shipping storage and erection num shop coating num cleaning astm a numa numm grade numw numw steel num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing shop drawings furnishing and fabricating structural steel members nondestructive testing fabricator performed quality control documentation cleaning shop coating and erecting structural steel and other structural metals .
prepare shop drawings and erect structural steel according to item num and the additional requirements below .
shop painting shall conform to item num .
the work also includes any work to move existing steel structures to the plan location making necessary repairs and alterations and connecting or joining new and old construction .
the terms main secondary or detail as referred to in item num are defined as follows main refers to material members and fasteners that are primarily stressed by live load and structure weight secondary refers to material members and fasteners that do not directly support live load or main members detail refers to essential nonstructural material members and fasteners .
num fabricator approval procedure .
select fabricators that are listed by the department before the contract letting date as evaluated by the office of materials management and prequalified according to supplement num .
the office of materials management may accept subletting of processes that require specialized machinery or knowledge .
submit written requests for subletting to the office of materials management .
the office of materials management will determine if the process is uncommon and will evaluate the qualifications of the proposed sublet fabricator .
the fabricators quality control staff shall witness and perform quality control of the sublet work .
num levels of fabricator qualification .
there are eight levels of fabricator qualification .
the office of materials management will classify each fabricator at the highest level of fabrication it is qualified to perform .
level description of capabilities sf standard fabricated members described and paid for as item num num and num and detailed by standard bridge drawings .
material and fabrication acceptance by certification with random department audits of the work and documentation .
uf unique fabricated members not covered by standard bridge drawings and not designed to carry tension live load .
examples include curb plates bearings expansion joints railings catwalk inspection access special drainage or other products .
examples also include retrofit cross frames retrofit gusset plates retrofit lateral bracing or other miscellaneous structural members not included in levels num through num .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num single span straight rolled beam bridges without stiffeners secondary and detail materials designed to carry tension live loads such as retrofit moment plates .
case ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num multiple span straight rolled beam bridges without stiffeners .
case ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num single or multiple span straight dog legged or curved rolled beam bridges including stiffeners .
case i or ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num straight or bent welded plate girder bridges .
case i or ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num straight curved haunched or tapered welded plate girder bridges .
case i or ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num truss bridges fracture critical bridges fracture critical members or fracture critical components new or retrofitted .
case i or ii loading .
quality assurance of shop drawings material test reports and inspection according to supplement num .
num general .
perform all steel fabrication including the shop application of coatings in a prequalified structural steel fabricating shop consisting of adequately sized permanent buildings with equipment heat and light and experienced personnel to satisfactorily perform all necessary operations .
perform flame cutting air carbonarc gouging cambering welding cleaning and painting inside permanent buildings that are maintained at the required environmental conditions .
the fabricator may perform shop assembly of large pieces for fitup of field connections outdoors .
these provisions will not apply to steel requiring fabrication at the bridge site in the repair alteration or extension of an existing structure .
if repairing extending or altering existing structures take measurements of the existing structure as required to accurately join old and new work .
include these measurements on shop drawings .
measurements shown on the plans that indicate the extent and nature of repair alterations or extension shall not relieve the contractor of this responsibility .
at least two weeks before starting shop fabrication the fabricator shall notify the office of materials management and furnish a proposed fabrication schedule for the work .
unless the office of materials management provides a written waiver of a hold or witness point inspection the fabricator shall store members completed during the inspectors absence in a manner that allows the inspector to completely and safely inspect the finished work .
the fabricator shall not ship fabricated members performed under item num uf level or levels num through num from the shop without prior hold point inspections unless the office of materials management waives the inspection .
the office of materials management will not conduct the scheduled final inspection until the fabricator completes and inspects with documentation final fabrication and shop coatings and the contractor documents approval of shop drawings and material test reports .
the office of materials management will not conduct a final fabrication inspection of sf level members .
instead the office of materials management will conduct random inspections during the fabricators work .
the fabricator shall provide an office with the following attributes a .
a minimum floor area of num square feet num m .
b .
a minimum ceiling height of num feet num m. c. adequate working and storage facilities with one locking file cabinet for the exclusive use of the departments inspector lighting and electrical outlets .
d. provisions for heating to a minimum temperature of num f num c and adequately ventilated .
e. a telephone with direct access to an outside trunk line for the exclusive use of the inspector .
if using steel stamps for identification purposes use the ministress or stressless type .
num fabricator documentation responsibility .
the fabricator shall keep and maintain documentation records as specified in supplement num .
at the departments request provide access to the above documents for audit inspection and copying .
num shop drawing .
provide shop drawings conforming to num and the following requirements include details dimensions size of materials match mark diagrams for field connections a diagram identifying by some unique mark each area of a welded splice to be covered by a single radiograph and other information necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the metal work .
for multiple span beam and girder bridges include an overall layout with dimensions showing the relative unloaded vertical and horizontal position of beam or girder segments with respect to a full length base or work line .
account for camber and horizontal curvature of the beams or girders and the effect of deck surface profile in this layout .
show required offsets for vertical and horizontal curvature at approximately each onefourth of span length at field splices and at bearing points .
for horizontally curved members show the offset to a baseline strung from end to end of the member every num feet num m of length .
identify the grade astm designation cvn fracture critical or any special testing requirements for each piece of steel .
identify pieces made of different grades of steel with different assembling or erecting marks even if the pieces have identical dimensions and detail .
identify the welding procedure by the wps number at each joint and the location and identification numbers of all radiograph tests .
detail structural steel to fit under full steel dead load and prior to deck placement with the webs of primary members plumb .
num levels num through num prefabrication meeting .
after providing the notice and schedule required by num and at least num days after the department receives shop drawings conduct a prefabrication meeting at the fabricators facilities or another location agreed to by all parties .
the fabricator and its quality control specialists for fabrication and painting the inspector and the contractor or its designated representative shall attend the meeting .
the purpose of this meeting is to review any fabrication issues including information on shop drawings inspection hold or witness points unique fabrication items special processes and both the fabrication and project schedule .
the fabrication quality control specialist shall conduct the meeting and record and distribute meeting minutes that document all issues discussed .
fabrication may begin after the prefabrication meeting is complete .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num .
num material control .
identify and mark each piece of steel according to the shop drawings and the following requirements .
immediately after removing steel that is furnished in tagged lifts or bundles mark the individual pieces of steel with the astm a numa numm specification identification color code and heat number .
the fabricator may furnish material from stock that is marked with the heat number and mill test report .
if separated from the fullsize piece furnished by the supplier mark excess material placed in stock for later use with the heat number and if provided with the astm a numa numm specification identification color code .
during fabrication clearly and legibly mark the specification identification color code and heat number on each piece of steel .
before cutting steel into smaller size pieces clearly and legibly mark each smaller size piece with the astm a numa numm specification identification color code and heat number .
unless otherwise approved by the inspector mark pieces of steel that will be subject to fabricating operations such as blast cleaning galvanizing heating for forming or other operations that may obliterate paint color code and heat number markings with steel stamps or with a substantial tag firmly attached to the piece of steel .
at locations acceptable to the office of materials management stamp the heat numbers into main material tested for cvn .
issue cutting instructions by crossreferencing the assembly marks shown on the shop drawings with the corresponding item covered on the mill purchase order .
the fabricators system of assemblymarking individual pieces of steel and issuing cutting instructions shall provide a direct reference to the appropriate mill test report .
the fabrication quality control specialist shall provide the engineer with a letter documenting that the fabricator performed material control according to this specification .
num care of material .
store structural material at the shop or field above the ground upon platforms skids or other supports .
use straight structural steel with clean and dry surfaces before working it in the shop .
before using clean all rusted or corroded material .
only use this material if it conforms to astm a numa numm thickness tolerances after cleaning .
num workmanship and straightening .
if necessary to straighten rolled material use methods that will not damage the member .
if carefully planned and supervised apply localized heat for straightening .
do not allow the temperature of the heated area to exceed num f num c as controlled by pyrometric stick or thermometers .
do not quench to accelerate cooling .
do not kink or offset the material if using mechanic or hydraulic force to camber or strengthen material .
do not cold bend fracture critical materials .
camber rolled beams as shown on the plans in the prequalified fabricating shop using heat or hydraulic jacks .
control heating as specified above and follow a formal shop heating procedure .
camber plate girders by trimming web plates before assembly .
during fabrication shipping and erection support and handle members to maintain camber .
fabricate structural steel to within the dimensional tolerances specified by articles num of the aashtoaws bridge welding code with the following modifications a. waviness the deviation of the top or bottom surface of a flange from a straight line or plan curvature shall not exceed num inch num mm when the number of waves in a numfoot num m length is four or less or num inch num mm when more than four but sharp kinks or bends shall be cause for rejection .
b .
for the measurement of camber during lay down position the bearing points both horizontally and vertically to plan dimensions num inch num mm .
c. measure camber as the vertical offset between the steel and the common base line extending from abutment bearing to abutment bearing .
the maximum camber tolerance at midspan shall be num inch num mm and the greater of num inch num mm or the designed haunch height .
prorate the maximum camber tolerance at midspan between the center of the span and each adjacent bearing to provide a smooth unbroken curve .
d. permissible difference in horizontal curvature of top and bottom flange at any point on centerline of member when measured as specified in num shall not exceed num inch num mm num finish .
plane sheared edges of all main material to a minimum depth of num inch num mm except for astm a numa numm grade num num steel having a thickness of num inch num mm or less .
remove fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges from steel members by grinding .
if these conditions appear during the blasting operation regrind and reblast the steel members to the required surface profile .
the fabricator may flame cut structural steel .
provide a smooth surface free from cracks and notches and use a mechanical guide to provide an accurate profile .
roll and flame cut surfaces according to the aashtoaws bridge welding code as amended by supplement num .
provide a surface finish for bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that contact each other or concrete according to ansi bnum surface roughness waviness and lay part i. ansi bnum steel slabs num mil num m heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded num mil num m milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers num mil num m bridge rollers and rockers num mil num m pins and pin holes num mil num m sliding bearings num mil num m num stiffeners .
place the bearing end of bearing stiffeners flush and square with the web and in a manner so at least num percent of the area of the bearing end is in contact with the inner surface of the flange .
the other end of the bearing stiffener shall have a tight fit as defined below .
position bearing stiffeners to be vertical after erection .
weld intermediate stiffeners that are not used in pairs to the compression flange and provide a tight fit for the tension flange .
weld intermediate stiffeners connected to cross frame angles to the top and bottom flange .
a tight fit is defined as the contact between the stiffener and flange over some portion of the end of the stiffener and having no gap greater than num inch num mm .
clip stiffeners num num inches num mm along the web and num inch num mm along the flange to clear flangeweb welds and fillet or rolled shapes .
when attaching stiffeners to the web and flanges do not extend welds to the edge of the stiffeners or into the clip area .
terminate these welds num num inch at the flange connections and num num inch at the web connection .
num fillers .
detail the shop drawings to show fill plates that compensate for the misalignment of abutting elements due to differences in thickness of flanges and webs at the splice locations .
detail the fill plates to the nearest num inch num mm in thickness but not less than num inch num mm thick .
however in the final shop assembly furnish fills of sufficient thickness to compensate for misalignment of abutting elements due to standard rolling mill tolerances or due to differences in thicknesses of flanges and webs at the splice location .
the actual fills used shall compensate for differences in total thickness or relative positions of more than num inch num mm but with no fills less than num inch num mm thick .
provide fill plates in bolted joints that are flush with the perimeter of the splice plates .
num horizontally curved beams and girders .
if members are to be heat curved submit the detailed procedure including necessary calculations to the office of materials management .
obtain the office of materials managements acceptance of the procedure before starting this work .
curve beams and girders using heat according to aashto standard specifications for highway bridges except that the fabricator may cut flanges for girders to obtain the required alignment .
num joints and splices .
in bolted construction where tension or flexural members are spliced maintain a clearance of not more than num inch num mm between the abutting surfaces of spliced members .
for spliced compression members face the abutting surfaces to provide a uniform bearing when properly aligned and completely bolted .
in welded construction prepare abutting surfaces as shown on the shop drawings .
verify the preparation for field welded butt joints in main members by a complete shop assembly according to num .
num pin holes .
bore pin holes after the member is fabricated and true to size at right angles to the axis of the member and parallel to each other .
pin holes for up to numinch num mm diameter pins shall not exceed the pin diameter by more than num inch num mm and pin holes for larger pins shall not exceed the pin diameter by more than num inch num mm .
num pins and rollers .
use pins and rollers made from cold rolled steel accurately turned to size straight and smooth and entirely free from flaws .
pins over num inches num mm in diameter shall be annealed .
in pins larger than num inches num mm in diameter bore a hole not less than num inches num mm in diameter the full length of the axis .
furnish one pilot and one driving nut for each size of pin .
num holes for highstrength bolts and bearing bolts .
provide cylindrical holes perpendicular to the member clean cut and free of ragged edges .
remove burrs by countersinking not more than num inch num mm or by grinding .
provide finished holes with a diameter not larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt plus num inch num mm .
the hole diameter shall not vary by more than num inch num mm from a true circle for num percent of the holes in a contiguous group and not more than num inch num mm for the remainder .
punch holes using a die with a diameter not exceeding that of the punch by more than num inch num mm .
ream and drill holes using twist drills and twist reamers .
wherever possible direct the reamer by mechanical means .
subdrill holes num inch num mm less in diameter than the nominal diameter of the bolt and ream the holes to size with the parts assembled except a .
the fabricator may subpunch main material conforming to astm a numa numm grade num num steel that is less than num inch num mm thick and grade num num or numw numw steel that is less than num inch num mm thick .
b .
the fabricator may drill fullsize holes in materials assembled and adequately clamped together .
c. the fabricator may punch fullsize holes in secondary and detail material conforming to astm a numa numm grade num num steel that is less than num inch num mm thick and grade num num or numw numw steel that is less than num inch num mm thick .
d. the fabricator may make assemblies such as floor beams connected to girders and rolled beam spans connected by diaphragms through steel templates .
place all subpunched or subdrilled holes with sufficient accuracy such that after assembling before reaming a cylindrical pin num inch num mm smaller than the nominal size of the punched hole may be entered perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting in not less than num percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane .
all holes shall allow a pin num inch num mm smaller than the nominal size of the punched holes to be inserted in the above manner .
do not plug located holes without written approval from the office of materials management .
provide steel templates with hardened bushings in holes that are accurately located in relation to the centerline of the connection as inscribed on the template .
the fabricator is not required to use hardened bushings when using a rotobroach shell drill or other similar tool to make the holes .
ream and drill holes through multiple piles only if the plies of the joint are held tightly together with bolts or clamps and if subpunched or subdrilled only if the joint is pinned .
disassemble and clean the piles of burrs and shavings before final assembly .
the contractor may drill or punch bolt holes full sized in unassembled pieces or connections including templates for use with matching subsized and reamed holes using suitable numerically controlled nc drilling or punching equipment .
if using nc drilling or punching equipment demonstrate the accuracy of the drilling or punching procedure to the inspector according to num .
after holes are reamed or drilled full size num percent of the holes in any contiguous groups shall have no offset greater than num inch num mm between adjacent plies .
the remainder of the holes shall not be offset more than num inch num mm between adjacent plies .
if requested in writing the office of materials management may consider other methods of preparing holes for highstrength bolts .
num highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers .
provide highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers conforming for all bolted connections including erection bolts for cross frames and lateral bracing to num .
a .
general .
provide the engineer with access to the work for observing the installation and the tightening and checking of the bolts .
determine the required bolt length by adding the value from table num to the grip .
the table values include an allowance for manufacturing tolerances and provide a bolt length for threads to protrude through the nut .
add num inch num mm for each hardened flat washer used and num inch num mm for each beveled washer used .
adjust the length as determined by table num to the next longer num inch num mm when installed the end of the bolt shall be flush with or project several thread lengths outside the face of the nut .
table num bolt size inches to determine required bolt length add to gripnum inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num total thickness of all connected material excluding washers .
table numm bolt size mm to determine required bolt length add to gripnum mm mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num num total thickness of all connected material excluding washers .
use bolts nuts and washers with a residual coating of lubricant when received .
bolts nuts and washers without their original lubrication shall not be used .
b .
preparation .
with the exception of metalizing galvanizing and both organic zinc and inorganic zinc primers remove coatings from joint surfaces including surfaces adjacent to the bolt heads nuts and washers .
remove lacquer dirt oil loose scale rust burrs pits and other substances or defects that prevent solid seating of the parts or interfere with the development of complete frictional contact .
do not place gaskets or other yielding material between joint surfaces .
c. installation .
for each bolt place a hardened washer under the element nut or bolt head turned in tightening .
if an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a smooth beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
if necessary the contractor may clip washers at one location not closer than seveneighths of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
during final assembly of the parts to be bolted first install a sufficient number of drift pins to provide and maintain accurate alignment of holes and parts then a sufficient number of bolts tightened to a snug tight condition to bring all the parts of the joint into complete contact .
replace any bolts that were installed before installing drift pins .
before releasing the member from the hoisting equipment fill half the holes with drift pins and bolts tightened to a snug tight condition in at least num percent of the holes preferably half pins and half bolts but use at least two drift pines in each flange and web of each beam or girder .
install bolts starting at the most rigidly fixed or stiffest point and progress toward the free edges .
use cylindrical drift pines that are not more than num inch num mm smaller than the hole diameter .
bolts are snug tight when an impact wrench begins to impact the nut or when a man applies full effort using an ordinary spud wrench .
install bolts in the remaining open holes and tighten the bolts to a snug tight fit after which all bolts shall be tightened completely by the turnofnut method .
where difficulty is experienced with the fit of the connection and the bolts are used to draw the elements into contact check all bolts in the affected portion of the connection for a sustained snug tight condition .
replace drift pins with completely tightened bolts only after all the remaining holes are filled with completely tightened bolts .
do not field ream holes drilled full size during fabrication .
after bolts are snug tight the wrench operator shall matchmark the outer face of the nut with the flush or protruding portion of the bolt using a crayon or paint .
the engineer will use the matchmarks to determine the relative rotation between the bolt and nut during final tightening using the turnofthenut method .
commence tightening at the most rigidly fixed or stiffest point and progress toward the free edges both in the initial snugging up and in the final tightening .
if required because of wrench operation clearances tightening may be done by turning the bolt .
if used provide impact wrenches of adequate capacity to perform the required tightening each bolt in approximately num seconds .
do not reuse galvanized a num bolts .
retightening previously tightened bolts that became loose by tightening adjacent bolts is not reuse .
follow the additional bolting requirements in num .
d. bolt tension .
when all bolts in the joint are tight the minimum bolt tension for each bolt size is shown in table num .
table num bolt size inches bolt tensionnum kips minimum a num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num equal to num percent of specified minimum tensile strengths of bolts rounded off to the nearest kip .
table numm bolt size mm bolt tensionnum kn minimum a numm mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num num equal to num percent of specified minimum tensile strengths of bolts rounded off to the nearest kn .
table num nut rotation from snug tight condition bolt length as measured from underside of head to extreme end of point disposition of outer faces of bolted parts both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num bevel washer not used both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis bevel washer not used up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn attain the bolt tension specified in table num by tightening all bolts the applicable amount of nut rotation specified in table num by the turnofnut method .
nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
tighten bolts requiring num turn and less within num degrees and tighten bolts requiring num turn and more within num degrees .
e. inspection .
num .
the engineer will inspect the first completed connection of each bridge according to num.e.num below and subsequent connections the engineer deems necessary .
thereafter where the engineer has approved the joint compactness and snugtight condition of bolts prior to bolt tightening by the turnofnut method the bolt tension as required in table num shall be considered as attained if the amount of nut rotation specified by table num num is verified by the required matchmarking .
num .
furnish and use manual torque wrenches to inspect bolts .
perform test to the satisfaction of the engineer .
calibrate the inspection torque wrenches at least once each workday using a device approved by the engineer and capable of indicating bolt tension .
use three bolts placed and tensioned individually representative of the grade size length and condition used in the structure to determine the job inspection torque according to num.e.num .
place a washer under the part being turned .
num .
tighten each of the three representative bolts using any convenient manner to the tension shown in table num .
then using the inspection wrench apply a slow steady pull to the tightened bolt and measure the torque required to turn the nut or head num degrees approximately num inch num mm at a numinch num mm radius in the tightening direction .
use the average torque measured in the tensioning of the three bolts as the job inspection torque .
num .
with the engineer present randomly select for inspection two bolts or num percent of the bolts whichever is greater from each connection represented by the numbolt sample described in num.e.num .
using the inspection wrench apply the job inspection torque in the tightening direction .
the engineer will accept the connection if the job inspection torque does not turn the nut or bolt head .
if the job inspection torque turns a nut or bolt head apply the job inspection torque to all the bolts in the connection and reinspect the connection as described above .
f. calibration devices .
the manufacturer of the calibration device or a qualified testing laboratory shall periodically examine each calibration device at least once each year and other times if requested by the engineer .
after calibration the manufacturer or testing laboratory shall certify that each calibration device accurately indicates the actual bolt tension .
num welding .
perform welding by the shielded metalarc submerged arc flux cored arc or stud welding process .
only shielded metal arc stick welding is prequalified .
all other welding processes require testing and approval by the office of materials management .
consideration will be given to other methods of metalarc welding if a written request is submitted to the office of materials management .
in other respects the aashtoaws bridge welding code as amended by supplement num shall govern the work .
post copies of the shop welding procedures at each welding location .
weld only fracture critical and main members when the fabrication quality control specialist and inspectors are physically at the facility .
the fabricator shall not perform fracture critical welding without prior scheduling with the fabrication quality control specialist and the inspector .
the fabrication quality control specialist shall witness the minimum percentages specified in supplement num and shall check all welding processes .
for nonfracture critical welds the fabrication quality control specialist shall perform frequent inspections and check all welding processes .
num stud shear connectors .
perform stud welding according to the aashtoaws bridge welding code as amended by supplement num and this subsection .
in addition to the stud bend tests of article num of the aashtoaws bridge welding code perform bend tests of stud shear connectors at the start of each workday when welding has been interrupted for an hour or more when changing grounds when changing weld settings and when changing cable loop due to arc blow .
do not weld more than num studs without the welds being field bend tested in accordance with the specified procedure .
the contractor may leave in the bent position tested studs that show no sign of failure as determined by the engineer .
weld stud shear connectors to the top flanges of beams or girders after the steel has been erected and suitable scaffolding or deck forming has been provided .
studs may be welded to beam or girder webs end dams bearing plates or to other secondary members and detail material in the shop .
for galvanized structures with welded shear connectors remove the galvanic coating by grinding at each connector prior to welding .
num threads for bolts and pins .
threads for pins shall conform to the unified standard series ansi bnumunc ansi bnumm class numa numg for external threads and class numb numh for internal threads except that pin ends having a diameter of num num inches num mm or more shall be threaded num threads to the inch num mmthread .
num shop assembly .
remove paint grease oil rust loose mill scale and protruding edges or burrs from all contact surfaces .
unless waived by the office of materials management do not assemble and weld flanges and webs to form girders or other similar members and do not accomplish fabrication or assembly that interferes with the repair of a butt weld until the fabrication quality control specialist for the a rated fabricators or the inspector for b and c rated fabricators examines and approves radiographs of all butt welds in the component parts .
perform fitup work with the members assembled in unloaded positions as shown on the shop drawing layout required by num .
during shop assembly adequately support members especially at joints to prevent misalignment or deflection and designate supports that prevent settlement during the fitup reaming or drilling of connections .
the fabrication quality control specialist shall maintain records of the actual horizontal and vertical dimensions and relative positions of each assembly for each offset required by num and upon request furnish a copy to the inspector .
reposition members that become a part of two assemblies for the second assembly to the dimensions recorded for the first assembly .
using steel stamps matchmark all connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of reaming or drilling of holes for field connections or for fitup of field welded connections before disassembly .
punch mark bearing centerlines .
continuous beam and plate girders including sections adjacent to hinged pin connected sliding or rocker bearing joints shall have at least three adjacent segments assembled and holes reamed or drilled while assembled .
check the fitup of field welded connections by similar shop assembly .
shop assemble longitudinal or transverse beams and girders that are either framed or connected by diaphragms and floor beams to check fitup of connections to be field welded or to ream or drill holes for bolted connections .
assemble trusses in lengths of at least three abutting panels before drilling or reaming field connections .
include deck plates in the final shop assembly of bridges that involve railroad deck plates even if welding of these deck plates takes place in the field .
if the fabricator elects to use numerically controlled drilling or punching the required assembly shall be performed as specified above .
the office of materials management will consider the contractors written request to use other methods of checking hole alignment and match marking .
if the office of materials management does not consider or disapproves the fabricators proposed methods of assembly perform the work according to num and num .
after fabrication shop assemble deck expansion devices to check fitup straightness and roadway crossslope changes .
full width assembly is required with phased construction if expansion devices have interlocking fingers or have mechanical devices that require exact field alignment .
the fabricator may fabricate partwidth deck segments without the required shop assembly under the following conditions a .
the plans require a phased construction sequence .
b .
shop drawings incorporate a lay down similar to num defining vertical offset dimensions from a full length common baseline to all roadway changes including sidewalks rounding crowns and field splice points of the expansion device .
secure parts not completely assembled in the shop with temporary bolts to prevent damage in handling and shipping .
in the shop bolt field splice plates into final position shift the splice plates laterally with respect to their final position so that the ends of the plates are flush with the ends of the member .
without the office of materials managements written acceptance do not weld or tackweld to bolted assemblies .
perform authorized welding according to num .
num nondestructive testing .
nondestructive testing shall conform to the aashtoaws bridge welding code as amended by supplement num and as specified below .
as the engineer directs perform ultrasonic or radiographic inspection of field welded repairs in main members for thick scabs deep kerfs or nicks and similar gross flaws .
ensure that all examined welds and base metal adjacent to a welded joint conform to the quality requirements specified in num .
submit radiographs field sketches showing specific locations lengths and depths of the repair and two copies of the radiographic or ultrasonic technical reports to the office of materials management for acceptance .
receive the office of materials managements acceptance before performing construction activities making welds inaccessible for repair .
the contractor or fabricator shall notify the department at least num hours before performing nondestructive testing .
provide this notice even if specific hold or witness point inspections are not required by supplement num .
the office of materials management has the final authority to accept welds and will resolve controversies regarding the interpretation of radiographs magnetic particle indications or the acceptability of welds .
a. radiographic inspection of welds .
before inspection grind welds smooth .
grind web splices only where radiographed except grind outside fascia surfaces the full length .
inspect the following welds num .
the full length of all butt welds in flange material of plate girders or rolled beams .
one hundred percent of butt welds in back up bars that remain in the structure .
num .
the top and bottom onethird of transverse web splices in plate girders or rolled beams and show any cope holes .
if an unacceptable weld occurs radiograph an adjoining numinch num mm length of weld not previously inspected .
if unacceptable flaws are found in this adjoining segment radiograph the remainder of the weld .
num .
butt welds in longitudinal stiffeners attached to tension areas of webs .
num .
twentyfive percent of each longitudinal web splice as selected by the inspector .
num .
full length of field flange cut repairs .
num .
other welds specified in the contract or aashtoaws bridge welding code .
use a steel stamp to make the radiograph identification mark shown on the shop drawing layout in the area marked weld identification of figures numa through numd of the aashtoaws bridge welding code in a manner to make it visible in the radiograph of the area without resorting to superimposed like markings .
place steel stamped identification marks on flange plates so that after girder assembly the marks are on the inside of flange and outside the area fastened to the web .
identify films of repaired welds by the letter r. do not place steel stamped identification numbers within the weld area .
use superimposed characters to make other required markings .
use film locations or a technique employed that will show the top and bottom images of the plate edge .
use films num num num inches num num mm where practical and a minimum film size of num num num inches num num mm .
supply a technical report for the rt testing similar to annex iii form iiinum of the aashtoaws bridge welding code and include the following project identification member piece mark description of the repairs made and the qualification level of the technician .
the department will take ownership of contact films .
for main material repairs provide sketches that clearly show specific locations lengths and depths of field cuts or damages repaired by field welding .
b .
magnetic particle inspection of welds .
before magnetic particle inspection mpi complete welding required to fabricate each beam or girder correct all visual defects and clean the weld .
if the fabricators quality control plan is acceptable to the department and additional processing does not produce a potential for cracking the department may allow the contractor to perform mpi before complete welding .
inspect welds using the procedure and techniques for the dry powder magneticparticle examination of welds using the prod or the yoke method according to aws num .
the prod test equipment shall have a functioning ammeter .
provide a prod magnetizing current of num amperes per inch num mm of prod spacing but not less than num amperes .
use only aluminum prods .
inspect at least num foot num m for every num feet num m or fraction thereof for each size of weld in the following num .
flangetoweb welds including ends of girder after trimming .
num .
moment plate to flange welds .
num .
bearing stiffener welds .
num .
other welds specified in the contract or aashtoaws bridge welding code .
num .
field weld repairs as directed by the engineer .
the inspector or the fabrication quality control specialist will select random test sections .
unless waived by the office of materials management the inspector will observe inspection by crated fabricators .
position test sections as necessary for the inspection and after considering the safety and convenience to the inspecting personnel .
if a test section contains unacceptable defects test numfoot num m segments on both sides of the test section or if less than numfoot num m segments are on both sides of the test section test the full length of the weld .
retest welds requiring repair after repairs are complete .
mpi will not locate all surface defects of article num of the aashtoaws bridge welding code .
unacceptable welds have mpi results that indicate defects exceed the above quality standards .
for each unacceptable defect the fabricator shall record the piece mark the location of the defect on the member the defect description and the proposed repairs .
c. ultrasonic testing of welds .
perform ultrasonic inspection of the following welds num .
complete joint penetration flangetoweb t or corner joint welds num percent for nonfcm num percent compression or shear fcm and num percent tension fcm .
num .
complete penetration butt welds num percent tension fcm and num percent compression fcm .
num .
other welds as specified in the contract or aashtoaws bridge welding code .
the fabrication quality control specialist shall provide the engineer with specified certification sketches technician reports and a letter documenting that the contractor performed nondestructive testing according to this specification .
num shipping storage and erection .
repair or replace at the discretion of the office of materials management members damaged by improper handling storing or erection .
during transportation place adequate blocking between members to prevent movement and facilitate unloading .
unless reinforced by additional plates angles or other material bolted in place do not use field connection holes for tiedown .
band together bearing components .
place material stored in the fabricating shop or in the field on skids or blocks to prevent the metal from contacting the ground .
place and shore girders and beams in an upright position for shipping and field and shop storage .
field splice plates shall be bolted with temporary bolts which shall be removed and replaced when field splice plated are placed in their final position or shifted laterally with respect to their final position .
keep material clean and properly drained .
install bearing devices and anchorages according to item num .
thoroughly clean bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact before the members are assembled in the field .
before erecting structural steel completely bolt up field splices and connections that started before steel erection .
during erection the engineer will allow drifting to draw the parts into position but do not enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
install drift pins and bolts according to num .
fill at least threefourths of the holes with completely tightened bolts in splices and connections subject to construction loads during erection .
complete permanent fastening of steel truss tension chord members before removing falsework .
permanently fasten compression chord members after the span is released sufficiently from the falsework to bring the compression chord joints into full bearing .
properly regulate and maintain elevations of panel points and ends of floor beams until the falsework is removed .
do not enlarge the holes of splices and connections between segments or elements of main members without approval by the office of materials management .
adjust structures to the correct alignment and to the marked bearing centerlines before beginning permanent fastening .
do not permanently fasten cross frames and lateral bracing in continuous beam or girder spans until completing main connections in adjacent spans however install sufficient bracing to maintain structural stability .
for erection bolts used to fasten cross frames use not less than numinch num mm diameter and fully tighten bolts according to num .
erect end cross frames and end dams in a manner that ensures bearing parts remain in bearing contact .
permanently fasten all intermediate cross frames before deck placement begins .
the webs of primary members shall be plumb before deck placement begins .
num shop coating .
for steel surfaces specified to be coated according to item num apply a prime coat in the shop .
num cleaning astm a numa numm grade numw numw steel .
before the new steel is shipped solvent clean where necessary all surfaces of astm a numa numm and grade numw numw steel that are to be left unpainted to remove all traces of asphalt cement oil grease diesel fuel deposits chalk paint marks and other soluble contaminants according to sspcsp num solvent cleaning .
qcp num and qcp num shall apply according to item num .
shop blast unpainted grade numw material to sspcsp num commercial blast .
qcp num shall apply according to item num .
after placing superstructure concrete clean where necessary the exterior surface and bottom flanges of all fascia beams or girders that are to be left unpainted to remove all traces of asphalt cement oil grease diesel fuel or petroleum deposits concrete and other contaminants .
do not use acid for cleaning .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure structural steel members on a lump sum basis or by the number of pounds kilograms .
if payment is per pound kilograms submit weight computations to the office of materials management based upon the accepted shop drawings .
deduct waste material removed by burning cutting machining holes etc .
but include groove weld bevels .
include the weight of all permanent fasteners shop fillet welds other metals and preformed bearing pads .
exclude the weight of paint or galvanized coatings .
exclude thickness or weight of members exceeding the plan requirements due to overweight or other cause unless authorized by the department .
as an option measure and record the weight of structural members before painting in the presence of the inspector .
use the following unit weights for computations .
lbft kgm steel cast steel and deposited weld metal num num cast iron num num phosphor or leaded bronze num num lead num num preformed bearing pads num num the department will measure welded stud shear connectors by the number of each installed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
if the fabricators proposed methods of assembly with numerically controlled drilling or punching fail to produce specified results and the office of materials management directs the contractor to perform work as according to num and num the department will not pay for this work .
for steel surfaces specified to be coated according to item num the cost of applying a prime coat in the shop is incidental to the bid for structural steel .
the department will not pay for repairing or replacing members damaged by improper handling storing transportation or erection .
the department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum structural steel members level uf num lump sum structural steel members level num num lump sum structural steel members level num num lump sum structural steel members level num num lump sum structural steel members level num num lump sum structural steel members level num num lump sum structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level uf num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num pound kilogram structural steel members level num num each welded stud shear connectors item num painting of structural steel num description num materials num superintendent num quality control num testing equipment num work limitations num protection of persons and property num pollution control num safety requirements and precautions num inspection access num job site visual standards num quality control point photographic verification and documentation num surface preparation num washing shop primer num handling num mixing and thinning num coating application num removing fins tears or slivers num caulking num dry film thickness num final inspection num repair procedures num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of cleaning and painting all steel surfaces .
num materials .
on existing steel apply a threecoat paint system consisting of an organic zinc prime coat an epoxy intermediate coat and a urethane finish coat .
the coating system shall conform to num .
on new steel apply a threecoat paint system consisting of an inorganic zinc prime coat an epoxy intermediate coat and a urethane finish coat .
the prime coat shall conform to num and the intermediate and finish coats shall conform to num .
supply the intermediate and finish coats from the same manufacturer .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the intermediate and finish coats with the prime coat .
for caulking use a single pack moisture cured polyurethane based material which will not shrink or sag capable of filling voids up to num inch num mm wide .
only material that is listed on the omm qualified product list website may be used .
num superintendent .
in addition to the requirements of num the superintendent must successfully complete a bridge painting prequalification course and training offered by the department .
the course must have been completed within the past four years and an individual course certificate must have been received by the superintendent .
present certificate to the engineer prior to commencing work .
no work is permitted unless the superintendent provides a valid course certificate .
num quality control .
quality control consists of designating quality control specialists to control the quality of work in each phase established by quality control points qcps .
control quality by inspection tests and cooperation with inspection and testing performed by the engineer and inspector .
a .
quality control specialist .
identify the individuals dedicated to performing duties as the painting quality control specialists before starting work in the field .
provide a quality control specialist for each structure but one quality control specialist must be provided for every three structures for which work is progressing concurrently on this contract .
each quality control specialist must be at a minimum either a nace national association of corrosion engineers coating inspector level numcertified or a sspc the society for protective coatings protective coating specialist or a sspc protective coating inspector level num or a sspc bridge coating inspector level num or formally trained or retrained by at a minimum a nace coating inspector level num certified or a sspc protective coating specialist or a sspc protective coatings inspector level num or a sspc protective coatings inspector level num or a sspc bridge coating inspector level num .
the training shall be adequate to ensure that the quality control specialist is able to use all the testing equipment and understands the requirements of this specification .
provide a copy of the nace or sspc certification or a copy of the trainers nace or sspc certification and a letter or certificate signed and dated by the trainer to the office of construction administration .
ensure that the nace or sspc certification is current or retrain the quality control specialist every five years in accordance with the above requirements .
the quality control specialist must successfully complete a bridge painting prequalification course offered by the department .
the training course must have been completed within the past four years and an individual course certificate must have been received by the quality control specialist .
select only a quality control specialist who is approved by the department .
the office of construction administration will publish a list of approved quality control specialists .
present all required certificates letters of certification and valid identification to the engineer prior to commencing work .
the quality control specialist will be immediately removed from their duties as the quality control specialist and disqualified from future duties as the quality control specialist if any quality control failure occurs .
a quality control failure is defined as any of the following num .
the dry film thickness has been approved by the quality control specialist and it is later found that over num percent of the spot measurements of any one member of a structure such as a cross frame web flange stiffener or other parts of the structure are either under the minimum or over the maximum spot thickness .
num .
the dry film thickness has been approved by the quality control specialist and it is later found that the thicknesses of any area of a structure as described in num are either under the minimum or over the maximum specification thickness .
num .
two separate occurrences when the surface preparation has been approved by the quality control specialist of any one member type such as the cross frames webs flanges stiffeners or other parts of the structure and it is later found that the surfaces of those members were either not properly profiled or not properly cleaned as required by the contract documents .
occurrences are determined per structure .
num .
two separate occurrences of the quality control specialist performing production duties not allowed by the contract documents .
occurrences are determined per structure .
num .
two separate occurrences when the quality control specialist fails to perform any one of the duties assigned to the quality control specialist in the contract documents .
occurrences are determined per structure .
suspend work if the quality control specialist is not available or has been removed .
the engineer or inspector will immediately provide written notification to the office of construction administration of any quality control failure identified above .
resume work when a quality control specialist qualified and approved as provided in num is available .
for work in the fabrication shop each fabricator shall identify one or more fulltime individuals who shall perform the duties of the painting quality control specialist .
the quality control specialist may not be used to perform production duties including supervision blasting painting waste disposal mixing operating or repairing equipment or other tasks not associated with duties of the quality control specialist while the contractor is performing work toward the completion of a quality control point .
ensure that each quality control specialist is trained and equipped with material safety data sheets msds product data sheets tools and equipment necessary to provide quality control on all aspects of the work .
each quality control specialist shall have a thorough understanding of the plans for the work including any pertinent addenda change order or other contract documents and these specifications .
duties each quality control specialist shall perform include num .
inspect equipment and abrasive at specified intervals .
num .
approve the work and provide documentation that the work has been approved immediately before each qcp .
num .
inspect the work with the engineer or inspector at each qcp .
num .
verify the contractor or fabricator performed work according to the contract documents .
num .
cooperate with the inspection and testing performed by the engineer and inspector .
num .
document test results and compare test results with the engineers and inspectors test results .
num .
notify superintendent of nonconforming work .
num .
stop work when test equipment is not available and when necessary to ensure the work is performed according to the contract .
the fabricators quality control specialists shall provide the engineer with a letter that includes specified information or check point data documenting acceptance of the work and consisting of the following num .
checks on the abrasive to ensure that it has not been contaminated with oil .
num .
the profile of the blasted surface .
num .
the air and steel temperature and dew point before blast cleaning and painting and at numhour intervals during the blasting and painting operation .
num .
readings of the actual dry film thickness .
num .
the lot and stock number of the paint and the date of manufacture .
num .
documentation that the paint mixer is functioning properly that each spray operator has demonstrated the ability to paint and that all spray equipment is used according to the manufacturers recommendation .
b .
quality control points qcp .
qcps are points in time when one phase of the work is complete and approved by the quality control specialist and ready for inspection by the engineer or the inspector before commencing the next phase of the work .
at a qcp the quality control specialist shall provide quality control tests bearing his signature to the engineer or inspector .
the contractor or fabricator shall provide the engineer and inspectors access to inspect all affected surfaces .
if inspection identifies a deficiency correct the deficiency according to the contract documents before starting the next phase of work .
discovery of defective work or material after a quality control point is past or failure of the final product before final acceptance shall not in any way prevent the department from rejecting the final product or obligate the department to final acceptance .
final acceptance will be determined according to num final inspection .
quality control points purpose new steel existing steel num .
solvent cleaning remove asphalt cement oil grease etc .
yes yes num .
grinding flange edges remove sharp corners yes yes num .
abrasive blasting blast surfaces to receive paint yes yes num .
containment waste disposal contain collect dispose of abrasive blasting debris no yes num .
prime coat application check surface cleanliness apply prime coat check coating thickness yes yes num .
remove fins tears slivers remove surface defects and slivers yes yes num .
washing of shop primer remove all water soluble materials salt dirt etc .
yes no num .
intermediate coat application check surface cleanliness apply intermediate coat check coating thickness yes yes quality control points purpose new steel existing steel num .
caulking caulk areas not sealed by the intermediate coat yes yes num .
finish coat application check surface cleanliness apply intermediate coat check coating thickness yes yes num .
final review acceptance and check total system thickness yes yes provide signed documentation of inspection testing conditions and material information to the engineer on the following odot forms or forms with the equivalent information .
qcs inspection documentation sign off for qcps casnum qcpnum solvent cleaning casnum qcpnum grinding flange edges casnum qcpnum abrasive blasting casnum qcpnum qcs visual standards information for abrasive blasting test section casnum qcpnum disposal of hazardousnonhazardous waste casnum qcpnum prime coat application casnum qcpnum dry film thickness readings for prime coats casnum qcpnum grinding fins tears and slivers casnum qcpnum dry film thickness readings for intermediate coats casnum qcpnum caulking casnum qcpnum intermediate coat application casnum qcpnum finish coat application casnum qcpnum dry film thickness readings for finish coats casnum num testing equipment .
for the project duration provide the engineer or inspectors with the test equipment listed below for the type of work at each work site with ongoing work .
with the exception of the recording thermometer the fabricator shall provide its quality control specialists with the test equipment listed below .
the contractor and fabricator shall maintain all testing equipment in good working order and provide documentation or certification of calibration from the manufacturer .
if the contractor or fabricator and the engineers inspector are using different test equipment the contractor or fabricator and the engineers inspector will perform sidebyside testing and compare results .
if the difference between the departments and contractors or fabricators tests results such as blast profile dry film thickness temperature dew point and relative humidity are greater than num the contractor or fabricator and the engineer will determine the reason for the differences and make necessary adjustments .
a .
film and a camera with the following features num .
uses self developing color print film .
num .
lens with auto focus system .
num .
focuses from num feet num m to infinity .
num .
builtin fill flash .
or provide a digital camera with the following features num .
num megapixel or greater resolution .
num .
minimum num optical zoom lens capability with automatic focus .
num .
minimum nummb memory capability .
num .
builtin flash .
num .
photograph printer with docking capability compatible with the camera including supplies necessary to print .
i.e .
ink cartridges photograph quality paper and other consumables required for operation and photograph printing .
b .
one spring micrometer and extracoarse replica tape or comparable electronic surface profile gauge for the measurement of abrasive blast profile depth within num mils on the project at all times .
c. one sspcpanum type num electronic nondestructive coating thickness gage with a set of calibration thickness foils shims and two sets of national institute of standards technology calibration plates .
the first set of calibration plates shall be num to num mils num to num m model no .
numb and the second set shall be num to num mils num to num m model no .
numb .
other certified coating thickness standard plates for ferrous substrates must be approved for use by the office of construction administration .
d. one sling psychrometer including psychrometric tables or comparable electronic or digital equipment for the measurement of dew point accurate within num f num c and within one percent relative humidity .
e. two steel surface thermometers accurate within num f num c. f. flashlight numd cell .
g. sspc visual standard for abrasive blast cleaned steel sspcvis num .
h. one recording thermometer capable of recording the date time and temperature over a period of at least num hours .
num work limitations .
apply the prime coat to new structural steel inside permanent buildings at the fabricators facility .
if inside permanent buildings the fabricator may perform yearround abrasive blasting and painting .
perform abrasive blasting and painting in the field from april num to october num .
the department will not issue a time extension due to adverse weather during the month of april .
the plans or other contract documents may require additional work limitations for specific bridges or projects .
a .
temperature .
do not apply inorganic zinc primer if the steel air and paint temperature is below num f num c .
do not apply organic zinc primer epoxy intermediate or urethane finish coats if the steel air and paint temperature is below num f num c .
follow the paint manufacturers printed instructions for the minimum times to handle recoat and cure the individual coats for specified conditions and thicknesses .
monitor and document that the temperatures listed below are maintained for minimum time frames listed below after application of each coat by using the recording thermometer .
the contractor may use a heated enclosure or building .
supply heat continuously and uniformly to maintain the required minimum temperature within the enclosure or building .
minimum times to maintain temp .
per coating .
num f num c num f num c num f num c primer organic zinc num hrs num hrs num hrs intermediate epoxy num hrs num hrs num hrs finish urethane num hrs num hrs num hrs if combustion type heating units are used vent the units away from the enclosure or building and do not allow exhaust fumes to enter the enclosure or building .
do not use open combustion in the enclosure or building .
the fabricator may use radiant heat when painting new structural steel inside permanent shop buildings .
locate radiant heaters at least num feet num m above all surfaces to be painted .
vent exhaust fumes to prevent fumes from contacting surfaces to be painted .
b. moisture .
do not apply paint num .
if the steel surface temperature is less than num f num c above the dew point .
num .
if the steel surface is wet damp frosted or icecoated .
num .
if the relative humidity is greater than num percent .
num .
during periods of rain fog or mist unless the above moisture criteria is met .
if steel was abrasive blasted when the temperature of the steel was less than num f num c above the dew point reblast the steel when the steel temperature is at least num f num c above the dew point .
num protection of persons and property .
collect remove and dispose of all rubbish buckets rags or other discarded materials and leave the job site in a clean condition .
except for deck bottoms and backwalls which have not been sealed or are not to have a sealer applied protect all portions of the structure that are not to be painted from damage or disfigurement by splashes spatters and smirches of paint .
if the contractor causes any damage or injury to public or private property the contractor shall restore the property to a condition similar or equal to the condition existing before the damage or injury .
num pollution control .
comply with pollution control laws rules or regulations of federal state or local agencies and requirements of this specification .
num safety requirements and precautions .
comply with the applicable safety requirements of the ohio industrial commission and osha .
provide material safety data sheets msds at the preconstruction meeting for all paints thinners and abrasives used on this project .
do not begin work until submitting the msds to the engineer .
num inspection access and lighting .
in addition to the requirements of num furnish erect and move scaffolding and other appropriate equipment to allow the inspector and the engineer the opportunity to closely observe all affected surfaces during all phases of the work and for at least num workdays after completely painting each structure to allow for the final inspection according to num .
provide artificial lighting as necessary to supplement natural light with a minimum of num foot candles num lux at the surface of the steel for inspection cleaning and painting .
prevent glare that interferes with traffic workers and inspection .
submit to the engineer for information complete details of the inspection access that complies with the applicable safety requirements of the ohio industrial commission and osha .
the details shall be reviewed signed stamped and dated by an ohio registered professional engineer certifying that they meet these requirements .
maintain the inplace inspection access equipment employed during original painting activities or provide alternate inspection equipment such as platform lifts bucket trucks snooper trucks or equivalent as approved by the engineer .
if scaffolding or any hanger attached to the scaffolding is supported by horizontal wire ropes or if scaffolding is directly under the surface to be painted comply with the following requirements a .
if scaffolding is suspended num inches num mm or more below the surface to be painted place two guardrails on all sides of the scaffolding .
place one guardrail at num inches num mm above the scaffolding and the other guardrail at num inches num mm above the scaffolding .
b .
if scaffolding is suspended at least num inches num mm but less than num inches num mm below the surface to be painted place one guardrail on all sides of the scaffolding at num inches num mm above the scaffolding .
c. if num.a and num.b do not apply place two guardrails on all sides of scaffolding .
place one guardrail at num inches num mm above the scaffolding and the other guardrail at num inches num mm above scaffolding .
d. provide scaffolding at least num inches num mm wide if guardrail is used and num inches num mm wide if guardrail is not used and scaffolding is suspended less than num inches num mm below the surface to be painted .
if using two or more parallel scaffolding to achieve the proper width rigidly attach the scaffolding together to prevent differential movement .
e. construct guardrail as a substantial barrier securely fastened in place and free from protruding objects such as nails screws and bolts .
provide a properly located opening in the guardrail to allow the engineer and inspector access onto the scaffolding .
f. construct guardrails and uprights of metal pipe steel angles or wood .
if using pipe railing provide pipe with a nominal diameter of at least num num inches num mm .
if using steel angle railing provide num num numinch num num num mm steel angles or other metal shapes of equal or greater strength .
if using wood railing provide num numinch num num mm nominal stock .
space uprights no more than num feet num m on center .
if using wood uprights provide num numinch num num mm nominal stock .
g. if the surface to be inspected is more than num feet num m above the ground or water and the scaffolding is supported from the structure being painted provide a safety harness not a safety belt and lifeline for the engineer and inspector .
the lifeline shall not allow a fall greater than num feet num m. provide a method to attach the lifeline to the structure that is independent of the scaffolding cables and brackets supporting the scaffolding .
h. if scaffolding is more than num feet num mm above the ground provide an access ladder and equipment to attach the ladder onto the scaffolding capable of supporting num pounds num kg with a safety factor of at least four .
uniformly space rungs steps cleats and treads no more than num inches num mm on center .
extend at least one side rail at least num inches num mm above the landing near the top of the ladder .
i .
if the distance from the ladder to the access point on the scaffolding exceeds num inches num mm provide an additional landing that is capable of supporting a minimum of num pounds num kg and at least num inches num mm wide and num inches num mm long .
size and shape the landing so that the distance from the landing to the point where the scaffolding is accessed does not exceed num inches num mm .
firmly attach the landing to the ladder however do not use the ladder to support the landing .
j .
in addition to the scaffolding requirements above comply with all federal state and local laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees .
k. furnish all necessary traffic control to allow inspection during and after all phases of the project .
num job site visual standards .
before starting abrasive blasting establish job site visual standards by preparing a test section subsequent test sections and by using photographs of approved test sections .
use job site visual standards and sspcvis num standard for blasting .
the contractor or fabricator shall prepare an approximately num to numsquare foot num to num m test section from a representative area on the first structure to be painted .
after the engineer or inspector and the contractor or fabricator agree the test area was blast cleaned to the requirements of the contract documents photograph the test section and check the steel surface for the proper profile .
after the engineer or inspector approves the test section and the job site visual standards are documented by photographs and replica tape the contractor or fabricator may start abrasive blasting .
the quality control specialists and engineer or inspector will use the job site visual standards photographs the plan specification and requirements to determine acceptance of blast cleaning procedures .
in all cases of dispute the sspcvis num standard shall govern .
if the contractor engineer inspector or fabricator believe the initial test section does not establish the proper visual standard for a different structure another test section on the different structure may be performed .
num quality control point photographic verification and documentation .
the engineer or inspector will take a sufficient number of photographs to document the condition of the work at quality control points num num and num .
num surface preparation .
a. solvent cleaning qcp num .
solvent clean by methods described in sspcsp num areas containing oil grease asphalt cement diesel fuel deposits other petroleum products and contaminants .
b. grinding flange edges qcp num .
before abrasive blasting round all exposed flange edges of all beams and girders to a radius of num num inch num num mm .
this work has no weather and temperature restrictions .
for shop painted steel ground the sides of thermally cut material num  inch num mm or thicker to remove the heat effected zone as necessary to achieve the specified surface cleaning .
c. abrasive blasting qcp num .
do not abrasive blast areas that contain asphalt cement oil grease or diesel fuel deposits .
before abrasive blasting completely remove all dirt sand bird nests bird droppings and other debris from the scuppers bulb angles and pier and abutment seats .
abrasive blast all steel to be painted according to sspcsp num and as shown on the pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces shown in sspcvis num .
maintain steel in a blast cleaned condition until it has received a prime coat of paint .
the contractor may commercial blast clean the back side of end cross frame assemblies that are num inches num mm or closer to backwalls according to sspcsp num .
cover and protect galvanized and metalized steel including corrugated steel bridge flooring adjacent concrete already or specified to be coated or sealed and other surfaces not intended to be painted from damage caused by blasting and painting operations .
repair adjacent coatings damaged during the blasting operation .
backwalls and bottoms of decks not sealed nor specified to be sealed do not need to be covered and protected .
for field blasting use a recyclable steel grit or a recyclable natural mineral low dusting abrasive .
do not use silica sands mineral slags and other types of nonmetallic abrasives that contain more than num percent free silica by weight have a chlorides salts content more than num ppm and contain any organic material .
for shop blasting use an abrasive that produces an angular profile .
all abrasives shall provide a profile from num to num mils num to num m as determined by replica tape according to astm d num method c. adjust the abrasive size blast hose nozzle pressure or other means in order to provide the num to num mil profile .
clean the abrasive of paint chips rust mill scale and other foreign material after each use and before each reuse .
use equipment specifically designed for cleaning the abrasive .
check abrasives used at the job site or fabrication shop for oil contamination at the beginning of each shift and at numhour intervals .
also check each load of abrasive delivered to the job site or fabrication shop for oil contamination before use .
check for oil by placing a small sample of abrasives and tap water into a jar .
reject the abrasive if an oil film is detected on the water surface .
to ensure that the compressed air is not contaminated the quality control specialists shall blow air from the nozzle for num seconds onto a white cloth or blotter held in a rigid frame .
if the cloth or blotter retains oil or other contaminants suspend abrasive blasting until retests verify the problem was corrected .
perform this test at the start of each shift and at numhour intervals .
the contractor may simultaneously abrasive blast and paint the same bridge provided the abrasive blasting debris and dust does not contact freshly painted surfaces and does not contaminate paint during the curing period .
for shop blasting the fabricator may simultaneously abrasive blast and paint if the two operations are separated by distance or containment that prevents paint contamination .
for surface preparation of new structural steel in the fabricators shop the quality control specialist shall take replica tape readings as follows num .
for an automated blasting process test the greater of num percent of the main members or one member per shift .
these tests shall consist of taking five random readings per member .
num .
for a manual blasting process test each main member .
the test of a main member consists of taking five readings at random locations .
num .
for both an automated and manual blasting process test num percent of all secondary members .
the test of a secondary member consists of taking one random reading .
remove abrasives and residue from all surfaces to be painted .
keep all structural steel that was blast cleaned in the field or the fabricators shop dust free .
apply a prime coat to steel that was blast cleaned in the field within num hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation .
apply a prime coat to structural steel that was blast cleaned in the fabricators shop within num hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation .
if a prime coat is not applied within the times stated above reblast the steel before applying the prime coat .
remove all dust or abrasives from adjacent work and from the finish coat .
provide the engineer and inspector with field wash facilities and an adequate supply of running potable water soap and towels for washing face and hands during the surface preparation operation .
properly contain test and dispose of the wastewater .
locate a wash facility at each bridge site and in an area that will not be contaminated by the blasting debris .
d. containmentwaste disposal qcp num .
waste material generated by abrasive blasting operations in the field is a solid waste and may be a hazardous waste .
contain collect store evaluate and properly dispose of the waste material .
comply with all federal state and local environmental protection laws regulations and ordinances including but not limited to air quality waste containment and waste removal .
the contractor is advised that various governmental bodies are involved with solid waste and hazardous waste disposal and the contractor is responsible for complying with laws enforced by the various governmental bodies .
to prevent contamination of the pavement or soil park all equipment on ground covers free of cuts tears and holes .
clean equipment of spent abrasives or debris before bringing equipment to the project moving equipment from one bridge site to another and removing equipment from the project .
store debris cleaned from equipment with the debris from the structure that generated the debris .
erect an enclosure to completely surround around under and over the top on truss type bridges the blasting operations .
the contractor may use the ground as the bottom of the enclosure if the ground is completely covered with plastic or tarps .
construct the enclosure of flexible materials such as tarpaulins specifically designed for blasting containments or construct the enclosure of rigid materials such as plywood .
maintain all materials free of tears cuts and holes .
overlap all seams a minimum of num inches num mm and fasten the seams together at numinch num mm centers or in a manner that ensures a seal that does not allow openings between the edges of the containment material .
extend the vertical sides of the enclosure completely up to the bottom of the deck on a steel beam bridge and use bulkheads between beams to enclose the blasting area .
collect all debris from blasting operations equipment or filters and all debris that fell to the ground .
store the debris in steel containersdrums with lids that are locked at the end of each workday .
store the debris in these locked drums while in the storage location and when hauled from the storage location to the disposal site .
the storage location shall be at the bridge site unless the engineer and contractor agree on an alternate storage location .
secure the storage location by surrounding the site with a num foot num m high dumpster or a num foot num m high chain link fence fabric supported by traffic sign drive posts num feet num m apart .
drive the traffic signposts into the ground at least num feet num m deep .
secure the dumpster or fencing with padlocks at the end of each day .
the location of centralized cleaning stations for recyclable steel shall also be agreed by the engineer and the contractor .
test and evaluate the debris for disposal .
obtain the services of a testing laboratory to obtain directly from the project site and evaluate a composite representative sample of the abrasive blasting debris for each bridge site .
the person taking the sample must be an employee of the testing laboratory .
take composite sample in the presence of the engineer or inspector comply with the requirements of u.s. epa publication sw num and take individual samples from all containers that are on the site at the time of the sampling .
blend individual samples of equal size together to comprise one composite sample .
take one individual sample from each drum and four randomly spaced individual samples from each container other than drums .
take individual samples and place into clean glass or plastic containers .
prepare a chain of custody record chain of custody for all composite samples .
the chain of custody must include the name of the person taking the sample the name of the testing laboratory for which the person works the date and time the sample was taken the bridge sampled the township and municipality where the bridge is located and the signatures and dates of all persons in possession of the sample in the chain of custody .
sample the abrasive blasting debris within the first week of production blasting at each bridge .
cease all blasting and painting operations on the bridge from which waste was generated if sampling is not performed within the first week of production blasting .
test composite samples for lead chromium cadmium and arsenic according to the u.s. epa publication sw num method num tclp .
provide the chain of custody and test results to the district regulated waste engineer drwe immediately after the test results are available .
if the drwe determines the blasting debris is hazardous as defined below provide the engineer with the names of the hauler and treatment facility .
perform all sampling and testing required by the hauler treatment facility or disposal facility .
the existing paint removed from bridges may contain lead chromium cadmium or arsenic .
the contractor is responsible for taking the proper safety precautions to ensure workers in this environment are properly protected .
num .
hazardous waste .
the blasting debris is hazardous if lead chromium cadmium or arsenic exceed any of the regulatory concentration limits shown below sw num analyte regulatory concentration limit lead num mgl chromium num mgl arsenic num mgl cadmium num mgl label all the containers of hazardous blasting debris hazardous .
post hazardous waste warning signs at obvious locations on the fenced enclosure .
the office of construction administration will obtain a generator number assigned to the state .
after the office of construction administration obtains the generator number arrange for the hauling treating and disposing of the hazardous waste .
use a firm licensed by epa to haul and dispose of the hazardous waste .
this firm is also responsible for providing the completed uniform hazardous waste manifest epa form num or current version .
in every case properly dispose of all hazardous waste within num days after it is generated .
if hazardous waste is not properly disposed of within num days the department will consider the contactor in breach of its contract and the department will take the following actions a .
immediately suspend all abrasive blasting and painting of structural steel on the project until hazardous waste is properly disposed .
b .
cease processing all pay estimates .
c. forward a breach of contract notification to the contractors surety .
the contractor is responsible for fines or liens assessed by any governmental agency that has jurisdiction over the disposal of this hazardous waste material .
decontaminate or dispose of all collection and containment equipment according to epa guidelines .
the contractor shall inform the department when all hazardous waste has been removed from the project so the epa site id number hazardous waste generator number can be deactivated .
num .
nonhazardous solid waste .
for all waste that is determined to be a nonhazardous solid waste by the drwe the contractor is required to a .
before disposing of any material provide the engineer with documentation that the disposal facility is licensed by the epa to accept nonhazardous solid waste .
b .
haul and dispose of the waste to the documented nonhazardous solid waste facility .
c. obtain from the disposal facility and provide the engineer with a receipt that documents disposal of waste material at the licensed disposal facility .
d. properly dispose of all waste within num days after it is generated .
num washing shop primer qcp num .
wash shop primed structural steel after it is erected and the concrete deck is placed and within num days of applying the intermediate coat .
wash the steel with potable water .
use equipment capable of delivering the water at a nozzle pressure of at least num pounds per square inch num mpa and at a rate of not less than num gallons num l per minute .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with equipment specifications that verify both the delivery pressure and rate .
provide gauges on the equipment to verify the pressure during operation .
hold the nozzle a maximum of num inches num mm from the surface being washed .
the surface is clean when clear rinse water runs off the structure .
after rinsing the surface inspect for remaining dirt and rewash dirty areas until clean .
num handling .
deliver all paint and thinner in original unopened containers with labels intact .
the engineer or inspector will accept containers with minor damage provided the container is not punctured .
thinner containers shall be a maximum of num gallons num l. before use provide the engineer with shipping invoices for all painting materials used on the project .
supply containers of paint and thinner with labels clearly marked by the manufacturer to show paint identification component color lot number stock number date of manufacture and information and warnings as may be required by federal and state laws .
store paint at the temperature recommended by the manufacturer and in a storage facility that prevents theft .
provide thermometers capable of monitoring the maximum high and low temperatures inside the storage facility .
before opening paint or thinner containers check the labels to ensure the proper container is opened and the paint has not been stored beyond its shelf life .
do not use paint that exceeded its shelf life .
do not open containers of paint and thinner until required for use and then open the oldest paint of each kind first .
solvent used for cleaning equipment is exempt from the above requirements .
do not use paint that has livered gelled or otherwise deteriorated during storage .
properly dispose of unused paint and paint containers .
num mixing and thinning .
thoroughly mix all ingredients immediately before use with a high shear mixer such as a jiffy mixer .
do not mix paint using paddle mixers paint shakers or an air stream bubbling under the paint surface .
after mixing carefully examine the paint for uniformity and to ensure that no unmixed pigments remain on the bottom of the container .
before use strain the paint through strainers that remove skins or undesirable matter but not pigment .
except for primer mix paint as necessary during application to maintain a uniform composition .
continuously mix primer using an automated agitation system .
do not use handheld mixers for primer paints .
do not add thinner to the paint without the engineers or inspectors approval and only add thinner if necessary for proper application as recommended by the manufacturers printed instructions .
in the engineers or inspectors presence slowly add the amount of thinner recommended and supplied by the manufacturer to the paint during the mixing process .
do not mix other additives into the paint .
add catalysts curing agents or hardeners that are in separate packages to the base paint only after thoroughly mixing the base paint .
with constant agitation slowly pour the proper volume of catalyst into the required volume of base .
do not pour off liquid that has separated from the pigment before mixing .
use the mixture within the pot life specified by the manufacturer and dispose of unused portions at the end of each workday .
num coating application a .
general .
paint all structural steel scuppers expansion joints except top surface steel railing exposed steel piling drain troughs and other areas as shown on the plans .
paint galvanized or metalized surfaces if shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified below apply paint to provide the specified coating thickness by brush and spray methods .
apply primer and intermediate paint per num and num to cover all visible steel surfaces .
if gaps or crevices remain between adjacent coated steel surfaces after applying the intermediate coat caulk according to num .
if brush and spray are not practical to paint places of difficult access the contractor may use daubers small diameter rollers or sheepskins .
use daubers small diameter rollers or sheepskins to paint the following areas num .
where crossframe angles are located within num inches num mm of the bottom flange .
num .
where end cross frames are within num inches num mm of the backwall .
num .
where there is less than num inches num mm between the bottom of the bottom flange and the beam seat .
b .
application approval .
the engineer or inspector may inspect the initial application of the prime intermediate and final coats .
if the engineer or inspector discovers defects adjust the method of application to eliminate the defects then continue applying the coat .
c. additional information pertaining to shop applied paint .
apply a prime coat to all structural steel surfaces by brush or spray methods including insides of holes behind stiffener clips and contact surfaces of connection and splice material that is to be fastened with bolts in the shop or field .
apply a mist coating from num to num mils num to num m on surfaces that are to be imbedded in concrete and on surfaces within num inches num mm of field welds other than those attaching intermediate or end cross frames to beams or girders .
apply one coat of primer to pins pin holes and contact surfaces of bearing assemblies except do not paint those containing selflubricating bronze inserts .
once the prime coat is dry apply erection marks using a thinned paint of a type and color that is completely concealed by and compatible with the second coat .
do not handle or remove coated structural steel from the shop until the applied paint has met the requirements as specified by the paint manufacturers printed instructions .
reduce the thickness of thick films of inorganic zinc primer by screening sanding or sweep blasting .
if the primer paint cured longer than num hours apply a recoating of primer paint according to the paint manufacturers printed instructions .
abrasive blast and reapply the primer to the affected area if mud cracking occurs .
if checking occurs abrasive blast and reapply the primer or remove the checking by screening and evaluate the area by adhesion testing .
if specified in the plansfurnish all necessary labor materials and equipment to apply a three coat paint system to item num structural steel in the shop and touch up areas in the field .
repair damage to the paint system caused during storage transportation erection bolting welding forming concrete placement and form removal operation according to num .
repair damage to the galvanized coating on the nuts bolts and washers in the field due to the bolt tightening or welding operations .
exercise extreme care while handling the steel during erection and during subsequent construction of the bridge .
insulate the steel from the binding chains by softeners and pad all hooks and slings that are used to hoisterect the steel members .
coating of bolted faying surfaces treat the surfaces indicated below as described in this specification a. faying surfaces of all bolted connections .
b .
all internal contact surfaces of filler and splice plates .
c. other surfaces indicated in the plans .
coat the faying surfaces of bolted splices with inorganic zinc primer in the shop .
after erection is complete field apply the final coatings of epoxy intermediate coat and urethane protective coats to overlap the shop coatings shown in figure num with the field coats shown in figure num .
for bolted crossframes leave a minimum of one inch step back from faying surfaces for epoxy intermediate and an additional one inch for urethane top coat .
remove and reassemble all shop bolted connections and shop bolted cross frames prior to the blasting and coating of the girders or beams .
separately blast and prime the parts then reassemble and fully tighten the bolts using the turn of the nut method .
after bolting is complete shop apply the epoxy intermediate and urethane protective coats .
after installation solvent clean all galvanized nuts bolts and washers .
remove any contaminants on the nuts bolts and washers prior to the application of paint .
repair any damaged galvanized coating and remove any corrosion prior to the application of organic zinc by brush .
then apply the epoxy coat and the urethane coats .
erection marks added by the fabricator to highlight or enhance the required steel stamped erection marks must be made without damaging the paint system .
apply erection marks only after the finish coat is cured and remove at the end of the project .
erection marks may be applied to the faying surfaces .
these marks to the inorganic coating need not be removed but must be of a paint supplied by the izeu system manufacture .
remove any oil grease asphalt cement concrete or other contaminants from the surface of the izeu system painted structural steel .
d. surface cleanliness .
all surfaces to be painted shall be free of dust dirt grease oil moisture overspray and other contaminants .
if the surface is degraded or contaminated restore the surface before applying paint .
in order to prevent or minimize degradation or contamination of cleaned surfaces in the field the prime coat of paint shall be applied within num hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation as required in surface preparation above for steel which is cleaned and painted in the shop the prime coat of paint shall be applied within num hours of the beginning of the blasting operation .
schedule cleaning and painting when dust or other contaminants will not fall on wet newly painted surfaces .
protect surfaces that do not receive paint or have already been painted from the effects of cleaning and painting operations .
before applying the next coat remove overspray and bird droppings with a stiff bristle brush wire screen or a water wash with sufficient pressure to remove overspray and bird droppings without damaging the paint .
before applying the next coat remove all abrasives and residue from painted surfaces with a vacuum system equipped with a brush type cleaning tool .
remove all visible abrasives on the finish coat that came from adjacent work .
e. brush application .
apply the paint to produce a smooth coat .
to ensure coverage apply wet stripe coats using brushes daubers small diameter rollers or sheepskins to all edges outside corners crevices welds rivets bolts nuts and washers in addition to the spray application of each individual coating apply stripe coat of organic zinc primer either before or after spray application of primer .
apply stripe coats of intermediate and finish coats before spray application of the respective coats .
apply additional paint as necessary to produce the required coating thickness .
f. spray application general .
apply paint using spray application as follows keep spray equipment clean so that dirt dried paint solvents and other foreign materials are not deposited in the paint film .
remove solvent left in the equipment before using the equipment .
apply paint in a uniform layer with overlapping at the edges of the spray pattern .
paint the border of the spray pattern first followed by painting the interior of the spray pattern .
complete painting a spray pattern before moving to the next spray pattern area .
within a spray pattern area hold the gun perpendicular to the surface and at a distance that will ensure a wet layer of paint is deposited on the surface .
release the trigger of the gun at the end of each stroke .
each spray operator shall demonstrate to the engineer or inspector the ability to apply the paint as specified before the operator sprays paint .
if mud cracking occurs the affected area shall be cleaned to bare metal in accordance with surface preparation above and repainted .
use spray equipment recommended by the paint manufacturer and suitable for use with the specified paint .
provide adequately sized traps or separators to remove oil and condensed water from the air .
periodically drain the traps during operations .
to ensure that the traps or separators are working properly test by blowing air from the spray gun for num seconds onto a white cloth or blotter held in a rigid frame .
the engineer or inspector will verify the test results by inspecting the white cloth or blotter .
if the cloth or blotter retains oil water or other contaminants suspend painting until retests verify the problem was corrected .
perform this test at the start of each shift and at numhour intervals .
this is not required for an airless sprayer .
do not use spray application unless the operation is totally enclosed as required for abrasive blasting to prevent overspray damage to the ground public and private property vegetation streams lakes and other surfaces not to be painted .
g. prime intermediate and finish coat application qcp num num and num .
apply paint as a continuous film of uniform thickness free of all defects such as holidays pin holes mud cracking checking drips runs and sags .
the contractor is responsible for applying the manufacturers paint as necessary to satisfy the above requirement .
repaint all thin spots or areas missed before the next coat of paint is applied .
ensure that the paint manufacturers printed instructions for the minimum times to handle recoat and cure the individual coats for specified conditions and thicknesses are followed for each coat of paint before applying the next coat .
comply with the manufacturers written instructions for the time interval between coats and apply the next coat when an additional coat will not cause detrimental film irregularities such as lifting wrinkling or loss of adhesion of the undercoat .
do not exceed the following time intervals .
if the prime coat is organic zinc the maximum time between the prime and intermediate coats is num days .
there is no maximum time between the prime and intermediate coats for an inorganic zinc primer .
the maximum time interval between intermediate and finish coats is num days .
these maximum recoat times include adverse weather days and the engineer will not extend the times .
if the next coating is not applied within the times stated above remove the coatings and reblast the steel according to sspcsp num .
if requested by the engineer perform one or both of the following test to determine the hardness and or the adhesion of an individual coating or the coating system num .
determine the hardness of an individual coat or the coating system by performing a pencil hardness test according to astm d num .
meet or exceed scale of hardness hb for the coating .
num .
perform adhesion testing according to astm d num type num .
meet or exceed num psi adhesion between coats or between the paint system and the substrate or num psi cohesion within paint coats .
stencil the completion date month and year of the finish coat and the letters of the applied paint system on the steel in num inch num mm letters with black urethane paint .
the appropriate letters for the paint systems are as follows system comprised of letters inorganic zinc prime coat epoxy intermediate coat and urethane finish coat izeu organic zinc prime coat epoxy intermediate coat and urethane finish coat ozeu apply the date and paint system at four locations near the end of each outside beam on the outside web visible from the road or as directed by the engineer .
num removing fins tears or slivers qcp num .
use a grinder to remove all fins tears slivers or any other burred or sharp edges that become evident after applying the prime coat .
retexture ground surfaces to produce a profile from num to num mils num to num m and reprime ground surfaces before applying the intermediate coat .
the contractor may begin removing fins tears and slivers after blasting and before priming .
temperature and weather restrictions do not apply to removing fins tears and slivers but do to applying the prime coat .
num caulking qcp num .
after the intermediate coat cures and before applying the finish coat caulk gaps or crevices up to num inch num mm wide .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for curing before applying the finish coat .
num dry film thickness qcp num num and num .
determine prime coat thickness prime and intermediate coat thickness and prime intermediate and finish coat thickness using a type num magnetic gage as follows measure paint thickness at separate evenly spaced spot measurement locations over each numsquare feet num m of area of structural steel .
locate five spot measurements on each of the following locations top flanges bottom flanges webs cross bracing stiffeners etc .
at each spot location take three gage readings of either the substrate or the paint .
move the probe num to num inches num to num mm for each new gage reading .
discard an unusually high or low gage reading that is not consistently repeated .
the spot thickness measurement is the average of the three gage readings .
the average of five spot measurements for each location in the numsquare foot num m area shall not be less than the specified thickness .
no single spot measurement area shall be less than num percent of the specified minimum thickness nor greater than num percent of the maximum specified thickness when organic zinc is applied and num percent of the maximum specified thickness when inorganic zinc is applied .
any one of three readings which are averaged to produce each spot measurement may under run or overrun by a greater amount .
take five spot measurements per location for each numsquare foot num m area as follows a .
for all shop painted steel regardless of size randomly select and then measure one numsquare foot num mnum area within each num square foot num m unit of surface area that is painted .
b .
for structures not exceeding num square feet num m in area measure each numsquare foot num m area .
c. for structures not exceeding num square feet num m in area randomly select and then measure three num square foot num m areas .
d. for structures exceeding num square feet num m in area measure the first num square feet num m as stated in section c and for each additional num square feet num m or increment thereof randomly select and then measure one numsquare foot num m area .
e. if the dry film thickness for any numsquare foot num m area sections c and d is not in compliance with the requirements of this subsection then measure each numsquare foot num m area .
f. measure other areas or revise the number of spot measurements as shown on the plans .
each coat of paint shall have the following thickness measured above the peaks min .
spec .
thickness max .
spec .
thickness min .
spot thickness max .
spot thickness inorganic zn max .
spot thickness organic zn prime num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m intermediate num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m subtotal num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m finish num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m total num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m num mils num m remove paint with a film thickness greater than the maximum specified thickness unless the paint does not exhibit defects such as runs sags bubbles or mud cracking etc .
the manufacturer provides a written statement to the engineer that the excessive thickness is not detrimental .
for any spot or average of five spots at any location of a numsquare foot num m area that exceeds the maximum spot thickness either remove and replace the coating according to num or prove to the office of construction administration that the excess thickness will not be detrimental to the coating system .
in order to prove to the office of construction administration that the excess thickness will not be detrimental to the coating system the contractor must provide the office of construction administration with the following information .
certified test data proving that the excessive thickness will adequately bond to the steel when subjected to thermal expansion and contraction .
the thermal expansion and contraction test shall take place over five cycles of a temperature range from num to num f num to num c. after the thermal contraction and expansion cycles have taken place the tested system shall be subjected to pull off tests and the results compared to the results of pull off tests that have been performed on a paint system with the proper thicknesses .
perform the adhesion tests according to astm d num type iv .
document the preparation methods for the panels including profile and level of cleanliness .
document the application methods conditions and if any thinner percentage was used .
test the panels according to the following num .
lightly sand the coating surface and aluminum dolly and apply a quick set adhesive .
document the type of adhesive .
num .
allow adhesive to cure overnight .
num .
scribe the coating and adhesive around the dolly before testing .
num .
make a minimum of num trials to failure and report the num trials .
reject trial if fracture occurs at the primer substrate interface or pressure at failure is less than num pounds per square inch num mpa .
a .
describe the test specimen as substrate a upon which successive coating layers b c d etc .
have been applied including the adhesive y which secures the dolly z to the topcoat .
b .
designate cohesive failures by the layers within which they occur as b c etc .
and the percent of each .
c. designate adhesive failures by the interfaces at which they occur as ab bc cd etc and the percent of each .
in addition to the certified test results the contractor shall provide the office of construction administration a written statement from the paint manufacturer stating that the excessive thickness is not detrimental .
if the office of construction administration does not approve the excessive coating thicknesses or the contractor elects not to provide the required written statement from the paint manufacturer and the certified test results when required the contractor shall remove and replace the coating .
the removal and replacement of the coating shall be done as specified in num .
num final inspection a .
the engineer will select locations for coating removal for inspection of surface preparation and dry film thickness .
for all structures in which the supporting members are rolled beams or girders remove a minimum of one location per num linear feet num m of beam line for webs and flanges and num percent of all cross frame assemblies and other secondary structural members shall be selected for destructive testing .
for all other bridge types with structural steel remove one location for every num square feet num m of steel surface for destructive testing .
do not perform destructive testing on areas that have been painted with an inorganic zinc prime coat .
b .
at the selected areas the engineer will perform total dry film thickness testing using a type num magnetic gage .
if the dry film thickness for that spot does not meet the requirements of num additional measurements will be taken to determine the extent of the deficient coatings .
c. at the selected areas where an organic zinc prime coat has been applied remove at least num square inches num cm of the new coatings by methods that will not damage the surface of the steel .
approved removal methods are scraping sanding or the use of solvents .
do not use power tools .
perform removal while in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer will document and photograph the selected areas after removal of the new coatings .
if work is found not to be in conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract documents additional locations may be selected for testing .
d. make repairs of areas where the coatings were removed and other areas that were determined to be deficient .
make repairs according to num .
if the final destructive testing according to num.c reveals greater than num percent of the areas inspected are not in complete conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract documents the department will require that surface preparation and painting of the structural steel be completely redone to meet the requirements of the contract documents at no additional cost to the department .
e. final acceptance shall be based upon the results of the surface preparation observations and dry film thickness measurements obtained from the final inspection .
final acceptance will also take into consideration acceptable progressive project documentation and progressive field measurements in determining the final acceptability of the bridge paint system .
inspection access to the test locations to perform the required final inspection measurements shall conform to the requirements of num .
num repair procedures .
remove paint and correct defects or damaged areas including areas damaged by welding and in areas that do not comply with the requirements of this specification .
correct defects and damaged areas using the same paint as originally applied except the engineer may approve using organic zinc to repair inorganic zinc in the field .
retexture the steel to a near white condition and a profile between num to num mils num to num m .
measure the profile immediately before applying the prime coat to ensure the profile is not destroyed during the feathering procedure .
see num.c .
feather the existing paint to expose a minimum of num inch num mm of each coat .
during the reapplication of the paint apply paint as follows a .
apply the prime coat only to the surface of the bare steel and the existing prime coat exposed by feathering .
do not apply the prime coat to the adjacent intermediate coat .
b .
apply the intermediate coat only to the new prime coat and the existing intermediate coat exposed by feathering .
do not apply the intermediate coat to the adjacent finish coat .
c. apply the finish coat only to the new intermediate coat and the existing finish coat that was feathered or lightly sanded .
do not apply the finish coat beyond areas that were feathered or lightly sanded .
at the perimeter of the repair area apply the prime and intermediate coats using a brush .
apply the finish coat using either brush or spray .
the contractor may need to apply several applications to obtain the proper thickness for each coat .
during the application of the prime coat the paint shall be continuously mixed .
perform all surface preparation and painting according to this specification .
instead of abrasive blasting the engineer may allow alternate methods of preparing the surface .
blend repair areas with the adjacent coating and provide a finished surface in the patched areas that is smooth and has an even profile with the adjacent surface .
submit in writing the method of correcting areas with runs to the office of construction administration for approval .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure surface preparation of existing structural steel and field painting of existing structural steel prime coat by the number of square feet square meters of structural steel painted or on a lump sum basis .
the department will measure field painting structural steel intermediate coat and field .
painting structural steel finish coat by the number of square feet square meters or pounds kilograms of structural steel painted or on a lump sum basis .
the department will determine the number of pounds kilograms of new structural steel painted by the accepted pay weight of the new structural steel .
for steel beam and steel girder bridges the department will determine the surface area by taking a nominal measurement of the beams i.e .
two times the beam depth plus three times the flange width .
in addition to this nominal measurement the department will add a percentage to account for incidentals such as cross frames bearing assemblies stiffeners expansion joints scuppers etc .
it is not necessary for the engineer or inspector to field measure every detail of the bridge to verify quantities .
if there is a quantity dispute exact field measurements of all painted surfaces and calculations will govern over the above percentage to account for incidentals .
for extremely complex bridges such as trusses the department will pay for painting on a lump sum basis .
the department will measure grinding fins tears slivers on existing structural steel by the number of man hours expended by the workers actually doing the grinding and will include the time when the workers are performing grinding and repairing prime coat and not limited to only the actual grinding duration i.e .
the department will include all hours of the workers when assigned to grinding regardless of actual grinding time .
the department will not measure grinding fins tears and slivers on new steel but will consider it incidental to unit price for the new steel .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows the department may consider paint as eligible for payment for material onhand as specified in num however only paint that the contractor can prove to the engineer will be used during the construction season is eligible for payment .
the contractor shall provide the engineer calculations indicating the total square feet square meter of steel to be painted during the construction season .
the contractor shall also provide calculations showing the total number of gallons liters required .
if the contractor causes damage or injury to public or private property the department will not pay for restoring the property to its original condition .
the department will not pay for repairing adjacent coatings damaged during the blasting operation .
the department will not pay for removing and replacing an area of coating because a spot or maximum average thickness exceeds the maximum spot thickness .
the department will not pay for additional testing required by any hauler treatment facility disposal facility or landfill .
the department will pay for caulking under field painting structural steel intermediate coat .
the department will pay for final inspection access test area preparation and test area repair at each selected area under final inspection repair .
the department will not pay for accessing inspecting and repairing areas that are not found to be in conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract documents .
all other requirements of this specification are considered incidental to the work .
item unit description num square foot surface preparation of existing structural steel square meter lump sum num square foot field painting of existing structural steel prime coat square meter lump sum num square foot field painting structural steel intermediate coat square meter lump sum pound kilogram num square foot field painting structural steel finish coat square meter lump sum pound kilogram num man hour grinding fins tears slivers on existing structural steel num each final inspection repair num square foot shop painting and field touchup of structural steel square meter lump sum pound kilogram item num prestressed concrete bridge members num description num fabricator approval procedure num levels of fabricator qualification num general num fabricator documentation responsibility num shop drawings num prefabrication meeting num materials num materials approval num casting beds num weather conditions during production num equipment num inspection facilities num construction methods num concrete num release of prestressing strands num fabrication tolerances num prestressed member acceptance and repair num handling storage transportation and erection num safety requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing shop drawings furnishing and manufacturing prestressed concrete bridge members testing fabricator performed quality control documentation shop coating and handling transporting storing and erecting prestressed concrete bridge members .
prepare shop drawings and erect prestressed concrete bridge members according to item num and the additional requirements specified below .
shop coating shall conform to item num .
num fabricator approval procedure .
select fabricators that are prequalified and evaluated by the office of materials management omm according to supplement num and listed by the department before the contract letting date .
num levels of fabricator qualification .
there are three levels of fabricator qualification .
the omm will classify each fabricator at the highest level of fabrication it is qualified to perform .
level description of capabilities num straight strand prestressed box beam members num straight strand prestressed ibeam members num draped strand prestressed ibeam members num general .
produce all members according to item num except as otherwise specified herein .
num fabricator documentation responsibility .
the fabricator shall keep and maintain records for each project bid line number concerning a. fabricator plant approval .
b .
shop drawing approval .
c. material test reports .
d. welding qualifications .
e. quality control plan qcp according to supplement num .
the fabricator shall provide access to the above records for audit inspection and copying .
provide a copy of the complete records at the completion and final shipment of the work .
the fabricator shall retain all documentation for at least num years from the date of final shipment from the fabrication shop .
the fabricator shall document all quality control qc activities to verify the fabrication conforms to the specification requirements .
qc activities include material quality checks dimensional checks weld inspections strand tensioning procedures release procedures postpour inspections concrete strengths at release of strand and final strength of concrete before shipment cleaning operations coating applications final qc inspections repairs and all other qc procedures required to provide a prestress concrete member conforming to the specifications .
supplement num defines the quality control plan evaluation process and quality control plan enhancement process the department will perform a quality assurance qa evaluation of the fabricators quality control performance using forms in supplement num and will include both validation of the fabricators actual records of inspection and department inspection .
num shop drawings .
provide shop drawings conforming to num and the following requirements .
include all details dimensions dimensional tolerances and size of materials lifting devices inserts reinforcing steel supports fabricator incorporated reinforcing piece mark diagrams for field connection and erection of any steel and all prestress members and all other information necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the prestressed members .
show all items that will be incorporated into each prestressed member .
provide the detensioning procedure and pattern conforming to num .
num prefabrication meeting .
at least num days after the department receives shop drawings conduct a prefabrication meeting at the fabricators facilities or another location agreed to by all parties .
as part of the prefabrication meeting request provide a initial fabrication schedule for the prestressed beam project including a .
start date for fabrication of the project b .
expected phasing of fabrication if any c. number of workdays for the project and length of work day d. quality control final inspection date the fabricators production manager quality control specialists qcs for the project the departments inspector and the contractor or its designated representative shall attend the meeting .
the meeting is to review fabrication issues including information on shop drawings previous qcqa inspection issues qc and quality assurance inspection hold points unique and special fabrication items and special processes .
the qcs will conduct the meeting and record and distribute meeting minutes that document all issues discusses .
begin fabrication when all meeting issues have been resolved .
office of material management may waive the prefabrication meeting if accepted by the fabricator and the contractor .
if contractor submitted shop drawings do not comply with the requirements of num no pre fabrication meeting can be scheduled or waived .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to reinforcing steel num concrete num portland cement num thru num aggregate num airentraining admixture num chemical admixtures for concrete num prestressing steel num transverse tie rods num welded wire reinforcement num for fine aggregate use natural sand for members without a separate wearing course .
modify coarse aggregate as follows do not allow more than num percent deleterious materials .
for gradation use no .
num num num num num or num size coarse aggregate .
num materials approval .
the fabricator shall control test and validate material requirements for all materials either incorporated into the prestressed fabricated item or supplied under item num as component parts to the fabricated items .
the fabricator shall provide supplement num documentation to the inspector at the time of final inspection .
the department will not sample materials at the fabricators shop for department approval .
the department will randomly sample materials to verify the fabricators performance .
num casting beds .
use steel or concrete casting beds set above grade to ensure the beds remain above the accumulation of water resulting from production and curing operations .
design beds and abutments capable of safely resisting all forces applied to them without appreciable movement or deflection .
these forces include compression and eccentric forces due to endjacking operations forces at hold down points when draped strands are used and downward forces due to the dead weight of the members .
num weather conditions during production .
make temperature change adjustments to initial strand tensioning according to pci quality control manual mnl num .
a .
cold weather .
conform to the requirements of this subsection if the ambient air temperature is below num f num c. heat mixing water aggregates or both as necessary to produce a concrete temperatures from num to num f num to num c when placed .
do not allow water heated above num f num c to directly contact the cement .
do not place concrete against forms reinforcing steel prestressing strand or other hardware materials with a temperatures below num f num c. immediately prior to final stressing obtain the temperature correction factor for prestressing strands using a thermometer that has been calibrated against a nisttraceable thermometer .
define the frequency location and thermometer in the quality control plan .
do not place concrete when the ambient temperature with sustained wind chill factor at the point of concrete placement is below num f num c. b .
hot weather .
if the ambient temperature is above num f num c cool the mixing water aggregates or both as necessary to produce a concrete temperature from num to num f num to num c. do not place concrete against forms mild reinforcing steel prestressing strand or other hardware materials with a temperature greater than num f num c. water fog spray forms mild reinforcing steel and strand just prior to placing the concrete .
cover beams immediately after casting to prevent surface drying .
do not place concrete when the ambient temperature at the point of concrete placement is above num f num c. c. inclement weather .
if a rainfall event begins after placement of concrete in the forms has begun provide cover and complete only the beam that had concrete in it when the rain began .
provide immediate cover over previously poured concrete not yet cured .
resumption of concrete placement is permitted after the rainfall stops .
num equipment .
provide hydraulic jacks of sufficient capacity and stroke to tension strands .
use either single or multiple strand tensioning .
provide tensioning jacks equipped with automatic cutoff valves and equipped with num inch num mm minimum diameter gages that provide readings at numpound num kn increments .
calibrate gages for the jacks with which they are to be used .
have a graph or table showing the calibration available for the inspector .
calibrate jacks according to a method acceptable to the laboratory at least every num months or as required by the director .
maintain calibration documentation as part of the projects qc inspection records .
design the jacking system to ensure uniform stress in all strands .
if simultaneously tensioning multiple strands use approved types of dynamometers to equalize the initial stress on all strands before applying the full tensioning load with the master jack provide dynamometers with sufficient capacity to ensure that the desired readings are in the middle to upper range .
num inspection facilities .
the fabricator shall provide the inspector office accommodations conforming to the following requirements a .
minimum floor area of num square feet num mnum .
b .
minimum ceiling height of num feet num m. c. adequate working and storage facilities work space lighting electrical outlets lockable files or cabinets with key .
d. heating and cooling capable of maintaining an ambient air temperature between num f num c and num f num c. e. secure internet access .
num construction methods .
use metal forms capable of producing members within the tolerances shown on the plans .
forms made of material other than metal may be used for bulkheads and voids and may be used for a single project for prestressed members requiring nonstandard forms .
ensure that the surfaces of the forms in contact with the concrete are smooth and the joints between panels are tight .
the soffit form shall have a plane surface at right angles to the vertical axis of the members and have the two bottom edges beveled num inch num mm with a triangular strip built into the forms .
increase the length of the forms for elastic shortening and normal concrete shrinkage and design the forms to accommodate this movement .
provide waterresistant formwork for box beam voids constructed of a material that resists breakage and deformation during placement of concrete .
provide form material that does not excessively increase the dead load of the beams .
prevent the release agent from contacting the prestressing strands or reinforcing steel .
install and assemble reinforcing steel according to the approved shop drawings .
if authorized weld reinforcing cages using welders qualified to aws dnum .
do not weld epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcing steel unless approved by office of material management .
repair all coating areas damaged by welding according to the coating manufacturers instructions .
reject reinforcing steel with a loss of crosssection of reinforcing caused by welding .
provide a protective covering for the prestressed steel from the elements until the strand is pulled into the bed .
accurately place strands in the positions shown on the shop drawings .
do not use strands with kinks bends nicks broken wires scale loose rust or other defects .
the fabricator may use slightly rusted reinforcing steel provided the rust is not sufficient to cause visible pits .
before placing the concrete carefully clean the strands of all dirt grease oil or other foreign matters .
do not splice strands within a member .
tension strands uniformly to the stress indicated on the shop drawings .
if multiple stands are stressed simultaneously use dynamometers to equalize the initial stress on all strands before applying full tension load with master jack .
measure the required stress in the strands using the calibrated jacking equipment gages and check the measured stress by the elongation of the strands .
if the stress from the gages and the measured elongation are not within a num percent tolerance of the design stop stressing the strands and determine the reason for the differences .
the quality control specialist shall keep a record of the jacking forces and elongations of all strands .
secure the strands by suitable anchorage devices capable of developing at least num percent of the ultimate strength of the strands .
the anchorage shall not allow the strand to slip after the tensioning operation .
if using draped strands the loss of stress due to friction shall not exceed num percent .
tension the strands at both ends .
the quality control specialist shall measure the loss due to friction by a procedure approved by the office of material management .
place holddown points within num inches num mm of the locations shown on shop drawings and within num inches num m of the locations shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown in the plans do not install inserts or holes in the beam web within a distance of num times the beam height from the end of the beam .
num concrete .
the fabricator shall provide concrete mix designs to office of material management .
the submittal will include a .
test data showing the mix achieves the required numday strength when cured by methods used for member fabrication .
the strength of the concrete for the mix design approval and during production is determined using sets of two num numinch cylinders or three num numinch cylinders .
b. wc ratio maximum num c. a design and maximum slump d. test data showing the mix design achieves num coulombs or less at num days when tested according to aashto tnum .
use samples for the test that were mixed without corrosion inhibitors and that were cured with the same methods that will be used to produce the prestressed concrete bridge members .
do not apply additional cure to samples that have reached the required design strength .
changes in proportioning cement pozzolans or aggregate will require retesting and resubmittal .
office of materials management may waive the retests .
provide the waiver request in writing and include all information for the new mix design and a comparison to the previously tested and approved mix designs .
deliver concrete according to item num except that num and num does not apply .
the plastic air content of the concrete before placement shall be num num percent .
if the department questions the concretes placed air content obtain cores from the prestressed member and have hardened air testing performed by an independent testing lab acceptable to the department .
beams with hardened air contents below num percent will be rejected .
add an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture at the approved dosage and document the dosage that has been incorporated into each batch of concrete .
maintain the mix design slump during production .
segregation of the mix is not acceptable .
do not exceed the maximum watercement ratio during concrete production .
when using admixtures to increase the slump use type f or g as described in num .
do not use calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride .
sample and test the concrete for prestressed concrete members as specified below test specimen requirements cubic yards per bed sampling frequency number of cylinders required less than or equal to num cubic yards first and last load per bed minimum of num num to num cubic yards first and last load per bed plus one random sample .
minimum of num greater than num cubic yards first and last load per bed plus num random samples .
minimum of num determine strength for both strand release and final shipping by testing a group of cylinders which consists of one cylinder from every sample location .
each group of cylinders shall have an average strength of what is specified in the shop drawings and no individual cylinder shall have less than num percent of the specified strength .
the inspector may require additional cylinders from locations were the concrete does not conform to mix design or placement requirements .
include these additional cylinders in the group of cylinders for determining release and final strength .
the fabricator may place concrete in the bottom flange of a box beam before placing the interior forms and reinforcement for the upper portion of the member provided continuous concrete placement is not interrupted for more than num minutes .
screed the top surfaces of noncomposite members and finish the surface with a burlap drag or other means to provide a uniform surface with a gritty texture suitable for waterproofing .
screed the top surface of composite members and finish the surface with a wire broom in a transverse direction and penetrating the finished surface approximately num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm at a maximum spacing of num num inches num mm .
immediately after final concrete placement and surface finishing protect the concrete surface with a suitable enclosure until application of live steam or radiant heat .
assure the enclosures ambient temperature is at least num f num c. assure the plastic concretes temperature before initial set doesnt rise more than num f num c per hour .
limit the total rise before initial set to less than num f num c and the maximum temperature to num f num c. record the times and concrete temperatures before initial set .
for curing with lowpressure steam do not apply live steam directly onto the concrete forms if it causes localized high temperatures .
for accelerated curing with radiant heat apply radiant heat using pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water or using electric heating elements .
minimize moisture loss by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting num or by applying a liquid membrane curing compound num to all exposed concrete surfaces .
before bonding fieldcast concrete or other materials in the finished structure remove the curing compound from the shear faces of composite members and other surfaces .
start initial application of the steam or heat num to num hours after final concrete placement .
if using retarders start applying the steam or heat num to num hours after final concrete placement .
if determining the time of initial set according to astm c num these time limits do not apply .
record and report the actual time of concrete placement of the last load placement of enclosure and initial set time .
apply live steam or radiant heat so the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure does not gain more than num f num c per hour until reaching the curing temperature .
do not exceed num f num c. only use a maximum temperature of num f num c if the fabricator documents to the department that delayed ettringite or alkali silica reaction is not at issue .
maintain the maximum curing temperature until the concrete has reached the required release strength .
detension the strands immediately upon completing the accelerated curing .
keep a record of the time the application of heat began and curing temperatures throughout the entire curing process .
neatly fill cavities in the exposed surface of beams with nonshrink grout .
clean the concrete and apply and cure the grout according to the manufacturers published recommendations .
reject beams with honeycombing that impairs the members performance .
num release of prestressing strands .
do not release prestressed strands until the concrete reaches a minimum strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa or plan defined release strength .
determine strength of concrete by testing cylinders produced according to aashto t num and cured in the same method as the member .
test cylinders in the fabricators laboratory .
assure all tested cylinders obtain the required strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa or the plan defined release strength .
provide the department the ability to witness the cylinder testing by notifying the inspector before testing .
before releasing prestressed strands loosen or remove forms and holddowns and all other attachments restricting either horizontal or vertical movement of prestressed members .
release the strands immediately upon completing accelerated curing .
heat release and burn the strands simultaneously between each beam and at all exposed points between anchorages and follow an approved predetermined pattern to equalize the forces being transferred to the various areas of the crosssection of the member .
submit any alternative strand release plans during the prefabrication meeting to omm for approval .
for heat release use a lowoxygen flame to uniformly heat at least a num inch num mm long section of strand before completely cutting the strand .
num fabrication tolerances .
construct all members to conform to the following tolerances .
beam dimensional tolerances description box beam i beam length of beam num per num ft num mmm max num num mm num per num ft num mmm max num num mm depth of beam num num mm num num mm num num mm depth of i beam flange including fillets na num num mm beam boxflange i width num num mm num num mm num num mm flange thickness excluding fillets a top num num num mm num num mm b bottom num num mm num num mm num num mm width web na num num mm num num mm width beam walls num num mm num num mm na width of void num num mm na height of void num num mm na box beam diaphragm spacing num num mm na deviation from true vertical num num mm num per ft num mm per m deviation from skew angle num num mm num num mm beam accessory tolerances description box beam i beam position of railing anchors num num mm na position of lifting devices num num mm num num mm positions of anchor dowels and tie rods inserts num num mm num num mm deviation from skew angle num num mm num num mm beam strand tolerances description box beam i beam strand tendon position num num mm num num mm strand cg position num num mm num num mm reinforcing steel tolerances description box beam i beam clear cover num num num mm num num num mm splice lengths num num num mm num num num mm stirrup spacing in anchorage zone num num mm num num mm stirrup spacing outside anchorage zone num num mm num num mm stirrup extension above top flange num num mm num num mm num num num mm reinforcement extension beyond beam end num num mm num num num mm num beam sweep and camber tolerances description box beam i beam horizontal sweep num per num ft num mmm max num num mm num per num ft num mmm max num num mm max gap between beam num num mm na deviation from design camber dt num sacrificial haunch num or num per num ft num mmm max num num mm sacrificial haunch num or variation in camber between beams in same span max num num mm na num design camber dt calculated in accordance with num num unless otherwise noted sacrificial haunch thickness is num num prestressed member acceptance and repair .
throughout the fabrication process reject all prestressed members not meeting specification requirements .
for all rejected members provide the department with a complete description of the rejection and unless waived by the director an ohio registered professional engineers written evaluation of the criticalness of the rejection and the professional engineers proposed repair method that will repair the rejected member to an acceptable condition .
the department will determine the acceptability of the member and the repair procedure .
if acceptable the fabricator will only make repairs witnessed by the departments inspector unless waived by director .
use the precastprestress concrete institutes manual for the evaluation and repair of precast prestressed concrete bridge products mnlnum as a general guide .
the department will not accept for shipping prestressed members with measured camber exceeding the design camber dt used to establish the seat elevations according to num by more than the sacrificial haunch thickness until a corrective work plan has been approved by the engineer .
the plan shall be signed sealed and dated by an ohio registered engineer and shall include all revised plan information necessary to place the deck to the plan thickness .
if the prestressed members are acceptable exclusive of the deviation from design camber the department will pay for all costs incurred resulting from measured camber exceeding design camber calculated for the actual beam age at the time of deck placement as extra work num .
num handling storage transportation and erection .
handle store transport and erect the members in an upright position .
the direction of support reactions during storage and transportation shall be the same as the member will experience in its inservice position .
do not ship prestressed members until the concrete obtains its numday design strength and the inspectors approval .
provide at least num inches num mm horizontally between each beam for inspection .
provide at least num inches num mm of vertical clearance from the bottom .
use storage support locations as close as practical to the inservice support locations .
during storage provide unyielding horizontal supports and bracing capable of maintaining the members in a vertical position .
transportation support locations shall be the sole responsibility of the fabricator with respect to member stresses and safe delivery to the job site .
obtain the directors written approval to transport the members in a position other than vertical .
provide lifting devices capable of withstanding the required loads to lift and erect the members .
during erection accurately place the prestressed beams on their bearings to ensure a uniform load on all bearings .
when shifting a member lift the member up completely off of its bearings .
temporarily brace the first ibeam erected to its substructure support units in the vertical position before releasing the beam from the crane .
tie each subsequent i beam to the previously braced beams .
provide bracing after erection adequate to prevent sliding tipping or other movement that may result from high winds creeping down the grade or other causes until placement of the diaphragms .
within any one day erect and brace at least num adjacent members in any one span before suspending operations for the day .
place box beams to ensure a correct fit of the keyways and to ensure proper grouting of the keyways .
after placing the beams and installing tie devices fill the longitudinal keyways using nonshrink keyway grouts num approved by omm .
mix install and cure the grout according to the manufacturers published recommendations to obtain a design compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa .
do not allow vehicular load on an individual prestressed concrete box beam until the grout in the keyway obtains the specified design strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa .
at the directors discretion repair or replace members damaged by improper handling storage transportation or erection .
num safety requirements .
provide effective safety measures to prevent injuries to personnel due to breakage of strands or failure of anchorage devices during the tensioning operations .
provide adequate protection and assure the omm inspector can perform inspection of beams and manufacturing processes .
the department inspector will report any inadequate safety precautions to the plant qcs and to omm if fabricator remedial action is not taken .
omm inspectors will follow safety rules established by the fabricator at a minimum .
where fabricator safety rules interfere with the inspectors duties the process should be altered to allow the inspections to be performed while maintaining the required level of safety .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure prestressed concrete bridge members by the number of members .
the department will measure the intermediate diaphragms by the number of each placed .
num basis of payment .
payment for prestressed concrete beams include all inserts sleeves fittings reinforcing steel fully or partially encased in the members threaded rods embedded inserts embedded bearing sole plates temporary bracing fixed anchor dowels and all transverse tie rods necessary to complete this work .
the department will consider all costs associated with all structural steel including bolts nuts washers and plate washers for steel intermediate diaphragms as well as concrete and reinforcing steel for castinplace concrete intermediate diaphragms as incidental to the intermediate diaphragms .
the department will pay for expansion joint end diaphragms semiintegral diaphragms pier diaphragms bearing load plates bearing pads and other expansion materials separately .
the department will not pay for repaired or replaced members damaged by improper handling storing transporting or erecting .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each prestressed concrete non composite box beam bridge members level num num each prestressed concrete composite box beam bridge members level num num each straight strand prestressed concrete bridge ibeam members level num num each draped strand prestressed concrete bridge ibeam members level num num each intermediate diaphragms item num expansion and contraction joints joint sealers and bearing devices num description num fabrication num coating num materials num expansion and contraction joints num joint sealers num bearing devices num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of fabricating assembling constructing coating and installing expansion and contraction joints vertical extension of structural expansion joints joint sealers or bearing devices of the type and size specified .
num fabrication .
fabricate metal joint armor and metal bearings according to items num .
select a fabricator that is at least prequalified at level sf .
the department will base final acceptance of fabricated members on the engineers approval that the fabricated items that can be successfully incorporated into the structures .
submit mill test reports for structural steel steel castings bronze and sheet lead certified according to num .
num coating .
coat exposed steel bearings according to items num and num that are to be attached to structural steel .
galvanize bearings according to num that are to be attached to concrete beams .
coat metal parts of expansion joints with metalized num percent zinc wire .
prepare the surface to be coated and apply coating as required by the society of protective coatings sspccsnum .
apply coating to a minimum thickness of num mils .
repair metalized coatings damaged during fabrication by removal of the damaged coating and reapplication as specified above .
repair metalized or galvanized coatings damaged during shipping construction or field welding according to num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to structural steel num bearing bolts and anchor rods num painting num joint sealer hot applied num preformed elastomeric compression stager num neoprene sheeting num steel castings num sheet copper num bronze num num num sheet lead .
num preformed bearing pads num elastomeric bearings num preformed fillers num swedged anchor bolts or bars num nonshrinknonmetallic grout num fabricated by deforming a minimum of num percent of the embedded bolt surface with deformations whose radial dimensions are num to num percent of the bar diameter .
num expansion and contraction joints .
ensure that expansion joints are completely open for the dimension specified for their full length .
remove stones forms or other materials that interfere with expansion .
finish the surface adjacent to preformed expansion joints to a smooth uniform surface .
use methods that do not interfere with the free compression of the joint material to anchor the expansion joint materials .
the joint material shall neatly fill the space and have a uniform thickness for the full extent of the joint .
for integral and semiintegral abutment expansion joint seals install a num foot wide neoprene sheet for waterproofing of the backside of the joint between the integral backwall and the bridge seat at locations shown in the plans .
secure the neoprene sheeting to the concrete with num num inch by num gage length shank diameter galvanized button head spikes through a num inch outside diameter num gage galvanized washer .
maximum fastener spacing is num inches .
use of other similar galvanized devices which will not damage either the neoprene or the concrete will be subject to the approval of the engineer .
center the neoprene strips on all joints .
for horizontal joints secure the horizontal neoprene strip by using a single line of fasteners starting at approximately num inches from the top of the neoprene strip .
for the vertical joints secure the vertical neoprene strip by using a single vertical line of fasteners starting at approximately num inches from the vertical edge of the neoprene strip nearest to the centerline of roadway .
for vertical joints install two additional fasteners at num inches center to center across the top of the neoprene strip on the same side of the vertical joint as the single vertical row of fasteners is located .
the vertical neoprene strips shall completely overlap the horizontal strips .
lap lengths of the horizontal strips that are not vulcanized or adhesive bonded shall be at least num foot in length or num inches in length if the lap is vulcanized or adhesive bonded .
no laps are acceptable in vertically installed neoprene strips .
the neoprene sheeting shall be num inch thick general purpose heavyduty neoprene sheet with nylon fabric reinforcement .
num joint sealers .
before applying joint sealer to the surface clean the concrete of foreign matter curing compounds oil grease dirt free water and laitance and clean steel by sand blasting .
apply joint sealer with a minimum depth of num inch num mm at its thinnest section .
fill joints to within num inch num mm of the roadway surface .
separate joint sealer from contact with asphalt concrete using a barrier of foil or other material that is impervious to the joint sealer .
as required to prevent bonding of the joint sealer with a joint surface place a suitable bond breaker barrier before applying the joint sealer .
remove joint sealer that did not bond to the joint face as intended within num hours after placing .
clean the joint by sandblasting and reseal the joint .
mix and place joint sealer according to the manufacturers instructions .
provide the engineer with a copy of the manufacturers instructions .
protect joint sealer with an impervious masking tape during the application of concrete protective coatings containing mineral spirits .
num bearing devices .
for sliding plates lubricate the sliding surfaces with flake graphite and superimpose plates on each other with their edges flush .
install each bridge bearing to within num inch of its marked centerlines in the horizontal plane and oriented to within an angular tolerance of num rad .
num degree .
accurately set level and align elastomeric bearings bearing plates and bolsters .
set bearing plates and bolsters on num inch num mm thick sheet lead conforming to num .
set bearing plates or bolsters on bridge seat areas that are flat and smoothly finished .
if the bridge seat area is high or uneven use a bushhammer or grinder followed by thin film of portland cement mortar or paste to fill the pitted surface to bring the seat area to the proper elevation and provide a level even surface .
if the bridge seat area is low use steel plate shims of the same bearing area as the bearing plates and bolsters to bring the seat area to the proper elevation .
set elastomeric bearing pads directly on the concrete surface .
if the beams seats are sealed with an epoxy or non epoxy sealer prior to setting the bearings do not apply sealer to the concrete surfaces under the proposed bearing locations .
if these locations are sealed or membrane cured remove the sealer or membrane cure to the satisfaction of the engineer before setting the bearings .
perform this removal at no expense to the department .
position rockers elastomeric bearings and rollers so that when the completed bridge is at num f num c the rockers and elastomeric bearings are vertical and the rollers are centered on the base .
if the steel is erected at an ambient temperature higher than num f or lower than num f and the bearing shear deflection exceeds num of the bearing height at num f num f raise the beams or girders to allow the elastomeric bearings to return to their undeformed shape at num f num f .
set anchor bolts for bearing devices that are clear of the beam or girder flanges in the concrete after erecting the main structural steel except as specified below for bearing devices at abutments .
place reinforcing steel in the bridge seat to not interfere with the drilling of anchor holes .
accurately set anchor bolts in the holes and embed the anchor bolts in nonshrink nonmetallic grout .
until the anchors are installed prevent water from entering and or freezing in the anchor bolt holes .
if structural steel interferes with the setting of the anchor bolts set the anchor bolts before erecting the steel .
the contractor may determine the location of the bolts by using a template and form holes or embed the bolts when placing concrete or drilling holes in the hardened concrete .
install anchor bolts to project at least num inch nummm beyond the nut when tightened .
damage or burr the threads on the projecting end of the bolt after the nut is tightened .
the bolt threads shall not extend to the planes of the contact surfaces between the connected parts .
include the length of two additional threads to the specified thread length of the bolt to allow for thread runout .
washers no thicker than num inch nummm are permitted under the nut .
permanently fasten bearing devices to the abutments steel beams or girders after backfilling the abutments to within num feet num m of the top of the bridge seat .
where the load plate of an elastomeric bearing is to be connected to the structure by welding control the welding so that the plate temperature at the elastomer bonded surface does not exceed num f as determined by use of pyrometric sticks or other temperature monitoring devices .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the specified items by the number of each square feet square meters pounds kilograms or feet meters horizontally along the joint centerline and between the outer limits of the fabricated joint .
for deck resurfacing the department will measure structural steel expansion joints extending vertically by the actual horizontal length of joint .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot or pound structural steel expansion joints meter or kilogram num foot meter structural expansion joints including elastomeric ___ seals num foot meter elastomeric compression seals for structural steel joints ___ width num foot meter folder copper strip ___ num foot meter vertical extension of structural expansion joints num square foot ___ preformed expansion joint filler square meter num foot meter joint sealer num each foot bearing devices square foot pound meter square meter kilogram num each square foot ___ inch ___ mm elastomeric bearing pad square meter num each elastomeric bearing with internal laminates only num each ___ ___ ___ elastomeric bearing with internal laminates and load plate ___ ___ ___ num square foot numinch num mm preformed bearing pads square meter item num railings num description num fabrication num materials num construction methods general num steel and iron railings num aluminum railings num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing constructing coating and erecting the type of railing specified .
this work also consists of providing and galvanizing structural posts anchors and connections .
num fabrication .
fabricate railing according to item num .
select a fabricator that is at least prequalified at level sf .
the department will base final acceptance of fabricated members on the engineers approval that the fabricated items that can be successfully incorporated into the structures .
submit mill test reports for structural steel steel castings bronze and sheet lead certified according to num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num num num reinforcing steel num num structural steel num preformed fillers sponge rubber or pvc num num steel tubing num paint num metal deep beam rail num ductile iron casings .
num aluminum num timber .
num stainless steel fasteners .
num pipe num submit mill test reports for structural steel and aluminum according to num .
num construction methods general .
construct railings as shown on the plans .
install posts for metal railings normal to the grade line .
install the tops of railings parallel to the grade line .
remove or release shoring or falsework supporting the superstructure before placing railing that has no expansion joints or that is on the concrete parapet .
num steel and iron railings .
unless specified to paint according to item num galvanize all parts of steel and iron railings .
erect metal deep beam rail elements according to item num .
num aluminum railings .
use alloy conforming to num for aluminum railings .
give the extreme outer surfaces of cast railing posts a numgrit finish .
the contractor is not required to provide a special finish for other portions of railings .
do not scratch dent or cause other damage to railings that may affect the durability or appearance of the railing .
use galvanized steel anchor bolts and hexagon nuts conforming to num .
coat the entire projecting portion of anchor bolts and fill the space between the bolts and post base with an aluminumimpregnated caulking compound .
where aluminum contacts concrete or stone masonry thoroughly coat the contact surfaces with an aluminum impregnated caulking compound or with a heavy asphalt material paint pigmented with aluminum powder or paste thereby providing an aluminum appearance .
where aluminum or aluminum shims contacts different metal thoroughly coat the contact surface with an aluminumimpregnated caulking compound or place a synthetic rubber impregnated fabric gasket between the metals .
weld only where shown on the plans using inert gas shielded metalarc or tungstenarc method without flux or by other approved methods .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure railing by the number of feet meters of railing including end posts .
if deep beam guardrail is used the department will measure the length of railing between the first posts off the bridge excluding the first posts off the bridge .
if hand rails or tubular backup rails are used the department will not measure any portions extending beyond the first posts off the bridge .
if twin steel tube bridge railing is used the department will measure the length of the railing between the second post off the bridge including the second post .
num basis of payment .
the cost of hand rails or tubular backup rails extending beyond the measured limits are included for payment in the unit price bid for the measured length .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num foot meter railing ___ item num drainage of structures num description num fabrication num materials num general num porous backfill num pipe num scuppers num excavation num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing drainage systems .
num fabrication .
fabricate scuppers according to item num .
select a fabricator that is at least prequalified at level sf .
the department will base final acceptance of all fabricated members on the engineers approval that the fabricated items can be successfully incorporated into the structures .
submit mill test reports for structural steel steel castings bronze and sheet lead certified according to num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to scuppers structural steel and cast steel num metal pipe num plastic pipe num num other metals num geotextile fabric type a num reinforced thermosetting resin pipe num furnish pipe specials of a grade at least as high as the type of pipe specified .
furnish porous backfill consisting of gravel stone or aircooled blast furnace slag with a no .
num size gradation according to table num .
the sodium sulfate soundness loss shall not exceed num percent .
furnish acbfs conforming to supplement num .
num general .
as shown on the plans connect all parts to new or existing sewers or other outlets .
when installing to superstructure take into account the deflection of spans under full dead load .
num porous backfill .
place porous backfill as shown on the plans .
when not shown on the plans place backfill at least num feet numm thick behind the full length of abutments wing walls and retaining walls .
measure the thickness of porous backfill normal to the abutment or wall face .
the contractor may leave undisturbed rock or shale within num inches num m of the abutment or wall .
place num ft num m of bagged no .
num aggregate at each weep hole to retain the porous backfill .
place the porous backfill for the full width of the trench and extend it to the bottom of the approach slab or base as shown in the plans .
place porous backfill in loose lifts not to exceed num inches .
run a plate compactor or tamper over the top of each lift for consolidation of approximately num of original layer thickness .
if placed in loose lifts greater than num inches flood the porous backfill at the appropriate moisture content for consolidation of approximately num of original layer thickness .
num pipe .
for drain pipe leading down from the superstructure use either galvanized steel pipe num or plastic pipe num or reinforced thermosetting resin pipe num .
provide specials elbows tees wyes and other fittings essential for a complete and satisfactory installation of the same material and quality as the pipe .
construct watertight joints of adequate strength .
in steel pipe weld joints or use clamptype couplings having a ring gasket .
in plastic pipe make joints according to the applicable astm standard .
in reinforced thermosetting resin pipe make joints according to manufacturer guidelines and procedures .
securely fasten the pipe to the structure with hanger or clamp assemblies that are galvanized according to num .
place subsurface pipe as shown in the plans .
if the plans require drainage pipe in the porous backfill provide plastic pipe conforming to num .
for corrugated metal pipe perforated specials are not required and the contractor may make bends with adjustable elbows conforming to the thickness requirements of the pipe specifications .
num scuppers .
construct secure and watertight connections including the connections to adjacent concrete .
provide castings true to form and dimension .
weld the joints of structural steel scuppers .
galvanize scuppers according to num .
num excavation .
excavate all material encountered to the dimensions necessary to provide ample space at least to install pipe or other drainage facility behind abutments and for outlets .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure porous backfill and porous backfill with geotextile fabric by the number of cubic yards cubic meters or lump sum .
the department will measure pipe specials by the same method as the pipe .
if pipe is by the foot meter the department will measure the pipe along its centerline .
num basis of payment .
the cost to backfill if not separately itemized in the contract and excavation is incidental to the drainage facility that necessitates them .
the department will include bagged aggregate with porous backfill for payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard porous backfill cubic meter or lump sum num cubic yard porous backfill with geotextile fabric cubic meter or lump sum num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm ___ pipe including specials num each scuppers including supports num pound or foot trough horizontal conductors kilogram or meter num pound or foot pipe horizontal conductors kilogram or meter num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm pipe downspout including specials item num patching concrete structures num description num materials num removal of disintegrated concrete num preparation of surface num placing of reinforcing steel num placing finishing and curing of concrete num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of removing all loose and disintegrated concrete preparing the surface furnishing and placing reinforcing steel including welded steel wire fabric dowels and expansion bolts placing forms and placing concrete patches including curing of same .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num num num dowels num num or num reinforcing steel num welded steel wire fabric num or num num removal of disintegrated concrete .
remove all loose and disintegrated concrete from the areas to be repaired in such a manner and to such an extent as to expose a sound concrete surface .
provide patches at least num inches num mm deep except on top horizontal surfaces provide patches at least num inches num mm deep .
remove sound concrete beneath the disintegrated concrete for a depth of not less than num inch num mm and not more than num inch num mm provided that the above minimum depth of patch is maintained .
make square or preferably slightly undercut shoulders having a depth of not less than the specified minimum depth of the patch at the edges of all patches .
only use pneumatic or hand tools that give results satisfactory to the engineer in the removal of the disintegrated concrete and in preparing and shaping the areas to be patched .
if working around reinforcing steel avoid damaging or debonding any reinforcing steel that is uncorroded and completely embedded in sound concrete .
ensure there is no shattering of the concrete beyond the area to be patched .
if the area around the reinforcing steel is either embedded in unsound concrete or the reinforcing steel is exposed during removal continue to remove the concrete around the reinforcing steel to completely expose the reinforcing and provide at least a num inch num mm clearance around the reinforcing .
the num inch num mm clearance may be reduced to num inch num mm if the patching concrete uses no .
num coarse aggregate .
adequately support reinforcement that is loose and tie it back into place .
replace reinforcement damaged during removing concrete .
num preparation of surface .
after removing all disintegrated and loose concrete properly shape the area to be patched and install dowels or expansion bolts as necessary to hold the wire fabric to be used in the patch .
thoroughly clean the surface of the area to be patched and all exposed reinforcing steel of all dirt dust or other foreign materials with water air under pressure or any other method that produces satisfactory results .
thoroughly drench the surface with clean water .
before placing the concrete allow the surface to dry to a damp condition .
num placing of reinforcing steel .
the department will not require reinforcement for patches on top horizontal surfaces .
reinforce patches on other surfaces with welded steel wire fabric either num num inch num num mm using wire size number w num or num num inch num num mm using wire size number w num .
cover the entire area of the patch with the fabric and place and hold the fabric approximately num inch num mm from the completed exposed surface of the patch .
securely fasten the fabric to the reinforcing steel in the original structure exposed in removing the disintegrated concrete .
if no reinforcing steel is exposed or it is not practical to fasten the fabric to exposed steel install dowels or expansion bolts at a distance not to exceed numinch num m centers in both directions and fasten the fabric to these dowels or bolts .
num placing finishing and curing of concrete .
place and finish class qc num concrete according to items num and num .
remove the forms within num hours after placing the concrete and finish all exposed surfaces by rubbing to match the surrounding concrete .
apply membrane curing according to num method b immediately after rubbing the surfaces .
after curing and before final acceptance sound all patched areas .
remove and replace all unsound or visibly cracked areas .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure patching concrete structures by the number of square feet square meters of the exposed surfaces of all completed patches irrespective of the depth or thickness of the patch .
if a patch includes corners or edges of members such as beams curbs and columns the department will measure all of the exposed surfaces .
if a patch extends completely through a member of a slab the department will measure both exposed surfaces .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows the department will not pay for replacing reinforcement damaged during concrete removal .
the department will not pay for removing and replacing of patched areas that are unsound or visibly cracked .
item unit description num square foot patching concrete structures square meter item num pneumatically placed mortar num description num materials num removal of concrete num reinforcement num preparation of repair area num mixing num proportions num pressures num preconstruction testing num placing num inspection and testing num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of repairing the surface of concrete structures using pneumatically placed mortar where the depth of repair generally is less than num inches num mm .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to reinforcing steel num portland cement num through num num fine aggregate num num welded steel wire fabric .
num or num use water free from sewage oil acid strong alkalis vegetable matter clay and loam .
potable water is satisfactory for use in mortar .
num removal of concrete .
in areas to be repaired remove all loose soft honeycombed and disintegrated concrete plus a numinch num mm depth of sound concrete .
remove additional concrete as necessary to permit the placement of the minimum specified mortar thickness of not less than num num inches num mm except on top horizontal surfaces where it shall not be less than num inch num mm .
perform all work in such a manner as not to damage or shatter the concrete that is to remain in place .
make square or preferably slightly undercut shoulders at the edge of all repair areas .
encase reinforcing bars exposed after concrete removal as required above with pneumatically placed mortar .
if these bars are less than num inch num mm from the proposed finished surface of mortar drive them back if practical into recesses cut in the masonry to obtain that coverage .
if this is impractical because of large concentrations of reinforcing bars provide the minimum specified mortar coverage by modifying the finish surface as the engineer approves .
if the bond between the concrete and a primary reinforcing bar has been destroyed or if more than onehalf of the periphery of a bar has been exposed remove the adjacent concrete to a depth that will provide a minimum num inch num mm clearance around the bar except where other reinforcing bars make this clearance impractical .
adequately support reinforcing that has become loose and tie it back into place .
replace reinforcement that is damaged during construction operations .
only use pneumatic or hand tools that give results satisfactory to the engineer in the removal of concrete and in preparing and shaping the areas to be repaired .
if working around reinforcing steel avoid loosening the steel or shattering the concrete around it beyond the repair area .
num reinforcement .
if pneumatically placed mortar is specified to repair areas of unsatisfactory concrete or for surface coverage of exposed reinforcing steel place wire fabric in all areas where the thickness of the mortar patch is num num inches num mm or more .
for areas where the thickness of the mortar patch exceeds num inches num mm use a single layer of wire fabric to reinforce each numinch num mm thickness of patch or fractional part thereof .
use fabric that is either num num inches num num mm using wire size number w num or num num inches num num mm using wire size number w num .
place all fabric parallel to the proposed finished surface .
completely encase each layer of fabric in mortar that has taken its initial set before the succeeding layer of fabric is applied .
ensure that fabric supported adjacent to the prepared masonry surface is no closer than num inch num mm to that surface .
overlap adjacent sheets of fabric by num inches num mm and securely tie them together .
carefully prebend fabric before installation to fit around corners and into reentrant angles .
never spring fabric into place .
place all steel items including reinforcing bars and wire fabric no closer than num inch num mm to the proposed finished surface of mortar .
support wire fabric with anchor bolts except where existing reinforcing steel in the repair area is considered by the engineer to be satisfactory for this purpose .
construct anchors of numinch num mm minimum diameter expansion hook bolts and ensure that each bolt has sufficient engagement in sound masonry .
for repairs that are generally num inches num mm thick or less space anchors no more than num inches num m and num inches num m centerto center on overhead and vertical surfaces respectively and num inches num m centertocenter on top horizontal surfaces .
for repairs that exceed num inches num mm in thickness ensure that the anchor bolts are capable of supporting three times the weight of suspended mortar and two times the weight of mortar on vertical surfaces .
use at least three anchors for each patch .
if specified thoroughly clean reinforcing exposed in the original structure or exposed after removals as required above and restore any appreciable reduction in steel area as directed .
num preparation of repair area .
after removing all unsatisfactory concrete properly shaping the sound concrete surface placing dowels and expansion hook bolts and restoring steel area as directed and within num hours before placing the mortar blast clean all surfaces to which the mortar is to bond including exposed reinforcing steel existing concrete and the work face of any previously placed mortar to remove all spalls laitance and contaminants detrimental to the achievement of an adequate bond .
the contractor may blast clean these surfaces using highpressure water blasting with or without abrasives in the water abrasive blasting with containment or vacuum abrasive blasting .
if a bonding compound is not specified drench the prepared masonry surface with water and keep the prepared surface wet during the num hours preceding the placement of the mortar .
ensure that all surfaces are damp but without free water while placing mortar .
the engineer will approve the preparation and condition of all surfaces immediately before the application of the mortar .
num mixing .
thoroughly dry mix the materials in a batch mixer .
before placing the mixture in the hopper of the cement gun remove all materials and lumps over num inch num mm in size by screening .
apply the screened sand and cement to the masonry surface within num hour after being combined .
num proportions .
ensure that the mixture as placed in the hopper has a ratio of one volume of portland cement to three volumes of sand .
num pressures .
use at least num pounds per square inch num kpa pneumatic pressure at the cement gun in placing the mixed material .
if more than num feet num m of hose or a greater lift than num feet num m is used increase the pressure proportionately .
maintain the water at a uniform pressure of not less than num pounds per square inch num kpa above the pressure of the air on the gage at the cement gun .
num preconstruction testing .
before the start of placing any mortar perform a preconstruction test to verify the operation of the equipment to confirm the application crews capability and to ensure the pneumatically placed mortar will be of acceptable quality .
fabricate the test panel by gunning mortar onto the plywood bottom of an open box numfoot num m square and num inches num mm deep .
install reinforcement in the test panel that matches the largest size and tightest spacing found for the reinforcement in the bridge .
mount the box vertically and apply the mortar using the same personnel equipment and procedures that will be used on the project until the box is full .
adjust the mixing water to provide mortar of the proper consistency but do not exceed a total water content including the free moisture in the aggregate and water added at the nozzle of num gallons num l per sack of cement num pounds num kg .
take three cores from the test panel and test them for compressive strength at an independent testing laboratory .
ensure that the strength at num days is a minimum of num pounds per square inch num mpa or at a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa at num days .
after taking the cores break the test panel and allow the engineer to carefully examine the interior portions .
ensure that they are substantially free of hollow areas and sand pockets and ensure that the mortar is well bonded to the reinforcement .
have each crew proposed to perform this work fabricate a satisfactory panel before allowing that crew to apply mortar to the structure .
num placing .
place the premixed dry cement and sand by pneumatic equipment with the proper amount of water applied in the mixing nozzle for the correct placement consistency .
apply the mortar as dry as practical to prevent shrinkage cracking .
use shooting strips to ensure square corners straight lines and a plane surface of mortar except as otherwise permitted by the plans or approved by the engineer .
place shooting strips so as to keep the trapping of rebound at a minimum .
at the end of each days work or similar stopping periods requiring construction joints slope the mortar off to a thin edge .
in shooting all surfaces ensure that the stream of flowing material from the nozzle impinges as nearly as possible at right angles to the surface being covered and hold the nozzle num to num feet num to num m from the working surface .
apply a sufficient number of mortar coats to obtain the required thickness .
finish mortar repairs flush with the original masonry surface except as noted for areas of exposed reinforcing steel .
on vertical and overhead surfaces do not apply any coat thicker than num inch num mm except as the engineer approves and place each coat so that it will neither sag nor decrease the bond of the preceding coat .
if a successive coat is applied on mortar that has set for more than num hours clean and dampen the mortar surface as required in num for the prepared masonry surface .
remove deposits of rebound from previous shooting whether loose or cemented .
after mortar has been placed to the desired thickness cut off all high spots with a sharp trowel or screed them to a true plane as determined by shooting strips or by the original masonry surface or as directed .
if using screeds apply them lightly to all surfaces so as not to disturb the mortar for an appreciable depth and work them in an upward direction when applied on vertical surfaces .
unless otherwise directed give the finished mortar surface a flash coat about num inch num mm thick .
take special care to obtain a sightly appearance on all exposed surfaces .
cover the pneumatically placed mortar patches with burlap or cotton mats and keep them wet for num days after placing .
if it is not practical to use mats keep the surface wet by sprinkling for the same length of time .
if the engineer determines that the above curing procedures are impractical because of the inaccessibility of isolated repair areas the contractor may cure the final mortar surface according to num method b .
do not place pneumatically placed mortar when the air temperature is below num f num c or against a surface in which there remains any frost .
protect all mortar against cold weather according to num .
num inspection and testing .
after curing and before final acceptance sound all patched areas .
remove and replace all unsound or cracked areas .
in addition to sounding all patches the department will base acceptance of the pneumatically placed mortar on numinch num mm diameter cores taken from patched areas and tested for compressive strength .
the engineer will determine the location of the cores with one core being taken for each num square feet num mnum of pneumatically placed mortar .
drill the cores completely through the patched area and into the underlying sound concrete at least num inches .
ensure that the depth of the cores is at least num inches .
the engineer will visually inspect the cores at the site for hollow areas sand pockets and voids around reinforcing steel .
test the cores at an independent laboratory for compressive strength .
the required minimum average compressive strength is num pounds per square inch num mpa at num days with no single core test less than num pounds per square inch num mpa .
the engineer will waive coring on small quantities or overhead patches if it is determined by sounding and visual inspection that the patches are sound .
remove replace reinspect and retest all defective patches as determined by sounding visible cracks or unacceptable cores .
fill core holes with concrete according to num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure pneumatically placed mortar by the number of square feet square meters as determined under method a unless method b or another method is specified .
a .
method a .
the department will measure the actual area of exposed surfaces of all completed tested and approved patches irrespective of depth or thickness of the patch .
if a patch includes corners or edges of such members as beams columns or curbs the department will include all of the exposed surfaces or if a patch extends completely through a member or a slab the department will include both exposed surfaces .
b .
method b .
for unreinforced mortar repairs the department will measure the actual area of exposed surfaces of all completed tested and approved patches irrespective of depth or thickness of patch .
if a patch includes corners or edges of such members as beams columns or curbs the department will include all of the exposed surfaces .
for fabric reinforced mortar repairs the department will measure the actual surface area of fabric complete and in place .
the department will consider fabric laps and layers of fabric closer than num num inches num mm centertocenter of layer as a single layer in area measurements .
the contractor and the engineer will agree on the measured area of wire fabric before said fabric is encased in mortar otherwise the department will obtain the area of the patch for pay purposes as described for unreinforced mortar repairs .
the contractor is responsible for all test panels coring repair of core holes independent laboratory testing of the cores and replacement of rejected areas and shall include them under pneumatically placed mortar .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for additional reinforcement to replace that damaged by the contractors operations .
the department will not pay for removing replacing and reinspecting of defective patched mortar as determined by sounding visible cracks or unacceptable cores .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square foot pneumatically placed mortar square meter item num structural plate corrugated metal structures on footings num description num materials num general num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing structural plate corrugated metal structures of specified dimensions including metal bearing angles or channels as required and erecting same on concrete footings .
num materials .
furnish plates and bolts conforming to num or num .
furnish steel bearing angles or channels conforming to num or num .
furnish aluminum bearing angles or channels conforming to num .
num general .
properly support the metal bearing angle or channel in the position shown on the plans before placing footing concrete .
erect the plates according to the manufacturers assembly instructions .
hold the unsupported edges of all plates in position using temporary props .
progressively install a sufficient number of bolts to hold the plates in position .
do not tighten bolts until tightening will not interfere with the adjustment and matching of additional sections .
if using drift pins or pry bars take care to prevent chipping or injury to the galvanized coating .
tighten the bolts to a final minimum torque of num footpounds num nm .
within the limits of backfill field coat the exterior of the num conduit above the limits of the bedding .
the coating material and application shall conform to aashto m numm .
thoroughly seal around all plate seams and bolts .
allow asphalt mastic material to dry for num hours and tar base material to dry for num hours before placing the conduit backfill .
backfill according to the requirements for num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the actual number of feet meters of the corrugated metal structure installed in place .
the department will determine the length by taking the average of the two side measurements end to end at the point of bearing .
excavation will be paid for under item num or num as shown on the plans .
concrete footings will be paid for as a separate pay item .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num foot meter ___ ___ ___ mm structural plate corrugated metal structure ___inch ___ mm item num dynamic load test num description num general num equipment num test report num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of establishing a driving criteria for all the piles of a specified shape crosssection and ultimate bearing capacity or as specified on the plans to be installed in the structure .
this shall be accomplished by applying dynamic loads with a pile hammer during driving of production piles to determine driving requirements .
apply the dynamic load to the piles using a pile hammer that is operating at its normal operating level .
perform restrike tests when specified in the plans num general .
perform dynamic tests on a minimum of two piles .
perform signal matching analysis of the dynamic test data on at least one of the two test piles .
perform the test according to astm d num to determine driving requirements to achieve the required ultimate bearing values for the piles to be installed in the structure .
perform restrike tests after piles have been driven and a minimum time specified in the plans has elapsed .
when performing a restrike warm the hammer before restriking the pile by applying at least num blows to another pile .
each restrike consists of performing dynamic testing on two piles and performing a signal matching analysis on one of the two piles tested .
use the hammer selected for driving the test piles to drive all piles represented by the test piles .
if the contractor subsequently finds it necessary to use a different hammer or multiple hammers to drive piles represented by dynamic load testing or if the hammer performance varies subsequent to the dynamic test complete additional tests at no additional cost to the department .
num equipment .
supply all required dynamic testing equipment necessary to run the test set forth in astm d num .
supply personnel with an advanced master or expert level certification in high strain dynamic pile testing hsdpt from either foundation qa or the pile driving contractors association pdca to operate this equipment .
supply the engineer a copy of the certificate showing that personnel operating dynamic testing equipment are currently certified .
supply all personnel and equipment needed to strike the test piles with the pile hammer .
num test report .
perform the dynamic test and signal matching analysis and immediately provide the engineer driving criteria for any piles to be driven within the next num hours .
within num hours after performing the dynamic pile test or restrike tests supply the engineer with a written report confirming driving requirements for piles represented by the test .
include in the report the required blow count for a .
the different strokes of the ram at numinch num mm intervals within the expected range of operation as determined by a wave equation analysis when open ended diesel hammers and drop hammers are used .
b .
the selected bounce pressures when closed end diesel hammers are used .
c. the operating air pressure and stroke when an air operated hammer is used .
d. the selected output energy or stroke when a hydraulic hammer is used .
also include in the report a minimum depth of penetration if applicable .
submit an electronic version of the report and data files from the testing and analysis to the office of geotechnical engineering and the office of construction administration .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for dynamic load testing after being provided the written test at the contract price as follows item unit description num each dynamic load testing num each restrike item num drilled shafts num description num materials num contractors installation plan num hole excavation num friction type drilled shafts num casings num slurry num excavation inspection num reinforcing steel for drilled shafts num concrete for drilled shafts num free fall concrete placement num tremie num pumped concrete num construction tolerances num inspection records num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing drilled shafts .
the lengths of the drilled shafts shown on the plans are estimated from available subsurface information .
furnish the proposed drilled shafts according to plan requirements with the understanding that the actual length required is based on conditions encountered during construction and may differ from the estimated length shown on the plans .
num materials .
furnish material conforming to concrete class qc num or qc num for mass concrete num num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num num contractors installation plan .
submit for the engineers acceptance a written installation plan of procedures to follow when excavating the hole placing the concrete and monitoring the concrete placement .
submit the installation plan at least num calendar days before constructing the drilled shafts .
include the following information a .
details of the sequence proposed for the overall drilled shaft construction operation .
b .
procedures for maintaining correct horizontal and vertical alignment of the excavation .
c. if using a casing method to advance the casing .
d. if using a temporary casing details of the methods to extract the temporary casing and to maintain the concrete slump to keep concrete workable by adding admixtures such as retarders or superplasticizers .
e. if using slurry details of the methods to mix circulate and desand the slurry .
for polymer slurry submit the manufacturers recommendations for use of the slurry .
f. details of methods to clean the shaft excavation .
g. details of reinforcement placement including support and centralization methods .
h. details of concrete placement including proposed operational procedures for free fall tremie or pumping methods .
i .
a list of proposed equipment to be used such as cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps tremies concrete pumps casings etc .
acceptance of the installation plan will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for obtaining the required results .
num hole excavation .
take precautions to prevent damaging existing structures and utilities .
precautions include but are not limited to selecting construction methods and procedures that will prevent excessive caving of the shaft excavation and monitoring and controlling the vibrations from the driving of casing or sheeting or drilling of the shaft .
when encountered remove objects such as large boulders .
do not blast unless shown on the plans or authorized in writing by the engineer .
unless otherwise shown on the plans where drilled shafts are to be installed in conjunction with embankment placement construct shafts after the placement of the fill and completion of any specified settlement periods .
excavate for the shafts to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans .
use methods and equipment suitable for the intended purpose and materials encountered .
use either the dry method wet method temporary casing method or permanent casing method as necessary to produce sound durable concrete foundation shafts free of defects .
when a particular method of construction is required on the plans that method shall be used .
if no particular method is specified for use select and use a method based on site conditions .
if the excavation operation is stopped protect the shaft cavity by installing a safety cover .
the contractor is responsible for the safety of the shaft excavation surrounding soil and the stability of the sidewalls .
if necessary to ensure such safety and stability use a temporary casing slurry or other methods accepted by the engineer .
unless cased to the full depth do not leave excavations unfilled overnight .
use appropriate means such as a cleanout bucket or air lift to clean the bottom of the excavation of all shafts .
promptly notify the engineer when unexpected obstructions are encountered .
a .
dry construction method .
use the dry construction method only at sites where the groundwater table and site conditions are suitable to allow construction of the shaft in a relatively dry excavation and where the sides and bottom of the shaft remain stable without any caving sloughing or swelling and may be visually inspected before placing the concrete .
the dry method consists of excavating the drilled shaft hole removing accumulated water and loose material from the excavation and placing the shaft concrete in a relatively dry excavation .
the rate of flow of water into the hole should not be more than num inches num mm within a numhour period .
do not place the initial concrete if there is more than num inches num mm of water in the bottom of the hole .
b .
wet construction method .
use the wet construction method at sites where a dry excavation can not be maintained for placement of the shaft concrete .
the wet method consists of using water or slurry to contain seepage and groundwater movement and placing concrete using a tremie or concrete pump .
additionally use this method to maintain stability of the hole perimeter while advancing the excavation to its final depth placing the reinforcing cage and placing the shaft concrete .
this method also consists of desanding and cleaning the slurry .
for drilled shafts that are not socketed into the bedrock and during drilling operations maintain a water or slurry fluid elevation inside the shaft excavation higher than the static water table .
unless demonstrated to the engineers satisfaction that the surface casing is not required provide temporary surface casings to aid shaft alignment and position and to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation .
extend surface casings from the ground surface to a point in the shaft excavation where sloughing of the surrounding soil does not occur .
c. temporary casing construction method .
use the temporary casing construction method when the stability of the excavated hole andor the effects of groundwater must be controlled .
remove temporary casings while the concrete remains workable .
as the casing is being withdrawn maintain a numfoot num m minimum head of fresh concrete in the casing so that all the fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward without contaminating the shaft concrete .
as necessary increase the required minimum concrete head to counteract groundwater head inside the casing .
extract casing at a slow uniform rate with the pull in line with the shaft axis .
rotate tap push down or vibrate the casing when necessary to extract it .
rotate the casing as little as possible to avoid deforming the reinforcing steel cage .
d. permanent casing construction method .
the permanent casing construction method generally consists of driving or drilling a casing to a specified depth before excavation begins .
if full penetration of the casing to the specified depth can not be attained the contractor may either excavate material within the embedded portion of the casing or excavate a pilot hole ahead of the casing until the casing reaches the desired penetration .
make the pilot hole no larger than onehalf the diameter of the shaft and center the hole in the shaft .
do not over ream to the outside diameter of the casing unless specifically shown on the plans .
ensure that the casing is continuous between the elevations shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown on the plans do not use temporary casing instead of or in addition to the permanent casing .
after installing the casing and excavating the shaft place the reinforcing steel then place the shaft concrete .
after filling the permanent casing with concrete pressure grout voids between the shaft excavation and the casing with cement grout .
submit the method of pressure grouting the voids to the engineer for approval .
pressure grouting is required to ensure contact bearing between the casing and any surrounding soil layer that is used for lateral support .
num friction type drilled shafts .
friction type drilled shafts are defined as drilled shafts that do not bear on bedrock and obtain their ability to support load from a combination of end bearing on the soil and adhesion between soil and concrete along the length of the shaft .
for friction type drilled shafts dry construction method may be used for cohesive soils only .
if using a casing for the construction of a friction type drilled shaft remove the casing completely or partially as shown on the plans .
if enough water is entering the hole through the sides and bottom of the hole such that the supporting soils are being eroded maintain a positive head of fluid in the excavation hole to ensure that water is not continuously flowing into the hole .
if the engineer determines that the hole sidewall has softened due to excavation methods swelled due to delays in concreting or degraded because of slurry cake buildup over ream the sidewall to sound material .
if the concrete is not placed the same day that the excavation is completed protect the excavation with a temporary casing and redrill the hole at least num inches num mm larger in diameter clean the excavation and perform slurry test before concreting .
num casings .
use smooth watertight steel casings of sufficient strength to withstand handling and driving stresses and the concrete and surrounding earth pressures .
provide an outside diameter of the steel casing equal to or greater than the plan diameter of the shaft .
if the plan diameter of the bedrock socket is same as the drilled shaft above the bedrock and a steel casing is used provide a diameter of the bedrock socket as shown on the plans .
ensure that the diameter of the casing is large enough to allow the excavation of the bedrock socket .
where drilled shafts are located in open water areas extend the casing a minimum of num inches num mm above the water to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of the concrete .
cut off the casing at the plan top of drilled shaft elevation after the concrete has cured .
if practical install the casing in a manner that produces a positive seal at the bottom of the casing to prevent piping of water or entry of other material into the shaft excavation .
if it becomes necessary to remove a casing and substitute a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils stabilize the excavation with slurry or backfill before installing the new casing .
the contractor may use other methods accepted by the engineer to control the stability of the excavation and to protect the integrity of the foundation soils .
num slurry .
slurry used in the drilling process shall be a mineral or polymer slurry .
the mineral slurry shall have both a mineral grain size that remains in suspension and sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable screening system .
ensure that the percentage and specific gravity of the material used to make the suspension is sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to allow proper concrete placement .
maintain the level of the slurry at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the hole .
thoroughly premix the mineral slurry with clean fresh water and allow adequate time for hydration before introduction into the shaft excavation .
agitate circulate and adjust the properties of the slurry to prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft excavation .
perform control tests using suitable apparatus on the mineral slurry to determine density viscosity and ph .
conform to the acceptable range of values for these physical properties as shown in table num .
table num mineral slurry specifications range of values at num f num c property test method time of slurry introduction time of concreting in hole density lbft kgm density balance num to num num to num num to num num to num viscosity sqt sl marsh cone num to num num to num num to num num to num ph ph paper or meter num to num num to num if desanding is required do not allow the sand content to exceed num percent by volume at any point in the shaft excavation as determined by the american petroleum institute sand content test .
determine density viscosity and ph values before and during the shaft excavation to establish a consistent working pattern .
before placing shaft concrete use an approved slurrysampling tool to take slurry samples from the bottom and at midheight of the shaft .
eliminate heavily contaminated slurry that has accumulated at the bottom of the shaft .
ensure that the mineral slurry conforms to the requirements specified immediately before shaft concrete placement .
only use polymer slurry after demonstrating to the engineer that the stability of the hole perimeter can be maintained while advancing the excavation to its final depth by excavating a trial hole of the same diameter and depth as that of the production shafts .
use the same polymer slurry in the trial hole as proposed for the production shafts .
if using different sizes of the shafts at the project use the same size trial hole as that of the largest diameter shaft except the depth of the trial hole need not be more than num feet num meters .
only one trial hole per project is required .
do not use the trial hole excavation for a production shaft .
after completing the trial hole excavation fill the hole with sand .
the acceptance of the polymer slurry does not relieve the contractor of responsibility to maintain the stability of the excavation .
polymer slurry shall conform to the manufacturers requirements .
num excavation inspection .
provide equipment for checking the dimensions and alignment of each shaft excavation .
determine the dimensions and alignment .
measure the final shaft depth after final inspection .
immediately before placing concrete ensure that the bottom of the completed drilled shaft excavation is as clean as practical .
remove drilling spoils that adhere to the vertical sides of the bedrock socket .
num reinforcing steel for drilled shafts .
place the reinforcing steel cage as a unit immediately after inspection of the excavation and before placing concrete .
if not placing the concrete immediately after installing the cage the contractor may have to remove the cage before placing the concrete to verify the integrity of the excavated area and to ensure loose material is removed from the bottom of the hole .
tie and support the reinforcing steel so it remains within the required tolerances .
securely tie spacers at quarter points around the cage perimeter and space at intervals not to exceed num feet num m along the length of the cage .
if the size of the longitudinal reinforcing steel equals or exceeds numinch num mm in diameter the contractor may increase the distance between the spacing devices to a maximum of num feet num m. use spacers of adequate dimensions to ensure a minimum annular space between outside of cage and side of hole or casing of num inches num mm for shaft diameters up to num feet num m and num inches num mm for shaft diameters larger than num feet num m. the contractor may use round plastic spacers .
maintain the top of the reinforcing steel cage no more than num inches num mm above and no more than num inches num mm below the required position .
if the reinforcing steel cage is not maintained within tolerances make acceptable corrections and do not construct additional shafts until the method of reinforcing steel cage support has been approved .
when approved by the engineer the contractor need not provide the reinforcing steel for the extended length of the drilled shaft if it is determined in the field that the contractor must drill the shaft deeper than the estimated length .
num concrete for drilled shafts .
for all drilled shafts use class qc num or qc num concrete for mass concretedrilled shaft diameter over num ft num m according to item num except as modified and supplemented as follows .
the required slump is num num inch num num mm .
achieve the additional slump over num inches num mm by using chemical admixtures conforming to num type f or g. the maximum watercement ratio shall not exceed num .
if placing concrete under water add num percent more cement to the concrete mix .
if placing concrete using a tremie further increase the slump to num num inch num num mm by using chemical admixtures .
for wet method construction place concrete in one continuous operation from bottom to top of the shaft .
after the concrete has reached the top of the drilled shaft continue pumping and remove all contaminated concrete until acceptable quality concrete is evident at the top of the shaft .
do not vibrate concrete with a vibrator .
carefully remove the casing so that the reinforcing steel cage is not deformed by the force of the downward flowing concrete .
do not place concrete in any drilled shaft excavation without acceptance from the engineer .
inspect the drilled shaft excavation immediately before placing the concrete .
provide a light powerful enough to thoroughly inspect the reinforcing steel cage the sides and the bottom of the drilled shaft .
the inspection for the wet construction method consists of only probing and measuring .
if the elevation of the top of the shaft is below ground at the time of concrete placement use a casing to prevent caving of materials into fresh concrete .
num free fall concrete placement .
the contractor may place the concrete in a dry drilled shaft excavation using the free fall method provided the concrete falls to its final position through air without striking the sides of the hole the reinforcing steel cage or any other obstruction .
use a centering drop chute at least num feet num m long with the free fall method .
unless shown on the plans there is no limit to the height of free fall .
if the concrete placement causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough or if the concrete strikes the rebar cage or sidewall reduce the height of free fall or the rate of concrete flow into the excavation or both .
if the engineer determines that dewatering is not practical or placement by free fall method can not be accomplished place the concrete using a tremie or a concrete pump .
num tremie .
the contractor may use a gravity tremie to place concrete placement instead of a concrete pump in either wet or dry holes .
for uncased wet holes maintain the drilled shaft excavation full of slurry or water to such a depth that water does not flow into the shaft excavation at any time .
to place concrete use tremies consisting of a tube of sufficient length weight and diameter to discharge concrete at the shaft base elevation .
if the tremie contains aluminum parts do not allow these parts to contact the concrete .
use tremies with an inside diameter of at least num inches num mm .
ensure that the inside and outside surfaces of the tremie are clean and smooth to allow both flow of concrete and unimpeded withdrawal during concreting .
use tremies with a wall thickness adequate to prevent crimping or sharp bends that restrict concrete placement .
for concrete placement use watertight tremies .
do not begin underwater placement until the tremie is placed to the shaft bottom elevation .
use valves bottom plates or plugs so concrete discharge can begin within one tremie diameter of the base .
either remove plugs from the excavation or use plugs of an engineer approved material that does not cause a defect in the shaft if not removed .
construct the discharge end of the tremie to allow the free radial flow of concrete during placement operations .
immerse the tremie discharge end at least num feet num m in concrete at all times after starting the flow of concrete .
if the tremie line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column during the concrete pour and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level consider the drilled shaft defective .
num pumped concrete .
pump concrete into either wet or dry holes .
for uncased wet holes maintain the drilled shaft excavation full of slurry or water to such a depth that water does not flow into the shaft excavation at any time .
use concrete pump pipe at least num inches num mm in diameter and constructed with watertight joints .
arrange the concrete pump equipment so no vibrations result that might damage fresh concrete .
arrange pipes carrying concrete from the pump to the shaft with a minimum number of bends .
anchor the pipe used to convey the concrete to the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation to the steel casing or another suitable stationary object to prevent the pipe from undulating during the initial placement of the concrete .
do not begin placing concrete until the pump line orifice is at the shaft base elevation .
do not use aluminum pipe as a conveyance for the concrete .
pump an adequate quantity of grout mortar or concrete without coarse aggregate through the equipment ahead of the specification concrete to provide lubrication to the pumping system .
do not place the concrete used for lubrication in the shaft .
the lubrication process will not be repeated as long as the pumping operations are continuous .
operate the pump so a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
to prevent the contamination of the concrete placed initially at the bottom of the shaft seal the outlet end of the pumping pipe with a diaphragm or plug that is flushed out when the hydrostatic pressure from the column of concrete exceeds that of the water in the shaft .
control the initial rate of concrete placement so not to lift or displace the cage of reinforcing steel .
use a watertight conveying system and leave the outlet end well below the top of the freshly placed concrete .
the preferred concrete placement procedure is to maintain the outlet end of the pumping system at approximately num feet num m below the top of the fresh concrete .
when the concrete reaches the top of the drilled shaft column remove all laitance .
if the concrete pump line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column during the concrete pour and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level the drilled shaft shall be considered defective .
num construction tolerances .
for shafts supporting single columns position the drilled shaft within num inches num mm of the plan location in the horizontal plane at the plan elevation for the top of the shaft .
for shafts supporting footings position the center within num inches num mm of the plan location .
do not allow the vertical alignment of the shaft to vary from the required alignment by more than num inch per foot num mmm of depth .
construct the supported elements at the plan location .
perform all corrections required to construct the supported elements .
num inspection records .
provide all necessary equipment and labor needed to obtain measurements for completing the inspection records .
obtain measurements before placing concrete .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure drilled shafts by the number of feet meters measured along the axis of the drilled shaft from the required bottom elevation of the shaft to the proposed top plan elevation .
the department will not measure the length of reinforcing steel projecting from the drilled shaft into the pier column or the footing supported on drilled shafts as shown on the plans .
if the drilled shaft extends into the bedrock the department will divide the total length of each drilled shaft into two segments .
the length of the lower segment is the length of the bedrock socket and the length of the upper segment is the length of the drilled shaft above the bedrock socket .
if a steel casing extending down to bedrock is used the department will measure the bedrock socket from the bottom of the casing to the bottom of the drilled bedrock excavation .
if the engineer is assured that a portion of the metal casing is embedded in solid bedrock and upon the engineers concurrence the department may include the embedded distance as a part of the bedrock socket .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for performing required excavation furnishing and placing steel casings furnishing and placing reinforcing steel and concrete by free fall pumping or tremie method removing casings casings left in place supplying equipment and performing slurry testing supplying and disposing of slurry and disposing excess excavated material .
the department will not pay for the cost of performing slurry tests before concreting .
the department will not make separate payment for the trial holes .
the department will not pay for corrections required to construct the supported elements .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter drilled shafts ___ ___ mm diameter above bedrock num foot meter drilled shafts ___ ___ mm diameter into bedrock num foot meter drilled shafts ___ ___ mm diameter item num approach slabs num description num materials num forming and placing reinforcing steel num placing and sampling concrete num finishing and curing num side curbs num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing reinforced portland cement concrete approach slabs for bridges on the completed and accepted subgrade or subbase .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num num preformed joint filler num joint sealer num or num use the same class of concrete used in the bridges superstructure that the approach slab is attached to unless otherwise shown in the plans .
if the superstructure concrete class for the bridge is not identified in the plans use class qc num .
num forming furnishing and placing reinforcing steel .
furnish true and straight steel or wooden side forms .
securely brace and hold forms to the line and grade shown on the plans .
do not allow forms to vary more than num inch num mm from a numfoot num m straightedge .
do not remove forms for a minimum of num hours .
clean and oil forms after each use .
furnish reinforcing steel and place it in the position shown on the standard construction drawing and firmly secure the steel during placing and setting of the concrete .
tie reinforcing bars at all intersections except tie reinforcing bars at alternate intersections where bar spacing is less than num foot num m in any direction .
num placing and sampling concrete .
immediately before placing concrete according to item num thoroughly moisten the subgrade or subbase with water in the amount and manner directed by the engineer .
when the bridge superstructure and the approach slab require qcqa make at least one set of test cylinders for each num cubic yards num cubic meters of concrete .
include the results of the cylinders into the lot for the num superstructure item .
num finishing and curing .
mechanically screed at a vibration frequency of num to num pulses per minute the concrete surface to the proper elevation in one complete pass with a minimum of hand finishing .
if the approach slab is to serve as a base for an asphalt concrete wearing course texture the approach slab according to item num .
if the approach slab is to serve as a wearing surface test the surface according to num and diamond groove the surface according to num .
cure approach slabs according to num.a .
open approach slabs to traffic according to table numa or table numb .
num side curbs .
if concrete curb extends across the approach slab construct side curbs of the dimensions required and place the concrete curb at the same time as the approach slab .
finish the curb according to item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure reinforced concrete approach slabs by the number of square yards square meters complete in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will calculate the final adjusted payment per num and supplement num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows which includes all concrete curbs reinforcing steel dowels joints and other materials item unit description num square yard reinforced concrete approach slabs square meter num square yard reinforced concrete approach slabs with qcqa square meter num incidentals item num slope and channel protection num description num materials num general construction num riprap num grouted riprap or rock num crushed aggregate slope protection num concrete slope protection num dumped rock fill num rock channel protection num detention basin filter infiltration basin filter infiltration trench filter or bioretention cell num paved gutter num tied concrete block mat num articulating concrete block revetment system num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of the excavation for and the construction of gutters riprap concrete grouted items tied concrete block mats articulating concrete block revetment systems crushed aggregate or rock items for protecting slopes and channels .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to curing num or num type num concrete class qcmisc num num water for grout num reinforcing steel .
num cement for grout num structural backfill type num num sand for grout .
num rock and aggregate materials num coarse aggregate num brick and blocks num preformed expansion joint num joint sealer num geotextile fabric type b num provide steel geotextile fabric securing pins with washers for securing geotextile fabric .
use a steel washer having an outside diameter not less than num num inches num mm .
use securing pins at least num inches num m long and at least num inch num mm in diameter that are pointed at one end and fabricated with a head to retain the steel washer .
ensure tied concrete block mats and articulating concrete block revetment systems are held together by galvanized steel wire hdpe mesh or stainless steel wire .
num general construction .
cure gutters concrete slope protection and grouted riprap according to item num except apply all the membrane cures at the rate of not less than num gallon per num square feet num lnum m of surface .
mix and place all concrete according to item num .
finish to produce a sandy texture .
num riprap .
construct riprap according to one of the following four alternatives unless specifically itemized in the contract .
the contractor may elect to use a different alternative at each location on the project .
a .
type a provide flat stones or broken concrete .
ensure that individual pieces are roughly rectangular in crosssection with a minimum volume of num cubic foot num m and a minimum thickness of num inches num mm .
place individual pieces by hand in courses and so that the pieces overlap the joints in the course below .
place riprap with the flat surfaces roughly perpendicular to the slope and in contact with the courses immediately below and above .
fill spaces between larger pieces with spalls that are rammed into place to present an even and tight surface pleasing in appearance and varying not more than num inches num mm from that shown on the plans .
when required by the plans fill riprap with grout .
compact the backing as riprap construction progresses .
ensure that the thickness of the riprap measured perpendicular to the slope is not flatter than num inches num mm and averages not flatter than num inches num m. b .
type b provide articulating concrete block revetment system .
ensure articulating concrete block revetment conform to num .
c. type c construct concrete riprap using cloth or burlap bags .
after soaking the bags with water fill them with approximately num cubic foot num m of concrete and place the bags by hand to the limits on the plans .
provide bags with approximate dimensions of num num num inches num num num mm .
stack the bags on the slope to ensure a minimum of num cubic yard num m of concrete for each square yard square meter of riprap in place as measured along the slope .
tie the open end of each bag and fold the tie under the bag .
place each tie or fold so that it overlaps the joint in the lower layer .
after placing pierce each bag in the lower layer to allow some concrete to flow out and bond with the top overlying layer .
stretchers are bags placed with the long length parallel to the streambed flow .
headers are bags placed with the long length perpendicular to the streambed flow .
a layer runs horizontally at approximately the same elevation perpendicular to the protected slope grade .
if the slope is num or steeper make the bottom layer with two bags laid as stretchers .
place the next overlying layer as a header .
place the rest of the overlying upslope layers as stretchers .
if the slope is flatter than num make the bottom layer with two bags as stretchers .
place all remaining layers as headers .
push or drive no .
num no .
numm reinforcing bars approximately num inches num m long and spaced approximately num inches num m apart through the top three layers .
when required by the plans fill voids with grout .
d. type d construct a numinch num mm reinforced concrete slab .
reinforce the slab approximately midway between the top and bottom of the slab with steel bars or fabricated reinforcement equivalent to no .
num no .
numm round bars spaced at numinch num m centers in two directions or wire fabric according to the standard construction drawing for pavement reinforcing .
the contractor may use formed construction joints .
extend reinforcement through all formed construction joints .
include cutoff walls as shown on the plans in the unit price bid for reinforced concrete slab .
num grouted riprap or rock .
when specified grout in place riprap cloth bags riprap burlap bags flat stones precast blocks broken concrete rock or tied concrete block mats .
make the grout by mixing one part portland cement three parts sand and enough water to allow the grout to flow into the joints and cracks .
prepare the grout in a mixing machine of an approved design and equipped with an accurate graduated regulating device for controlling the amount of water in each batch .
accurately measure and proportion the quantities for each batch and ensure that the quantities are exactly sufficient for one or more sacks of cement .
immediately before applying grout thoroughly wet all surfaces .
place the grout filling all the joints or voids .
do not add water to the grout after it has been placed .
num crushed aggregate slope protection .
furnish material conforming to num .
place the material on the geotextile fabric so that the surface is flush with the embankment slopes .
use a thickness of num inches num mm unless a different thickness is specified .
extend the aggregate from the face of the abutments down to the toe of the slope or to normal water elevation and a minimum of num feet num m beyond the outer edges of the superstructures or as shown on the plans .
num concrete slope protection .
construct a concrete slab num inches num mm thick extending over the embankment area under a bridge from the face of the abutment down to the toe of the slope and extending a minimum of num feet num m beyond the outer edges of the superstructure or as shown on the plans .
thicken the bottom num feet num m of the concrete slab from num to num inches num to num mm to provide resistance to sliding .
where pier columns extend through the slab place numinch num mm preformed expansion joint material around the columns and for the full thickness of the slab .
divide the surface into an equally spaced block grid pattern at approximately num to numfoot num to num m intervals .
make the block grid pattern with one direction horizontally at a constant elevation or as directed by the engineer and the other direction parallel to the superstructure centerline skewed or as directed by the engineer .
saw or form the block grid pattern to make joints at a depth of not less than onefourth the thickness of the slab and approximately num inch num mm wide .
num dumped rock fill .
furnish material conforming to num .
dump larger pieces at the outer face and smaller pieces in the inner surface of the protected area .
ensure a reasonably smooth and continuous surface conforming to the slope lines shown on the plans .
avoid concentration of fines and small pieces at any location in the completed dumped rock fill material .
when required by the plans fill all voids with grout .
num rock channel protection .
furnish material conforming to num .
when specified with a filter provide a filter consisting of geotextile fabric or a numinch num mm bed of aggregate conforming to num .
when placing rock exercise reasonable care to ensure that the finished surface of the protected channel conforms to the channel crosssections shown on the plans .
if geotextile fabric is used prepare the surface to receive the fabric to a relatively smooth surface free of obstruction and debris .
with the long dimension parallel to the flow direction loosely place the fabric without wrinkles and creases .
where joints are necessary provide a numinch num m minimum overlap with the upstream strip overlapping the downstream strip .
place securing pins with washers at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m everywhere else .
when required by the plans fill all voids with grout .
num detention basin filter infiltration basin filter infiltration trench filter or bioretention cell .
for infiltration basin filter furnish course aggregate no .
num or num conforming to num .
use a thickness of num inches num mm unless a different thickness is specified .
place the material on the geotextile fabric so that the surface is flush with the elevation as specified .
prepare the surface to receive the geotextile fabric to a relatively smooth surface free of obstruction and debris .
with the long dimension parallel to the flow direction loosely place the geotextile fabric without wrinkles and creases .
where joints are necessary provide a numinch num m minimum overlap with the upstream strip overlapping the downstream strip .
place securing pins with washers at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m everywhere else .
for infiltration trench filter furnish course aggregate no .
num or num conforming to num .
place infiltration trench aggregate no .
num or num on the geotextile fabric at the thickness specified .
prepare the surface to receive the geotextile fabric to be relatively smooth free of obstruction and debris .
with the long dimension parallel to the flow direction loosely place the fabric without wrinkles and creases .
where joints are necessary provide a numinch num m minimum overlap with the upstream strip overlapping the downstream strip .
place securing pins with washers at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of num feet num m everywhere else .
for bioretention cell furnish material as specified at the thickness specified .
num paved gutter .
mix and place concrete paved gutters according to items num and num and to the dimensions and shape shown on the plans or the standard construction drawing .
when gutter constructed under this item is to be tied to an existing concrete base pavement or other rigid structure match the type and location of the joints in the gutter with those in the adjoining pavement .
when gutter constructed under this item is not tied to an existing concrete base form impressed joints using a device or bar shaped to the gutter crosssection .
make the impression before initial setting of the newly placed concrete .
remove the device or bar as soon as the concrete is in such condition to retain its shape when the bar or device is removed .
form an impressed joint that is num inch num mm wide at the surface num inch num mm wide at the bottom and a depth equal to onethird the thickness of the concrete .
edge the joints to a radius not greater than num inch num mm .
until the filler is placed protect the joint from dirt or foreign matter .
fill the impressed joints in such a manner to confine the material to the joint and in no way mar the surface .
compact the subgrade for all paved gutters according to num .
when required by the plans fill all voids with grout .
num tied concrete block mat .
when specified use tied concrete block mat type ___ conforming to num as shown on the plans .
place directly on the geotextile fabric .
install per the manufacturers recommendation .
num articulating concrete block revetment system .
when specified use articulating concrete block revetment system type _ conforming to num as shown on the plans .
install per the manufacturers recommendation .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure riprap articulating concrete block revetment system crushed aggregate slope protection concrete slope protection and tied concrete block mats by the square yard square meter of the finished surface completed and accepted in place with or without grout .
the department will measure dumped rock fill and rock channel protection with or without filter by the cubic yard cubic meter completed and accepted in place according to the dimensions shown on the plans excluding rock filter with or without grout .
the department may determine quantities by volume in the vehicle or by a job conversion weight of acceptable material delivered .
the department will measure paved gutter by the foot meter completed and accepted in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will specify with grout in the pay item description when required .
when the pay item calls out tied concrete block mat or articulating concrete block revetment system include geotextile fabric material and installation in the price .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard riprap square meter num square yard crushed aggregate slope protection square meter num square yard concrete slope protection square meter num square yard tied concrete block mat type _ __ square meter num square yard articulating concrete block revetment system type___ square meter num cubic yard dumped rock fill type ___ cubic meter num cubic yard rock channel protection type ___ with filter cubic meter num cubic yard rock channel protection type ___ without filter cubic meter num cubic yard rock channel protection type ___ with aggregate filter cubic meter num square yard detention basin filter square meter num square yard infiltration basin filter square meter num square yard infiltration trench filter square meter num cubic yard bioretention cell cubic meter num foot meter paved gutter item num masonry num description num materials num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing headwalls pipe cradles collars and other brick and masonry units of the types and sizes specified .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to backfill num concrete class qcmisc num and num water for grout and mortar num reinforcing steel num cement for mortar num through num sand for mortar num granular base granular material type b num.c brick and masonry units num num num nonshrink mortar num lime for mortar .
num num construction requirements .
construct the designated items as shown on the plans .
a. excavate to dimensions that provide ample room for construction .
remove obstructions as necessary to perform this work .
protect the sides of all excavations from caving by providing suitable sheeting shoring and bracing .
use excavation methods that do not disturb the original material below the bottom of footers or below the additional num inches num mm required for precast structures .
if the material found at the bottom of the headwall or below the additional num inches num mm required for precast structures is not suitable for a foundation excavate to further depth to provide a suitable foundation .
backfill the void left by the additional excavation with granular base .
the department will pay for this additional work according to num .
backfilling shall follow completion of the work as closely as the construction will allow .
backfill with granular base or soil .
place backfill in numinch num mm loose lifts .
b. compaction requirements are according to item num except for the following four passes per lift with additional passes as required until num percent compaction is reached .
use compaction equipment with a minimum total weight of or minimum centrifugal force of num ton num metric ton .
supply the manufacturers specifications for this equipment to verify these requirements .
c. castinplace structures are headwalls wingwalls pipe cradles collars and other units .
construct castinplace structures according to the corresponding standard construction drawing using methods specified in items num num and num .
d. precast structures for half height headwalls are for circular conduits up to a maximum of num inches num mm and elliptical and pipe arch conduits up to a maximum num inches nummm round equivalent .
the shop drawings are kept on file at the certified precast facility per supplemental num .
construct elliptical and pipe arch half height headwalls from templates of the actual conduit being supplied to the project to ensure the opening is outside diameter plus one inch .
ensure the precast structures and their shop drawings conform to the following additional requirements num .
all manufacturers are preapproved according to supplement num .
num .
all reinforcing steel will be epoxy coated .
num .
all hwnum scd require wire insert details .
num .
attachment detail for metal or plastic conduit conforming to scd hwnum .
num .
noncorrosive lifting devices .
num .
maximum opening is conduit outside diameter plus num inch num mm for each conduit material type .
num .
all openings to be filled with nonshrink mortar including all lifting device voids .
num .
changes in preapproved drawings are the same as non preapproved drawings .
num .
detail how the num inch num mm extension is treated if required .
num .
fill the void between the precast half height headwall and the conduit by using nonshrink mortar .
num .
apply marking either stamped or painted to the headwall to ensure each headwall size is matched to the proper conduit size and material type .
e. precast structures for wing walls and headwalls for use with items num num num and num .
do not use precast footings .
the contractor may provide precast wingwalls or headwalls in lieu of castinplace walls using the following criteria num .
select fabricators that are prequalified and evaluated by the office of materials management omm according to supplement num and listed by the department before the contract letting date .
num .
all reinforcing steel shall be epoxy coated .
num .
wall anchorage dowels shall be epoxy coated as per num or galvanized as per num .
num .
galvanize all connection hardware per num .
num .
install dowels per num using nonshrink nonmetallic num epoxy grout .
num .
provide the entrained air requirements as per the applicable concrete specification .
num .
provide noncorrosive lifting devices .
num .
fill all openings including all lifting hook voids with nonshrink mortar per num .
num .
provide shop drawings detailing precast concrete structural elements and calculations according to the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
num .
have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings .
provide a cover sheet containing the preparers and checkers first name last name initials and shop drawing content responsibility .
preparers and checkers shall initial each sheet for their content responsibility .
the preparers and checkers shall not be the same individual .
have an ohio registered engineer review approve sign seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter according to orc num and oac num confirming that the shop drawings meet the intent of the contract .
num .
submit the shop drawings and calculations to the engineer at least num days before construction begins .
department acceptance is not required .
num .
the contractors written acceptance letter shall document acceptance of the shop drawings including confirmation of field verification as required and descriptions of issues resolved between the contractor the fabricator or the department .
num .
by accepting these shop drawings the contractor represents to the department that all dimensions and elevations of existing conditions shown on the plans have been field measured and verified and that these shop drawings comply with all the materials requirements construction requirements contract requirements and performance criteria .
the contractor further represents that these drawings have been coordinated and verified with the details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project .
the department will not make any allowance for additional cost or delays to the contractor for incorrect fabrication as a result of failure to coordinate or perform this acceptance .
num .
if the department requests changes on these shop drawings or the contractor makes changes in addition to those expressly requested ensure that the shop drawings are accepted as above with suitable revision marks to identify the changes .
num .
shop drawing general requirements a .
provide a separate shop drawing for each culvert location .
b .
provide on num x num sheets in pdf portable document format .
c. show i .
all dimensions .
ii .
inlet and outlet .
iii .
north arrow .
iv .
roadway centerline stationing .
v. all construction phases .
vi .
precast piece labels vii .
holes for conduits framed with diagonal reinforcing on both faces .
viii .
reinforcing lap lengths ix .
material strengths x. weep holes locations xi .
lifting device locations .
d. label i .
project number ii .
pid iii .
county route section of the structure iv .
stream name as show on plans v. structure file number or culvert file number as given on the plans vi .
fabrication facility where units are to be cast f. masonry units structures are headwalls pipe cradles collars and other units .
thoroughly wet masonry units before laying the mortar .
lay masonry units with full mortar joints .
take adequate precautions to prevent the mortar from freezing .
do not set masonry units having a temperature of num f num c or less with mortar until heated .
when required heat to ensure that a temperature of num to num f num to num c is obtained throughout the entire masonry units .
cure the exposed surfaces of the masonry units by covering with wet burlap for num hours or by applying curing membrane according to item num .
construct the masonry units structures according to the corresponding standard construction drawing .
use one of the following mortars num .
one part portland cement to two parts sand by volume .
the contractor may add lime in an amount not to exceed num percent of the cement by weight num .
one part masonry cement to two parts sand by volume .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure brick masonry block masonry and concrete masonry by the number of cubic yards cubic meters calculated from dimensions shown on the plans .
num basis of payment .
when a precast structure is used payment is based on the number of cubic yards cubic meters required for the cast in place item and is considered full compensation for construction of the precast structure .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard brick masonry cubic meter num cubic yard block masonry cubic meter num cubic yard concrete masonry cubic meter item num underdrains num description num materials num pipe underdrains construction num construction underdrains num prefabricated edge underdrains num underdrain outlets num aggregate drains num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing unclassified pipe underdrains shallow pipe underdrains deep pipe underdrains base pipe underdrains or rock cut underdrains with or without a geotextile fabric construction underdrains prefabricated edge underdrains and aggregate drains .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
concrete class qcmisc num and num reinforcing steel num geotextile fabric type a num backfill unclassified pipe underdrains shallow pipe underdrains deep pipe underdrains base pipe underdrains or rock cut underdrains with or without a geotextile fabric construction underdrains and aggregate drains with granular material consisting of no .
num num or num size aircooled blast furnace slag limestone or gravel .
use granular material with a maximum sodium sulfate soundness loss of num percent .
backfill prefabricated edge underdrains with granular material consisting of no .
num size aircooled blast furnace slag limestone or gravel .
use granular material with a maximum sodium sulfate soundness loss of num percent .
for num.a through num.b use the pipe of the same size and kind listed in the proposal .
if the kind of pipe is not specifically itemized in the proposal use types as listed below .
a .
pipe for num rock cut underdrains .
corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing perforated num smoothwall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe perforated according to num num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe perforated according to num num b .
pipe for num unclassified pipe underdrains shallow pipe underdrains deep pipe underdrains base pipe underdrains perforated concrete pipe num concrete drain tile extra quality num perforated vitrified clay pipe num clay drain tile extra quality num corrugated steel underdrains type iii num corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing perforated num polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and underdrains type iii num c. pipe for num construction underdrains num inch num mm corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing perforated num d. pipe for num prefabricated edge underdrains .
use pipe conforming to num .
num pipe underdrains construction .
construct underdrains as follows a. excavation .
excavate trenches to such dimensions allowing ample room for construction .
construct the trench width to at least num inches num mm for numinch num mm diameter underdrains and to at least num inches num mm for numinch num mm diameter underdrains .
excavate the trench walls as vertical as possible and excavate bell holes to allow proper placing of the underdrain .
remove obstructions encountered while excavating for the underdrains .
excavate trenches measured vertically from the subgrade to the bottom of the trench at a depth of num inches num mm for base pipe underdrains num inches num mm for shallow pipe underdrains and num inches num mm for deep pipe underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans .
furnish a depth of num inches num mm for construction underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans .
excavate trenches for unclassified pipe underdrains to the depth specified in the plans .
excavate trenches to a depth of num inches num mm below the rock shale or coal depth required in num for rock cut underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans .
if underdrains are to be placed within or beneath an embankment construct the embankment to the elevation of the top of the subgrade before trenching for the underdrain .
if fabric is specified line the underdrain trench with geotextile fabric .
place the geotextile fabric to completely surround the granular material .
overlap the geotextile fabric at the top of the trench .
match the overlap to the trench width .
at other seams overlap geotextile fabric a minimum of num inches num m. b .
laying underdrain .
lay the underdrain true to line and grade with close fitting joints .
place the underdrain in the center of the trench .
use locking bands or smooth sleeve type couplers matching the underdrain material type to join num num num and num .
when bell and spigot underdrain is used lay it with the bell end facing up grade .
set the underdrain on a solid bed shaped to fit the underdrain throughout its entire length .
make all necessary connections with branches wyes tees transitions and bends that match the underdrain material type .
close the upper ends of underdrains with suitable plugs .
lay perforated underdrain so that the perforations are in the bottom half of the underdrain .
c. backfilling .
inspect the underdrains before placing any granular material .
place the granular material for the full width of the trench around the underdrain and extend it to the bottom of the pavement or base as shown on the plans .
if underdrains are placed outside of the pavement or base area extend the granular material to within num inches num mm of the finished grade .
fill the remaining depth of the trench with num embankment material .
d. protection .
place the pavement over the underdrain trench within num days after placing the trench backfill .
if the trench remains open for longer than num days remove and replace backfill contaminated by soil .
num construction underdrains .
construct construction underdrains as follows a. excavation .
construct the trench width to at least num inches num mm with a minimum of num inches num mm on each side of the underdrain .
excavate the bottom of the trench to allow proper placing of the underdrain .
remove obstructions encountered while excavating for the underdrains .
b. trench depth and backfill .
construct the trench depth to that shown on the plans or num inches num mm .
backfill the trench with granular material for the full width of the trench and to the full height of the trench .
c. outlet .
outlet the construction underdrains as possible into the ditch or drainage structures .
there is no change in pipe types for the outlet .
d. removal .
construction underdrains are not to be removed at any time .
if the construction practice used requires the construction underdrains to be removed then install replacements as soon as possible .
num prefabricated edge underdrains .
install the prefabricated edge underdrains against the outside wall of a numinch num mm trench and backfill the trench adjacent to the pavement with granular material .
place the granular material in one or more lifts with a vibratory compactor run over the final lift to compact the granular material before placing the asphalt plug .
place the first layer of the granular material simultaneously with the trenching operation to hold the edge underdrains flush against the trench wall .
splice the prefabricated edge underdrains as required before placing in the trench using material furnished by the manufacturer and according to the manufacturers directions .
require the manufacturer to furnish all material required for the splices and furnish any equipment required for splicing .
construct splices to prevent separation of adjoining sections of the prefabricated edge underdrain panels .
num underdrain outlets .
construct pipe outlets concurrently with underdrains .
provide all outlets on the slope with a precast reinforced concrete outlet according to item num and a tied concrete block mat type num grouted according to num .
construct the underdrains outlets according to item num using outlet fittings .
require the manufacturer to supply outlet fittings that transition between the underdrains and the outlet pipe .
provide smoothlined or corrugated outlet fittings .
have the underdrains and outlets on fractured slab projects such as crack and seat rubblized or break and seat projects in place and functional before fracturing the existing pavement .
mark all underdrain outlets with a wooden lath prior to final seeding .
clean all debris from the outlets after final seeding .
num aggregate drains .
construct the aggregate drains after the completion of granular pavement courses .
a. excavation .
excavate trenches for aggregate drains to a minimum width of num inches num m and to the depth shown on the plans .
slope the bottom of the trench to drain and keep it free from loose particles of soil .
excavate the trench to furnish a clean exposure of the granular pavement courses .
b placing and backfilling .
use granular material for the drains .
place the aggregate to a minimum depth of num inches num mm above the bottom of the trench .
the remaining depth of the trench backfill with suitable embankment material according to item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure unclassified pipe underdrains shallow pipe underdrains deep pipe underdrains base pipe underdrains construction underdrains rock cut underdrains and prefabricated edge underdrains by the number of feet meters completed and accepted in place measured from end to end of each run .
the department will measure aggregate drains by the number of feet meters completed and accepted in place measured along the bottom of the trench .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for pipe outlets under num .
the department will pay for precast reinforced concrete outlets under num precast reinforced concrete outlet .
the department will pay for tied concrete block mats type num grouted under num tied concrete block mat .
rock cut underdrains are placed in rock and all required trenching in the rock is included under rock cut underdrain .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter ____ ____ mm unclassified pipe underdrains num foot meter num num mm construction underdrains num num foot meter ____ ____ mm shallow pipe underdrains num foot meter ____ ____ mm deep pipe underdrains num foot meter ____ ____ mm base pipe underdrains num foot meter aggregate drains num foot meter ____ ____ mm rock cut underdrains num foot meter ____ ____ mm prefabricated edge underdrains item num guardrail num description num materials num setting posts num erecting rail elements num guardrail rebuilt num impact attenuators num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing or reconstructing guardrail guardrail posts bridge terminal assemblies end terminals and impact attenuators including the furnishing assembling and erecting of all component parts and materials .
guardrail shall be deep beam rail type mgs num numa or num .
appurtenances shall include bridge terminal assemblies end terminals and impact attenuators .
construction of the various types of guardrail include the furnishing assembling and erecting of all component parts and materials complete in place at the location shown on the plans or as directed and according to the manufacturers recommendations where applicable .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc misc qc num qc num num and num reinforcing steel num deep beam rail and hardware num pressure treated guardrail posts and blockouts num steel guardrail posts num guardrail posts num galvanizing num for guardrail use deep beam rail type mgs .
num numa or num .
num setting posts .
set or drive posts plumb in a manner that prevents battering or distorting of posts .
trim posts that are set or driven more than numinch num mm above grade .
treat trimmed posts with a preservative material specified in num .
backfill post holes with acceptable material placed in layers and thoroughly compacted .
num erecting rail elements .
erect standard design singlefaced guardrail of the type shown on the plans .
erect barrier design doublefaced guardrail as shown on the plans .
erect rail elements in a manner resulting in a smooth continuous installation .
use shopcurved rail on curves with radii from num to num feet num to num m. except where otherwise required such as expansion joint bolts draw bolts tight .
tighten bolts through expansion joints as tight as possible without preventing the rail elements from sliding past one another longitudinally .
provide bolts long enough to extend at least num inch num mm beyond the nuts .
do not use splice bolts that extend more than num inch num mm beyond the nuts .
for doublefaced guardrail provide bolts that extend from num to num inch num to num mm beyond the nuts .
fabricate all metal in the shop .
do not perform burning or welding in the field .
the engineer may approve making holes in the field but only for special details in exceptional cases .
the engineer may approve field punching cutting and drilling if the contractor demonstrates that its methods do not damage the surrounding metal .
repair galvanized surfaces that have been abraded such that the base metal is exposed including threaded portions of all fittings and fasteners and cut ends of bolts as specified by astm a num except the department will not allow aerosol spray applications of paints containing zinc dust .
erect guardrail so that the bolts at expansion joints are located at the centers of the slotted holes .
splice the rail elements by lapping in the direction of traffic .
ensure that the plates at each splice make contact throughout the area of the splice .
num guardrail rebuilt .
as shown on the plans rebuild existing guardrails .
unless otherwise shown on the plans rebuild units of the same type and spacing of members as the existing guardrail .
for reerecting obtain the rail element from specified salvage sources .
furnish the following new materials posts blockouts bolts washers and incidental hardware as necessary to complete the guardrail except num existing steel posts and blockouts that are not damaged and have a good galvanized coating may be reused and num reuse guardrail splice bolts that are undamaged and were not removed during salvage may be reused .
num impact attenuators .
before installing the attenuator make all corresponding shop drawings from the manufacturer available for the engineers inspection .
include installation drawings and instructions with the shop drawings that completely describe the attenuator system .
grade the top of each foundation at the same elevation as the adjacent travel lane andor paved shoulder .
adjust the location of the anchors to avoid pavement joints .
the contractor shall use approved proprietary impact attenuator products as required which can be found on the office of roadway engineerings website .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure guardrail new or rebuilt of the type specified by the number of feet meters from centertocenter of end posts excluding anchor assemblies .
if however end connections are made to masonry or steel structures the department will measure to the center of the normal post bolt slot .
if rail element is used across a bridge the department will measure to the first post off the bridge .
the department will measure anchor assembly of the type specified by the number each assembly furnished and erected complete .
the department will measure bridge terminal assembly of the type specified by the number of each assembly furnished and erected complete .
the department will measure impact attenuator of the type specified by the number of each furnished and erected complete .
the department will measure guardrail post of the kind specified by the number of each furnished and erected .
num basis of payment .
the additional costs associated with furnishing and installing extralength posts instead of standardlength guardrail posts are incidental to guardrail post numfoot num m or guardrail post numfoot num m. for the extra costs associated with furnishing and installing extralength posts in lieu of standardlength guardrail posts payment for numfoot num m guardrail posts is considered full compensation .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter guardrail type ___ num foot meter guardrail barrier design type ___ num foot meter guardrail rebuilt type ___ num each anchor assembly type ___ num each anchor assembly barrier design type ___ num each bridge terminal assembly type ___ num each impact attenuator type ___ num each guardrail post num each guardrail post numfoot num m num each guardrail post numfoot num m item num fence num description num materials num clearing grading and seeding num post assemblies num horizontal deflection num line posts num fabric num barbed wire num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and erecting fence and gates of the types designated .
construct fence in a manner that provides a rigid taut fence closely conforming to the surface of the ground .
fence is designated by the following types a .
type num numinch num mm woven wire fence fabric steel line posts and one strand of barbed wire .
b .
type numra numinch num mm woven wire fence fabric wood line posts and no barbed wire .
c. type clt numinch num mm chainlink fence fabric with tension wire .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete qc misc or qc num or qc num num and num reinforcing steel num barbed wire num woven steel wire fence num chainlink fence num fence posts braces and dimension lumber num steel line posts and ties type num fence num expansion shield anchors self drilling num seeding and mulching num num clearing grading and seeding .
perform clearing and grading as necessary to construct the fence to the required alignment and provide a reasonably smooth ground profile at the fence line .
perform fenceline seeding and mulching according to item num seeding and mulching on all areas disturbed by the clearing and grading for the fence within num months of the activity .
the department will deduct the area paid for under item num fenceline seeding and mulching from item num seeding and mulching quantities as described in the plan if applicable .
num post assemblies .
securely brace end corner gate and pull or intermediate anchor posts in position during the curing period of the concrete encasement .
the engineer will not require forms for post encasement .
for type num and type clt fence ensure that the maximum spacing between intermediate anchor post assemblies or between end post assemblies and intermediate anchor post assemblies are num feet num m. num horizontal deflection .
at points of horizontal deflection construct the fence as follows a .
type num fence .
if the fence changes alignment by more than num degree but not more than num degrees install either steel line posts encased in concrete or wood posts without encasement at all horizontal deflection points .
if the change in alignment is more than num degrees and less than num degrees build an intermediate anchor post assembly at the deflection point .
if the change in alignment is num degrees or more build a corner post assembly at the deflection point .
b .
type clt fence .
if the fence changes alignment by more than num degree but not more than num degrees install line posts encased in concrete at all horizontal deflection points .
if the change in alignment exceeds num degrees provide a post brace and truss rod in each fence panel adjacent to the post located at the angle point .
if the change in alignment exceeds num degrees construct the footings for all post located at deflection points as specified for end posts .
num line posts .
set line posts according to the following a .
type num fence .
space line posts at intervals not to exceed num feet num m. anchor line posts at the bottom of dips or depressions in the ground surface in concrete .
if channels or streams cross the fence line construct crossings as shown on the plans .
on tangents place line posts so that the fabric when installed on the side toward the highway is num feet num m from the rightofway line .
if adjacent to rightofway lines with less than num feet num m radius in excess of num degree curvature construct line posts on chords so that the fabric when installed on the side toward the highway is not less than num feet num m or more than num feet num m from the rightofway line .
locate posts at points of horizontal deflection so that the fence fabric will bear against the post .
b .
type clt fence .
protect the tops of driven line posts by drive caps or other method to prevent distortion of the exposed end .
space line posts at not more than numfoot num m centers and place them so that when the wire is fastened on the side toward the highway it is num foot num m from the rightofway line .
num fabric .
if setting posts in concrete do not erect the fabric until after num days from the time of setting the posts when using regular concrete or until after num days when using concrete with high early strength cement stretch and securely fasten type num fabric to line posts using galvanized ties .
at a minimum use one tie each for the top and bottom horizontal wires and one tie for each alternate horizontal wire below the top horizontal wire .
fasten chainlink fabric to the line posts using clips or bands spaced approximately num inches num m apart and to the top rail or top tension wire using bands or tie wires at approximately numinch num m intervals or less .
join successive rolls of fabric by weaving a single picket into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh .
num barbed wire .
if barbed wire is specified stretch and fasten it in the same manner as woven wire fabric .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure fence type ___ by the number of feet meters complete in place .
the department will measure along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts exclusive of gates and other openings .
the department will count gate type ___ by the number of complete units of the size and type specified .
the department will measure fenceline seeding and mulching by the number of feet meters of fence .
the department will measure along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts exclusive of gates and other openings .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows seeding and mulching shall be paid under item num fenceline seeding and mulching item unit description num foot meter fence type___ num each gate type___ num foot meter fenceline seeding and mulching item num walks curb ramps and steps num description num materials num concrete walks num asphalt concrete walks num crushed aggregate walks num concrete steps num curb ramps num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing walks curb ramps and steps as per plans specifications and standard drawings .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to aggregate base num and num asphalt concrete type num num concrete class qc misc or qc num num reinforcing steel num crushed aggregate meeting grading requirements of num detectable warning devices num expansion joint material num replacing coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with recycled concrete aggregate conforming to supplement num is an option .
num concrete walks .
construct concrete walks as follows a. excavation .
excavate to the required depth and to a width that allows installation and bracing of forms .
shape and uniformly compact the subgrade to a surface conforming to the plans .
b .
forms .
use either fixed forms or slipform methods .
for fixedform construction use wooden or metal forms that extend the full depth of the concrete and that do not spring under the concrete pressure .
for slipform construction perform the work according to num.c .
c. placing and finishing .
immediately before placing concrete thoroughly moisten the subgrade .
deposit concrete in a single layer strike it off with a template and smooth it with a float to obtain a sandy texture .
do not plaster the concrete .
use a numinch num mm radius edging tool to edge all outside edges and joints .
divide the surface of the walks into equally spaced rectangular blocks at approximately numfoot num m intervals .
saw or form transverse joints to a depth of not less than onefourth the thickness of the slab and to a width of approximately num inch num mm .
install numinch num mm thick expansion joint filler between the walk and any fixed structure that extends the full depth of the walk .
install numinch num mm thick expansion joint filler between the walk and the back of curb that is on a numfoot num m or smaller radius such as at street intersections .
d. slope .
construct the surface of the walk with a maximum transverse slope rate of num and with the low side adjacent to the roadway .
e. curing .
cure concrete according to item num .
num asphalt concrete walks .
construct asphalt concrete walks as follows a. excavation and forms .
excavate and construct forms according to num.a and num.b .
b .
base .
place and thoroughly compact aggregate base in layers not exceeding num inches num mm in depth .
c. asphalt placement and compaction .
place asphalt concrete in one or more courses to provide the required depth .
compact using a hand roller or power roller of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer .
num crushed aggregate walks .
construct crushed aggregate walks as follows a. excavation .
excavate according to num.a .
b .
forms .
construct forms of wood or metal of acceptable rigidity and to the depth of the necessary loose material .
back forms with compacted soil to the height of the completed walk .
c. aggregate placement and compaction .
place aggregate in one or more courses to provide the required depth .
compact using equipment of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer .
num concrete steps .
construct concrete steps as follows a. excavation and forms .
excavate and construct forms according to num.a and num.b .
b .
placement and finishing .
place and finish concrete according to item num except finish the treads of steps to produce a sandy texture .
c. slope .
slope step treads at a rate of num and toward the next lower step .
d. curing .
cure steps according to num.e .
e. railing .
if specified install hand railing according to item num .
num curb ramps .
excavate form place finish and cure according to num.a num.b num.c and num.e .
finish ramps to a rougher final surface texture than the adjacent walk and with striations transverse to the ramp slope using a coarse broom or other method approved by the engineer .
provide detectable warning devices conforming to num in curb ramps .
install the detectable warning devices according to manufacturers written recommendations and standard drawings .
provide a warranty to conform with the requirements of num .
provide the manufacturers written installation instructions and the numyear warranty to the engineer at or before the preconstruction meeting .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure concrete walk asphalt concrete walk and aggregate walk by the number of square feet square meters of finished surface complete in place .
the department will measure curb ramps by the number of square feet square meters completed .
the department will measure detectable warnings in existing curb ramps and at grade crossings by the number of square feet square meters completed .
the department will measure concrete steps by the number of feet meters along the front edge of each tread .
where steps are constructed with integral walls the department will include the thickness of the integral walls with the tread width measurement .
num basis of payment .
payment for walks curb ramps detectable warnings and steps is full compensation for excavation backfill concrete cuttingsawing base course material reinforcing steel hand railing expansion joint materials and any incidentals required to complete the installation as specified .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square foot concrete walk square meter num square foot asphalt concrete walk square meter num square foot aggregate walk square meter num square foot curb ramp square meter num square foot detectable warning square meter num foot meter concrete steps item num curbing concrete medians and traffic islands num description num materials num stone curb num castinplace concrete curb and combination curb and gutter num asphalt concrete curb num concrete median and traffic island num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and constructing curb combination curb and gutter medians and traffic islands .
this work also consists of excavating backfilling furnishing and installing joint materials and disposing of surplus excavation and discarded materials according to item num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc misc or qc num num preformed filler num tie bar steel epoxy coated num num num num coated dowel bars num replacing coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with recycled concrete aggregate conforming to supplement num is an option furnish the best quality of berea or amherst gray sandstone or sandstone of equal quality .
furnish asphalt concrete curb conforming to num type num intermediate course .
conform the asphalt concrete to the composition requirements with the fine aggregate content set at the maximum allowed under this composition .
provided the contractor meets the composition requirements the contractor may add mineral filler conforming to num .
add the mineral filler using a method approved by omm .
num stone curb a .
cutting and dressing .
ensure that num percent of all straight curb pieces are at least numfeet num m long with no pieces less than num inches num m. the contractor may use a piece as short as num inches num m for closure .
for curves with a radius of num feet num m or greater the contractor may use radially jointed straight curb pieces between num and num inches num and num m long .
for curves and corners with a radius of less than num feet num m use pieces a minimum of numinches num m long and dress joint and set pieces to the radii specified .
for all curves and corners use curb sections that are approximately uniform in length .
dress all curb to a straight edge on top and on the exposed face and ends to a depth of at least num inches num mm below the gutter elevation .
dress the ends at right angles to the face for straight curb and radially for curb on curves .
do not allow slack or hollow joints .
do not leave any projections after dressing the ends of any curb section that exceed num inch num mm from the plane of the end of that section .
cut the edge next to the gutter to a numinch num mm radius and dress the top to a numinch num mm bevel rising from the exposed face .
use a pitching tool on the edge at the back to hand dress curb to the specified width .
b .
setting .
set the curb on a thoroughly compacted subgrade and with a num in num batter from the vertical backward from the gutter .
place a minimum numinch num mm thick firm bed of aggregate material as a foundation for the curb .
use a heavy rammer to settle the curb into place .
place and compact a minimum numinch num mm wide aggregate backfill behind the curb to within num inches num mm of the top .
bring the balance of the backfill to the level of the top of the curb for a distance of num feet num m behind the curb with soil or other acceptable material .
thoroughly tamp the backing in layers not exceeding num inches num mm in thickness loose measurement with an approved tamper or rammer .
perform as much of the backfilling and tamping as is consistent with alignment of the curb at the time the stone is first set .
set curb on curves in plastic concrete numinches num mm thick as shown on the plans .
extend concrete the width of the curb plus num inches num mm behind the curb and bring concrete up behind the curb to within num inches num mm of the top .
c. joints .
set curbs such that below the dressed portions the space between ends of adjacent sections of curbing is not less than num inch num mm at any point and not more than num inches num mm .
cushion the joints between the dressed portions of adjacent sections of curbing with numinch num mm thick expansion joint material .
trim expansion joint material flush with the curbing on all edges .
if placing sandstone curb after placing pavement fill remaining joints with dry sand to within num inches num mm of the surface of the pavement and fill to the pavement surface with asphalt concrete .
take care in filling this joint so that no asphalt concrete comes in contact with the exposed surface of the curb .
d. reusing existing as new curb .
if specifically allowed by the plans and to the extent available use acceptable stone curb sections removed under item num instead of furnishing new stone curb .
use salvaged curb at locations designated by the engineer .
place all salvaged sections of curb continuously without interspersing salvaged and new curb sections .
haul and store salvaged curb as necessary .
cut dress set and install joints in salvaged curbs according to the requirements for new curbs .
num castinplace concrete curb and combination curb and gutter .
a .
forms and joints .
use approved steel forms for curbs .
securely brace and hold forms to the line and grade shown on the plans .
the contractor may use approved flexible forms of steel or wood to construct curved curb with a radius of num feet num m or less .
immediately before placing concrete clean the inner surface of the forms and coat this surface with a form release agent .
where curb and combination curb and gutter is not constructed integral with or tied to the base or pavement construct numinch num mm wide contraction joints at numfeet num m intervals using steel separator plates a grooving tool or a saw according to item num .
for combination curb and gutter construct the joint to an average depth of num inches num mm or more .
for curb construct the joint to an average depth of onefifth or more of the curb height .
where expansion joints occur in the abutting pavement separate the section being placed with numinch num mm thick num preformed filler .
where the curb is integral with or tied to the base or pavement construct the same type of joints as used in the pavement .
space joints identically with the joints in the base or pavement .
leave curb forms in place until their removal will not crack shatter or otherwise injure the concrete .
do not seal transverse joints in castinplace concrete curb and combination curb and gutter .
if curbs are to later serve as a support for a finishing machine in the placing of a surface course align supporting edges so that the distance between the curbs is within num inch num mm from that specified .
b .
placing .
place concrete in forms prepared as described above and vibrate the concrete to eliminate all voids .
place concrete for curb that is integral with the concrete base or pavement while the base or pavement concrete is plastic .
where the presence of the finishing equipment on the forms at the end of the days run prevents completing the curb install no .
num no .
numm tie bars vertically in the pavement at numfoot num m intervals and in a line num inches num mm inside of and parallel to the pavement edge .
install these tie bars to within num num inches num mm of the subgrade or subbase and num inches num mm above the concrete base or pavement surface .
water cure this horizontal construction joint between the concrete base or pavement and the curb or membrane cure the concrete base or pavement and remove the membrane before placing the curb .
immediately before placing the concrete curb brush mortar consisting of one part cement to two parts sand with enough water to form a workable mortar into the surface area of the hardened concrete pavement or base where the curb is to be placed .
do not allow the mortar to dry before placing the curb on top of it .
c. slipform placement .
the contractor may use a selfpropelled machine to place concrete curb or curb and gutter .
force the concrete through a mold of the proper crosssection to obtain the proper density and crosssection .
if using a track set and secure the track on which the machine operates to the exact line and grade given by the engineer .
use concrete of a consistency that provides the desired shape and remains as placed without slumping of the vertical faces .
d. finishing .
without adding extra mortar float the top of the curb to thoroughly compact the concrete and produce a smooth and even surface .
round the edges of the curb using a tool specially designed for this purpose .
immediately after removing the forms rub the exposed face of the curb with a float to eliminate unnecessary tool marks .
provide a finished surface free of irregularities and waves and uniform in texture .
e. protection .
cure concrete according to item num .
num asphalt concrete curb .
use one of the following methods or other method approved by the engineer to furnish and place an asphalt concrete curb of the required crosssection .
a .
method a .
after completing the surface course paint or spray only the area to be occupied by the asphalt concrete curb with asphalt material conforming to num .
apply the asphalt material at the rate of num gallon per square yard num lmnum .
place the curb with a handoperated or selfpropelled machine consisting of a hopper and powerdriven screw which forces the material through an extrusion tube .
force the material through a die attached to the end of the extrusion tube to obtain the proper density and crosssection .
b .
method b .
as an independent operation preceding the final rolling of the asphalt concrete surface course on which the curb is placed place loose asphalt concrete of sufficient height .
shape the loose asphalt concrete by hand methods using suitable templates or by other means to produce the specified crosssection .
compact the loose asphalt concrete using a handoperated mechanical vibrating tamper equipped with a compacting shoe of such shape that will produce the specified final crosssection dimensions of the curb .
num concrete median and traffic island a .
forms and joints .
securely brace and hold approved steel forms to the line and grade shown on the plans .
the contractor may use approved flexible forms of steel or wood to construct curves with a radius of num feet num m or less .
immediately before placing concrete clean the inner surface of the forms and coat this surface with a form release agent .
where medians and traffic islands are not anchored to the pavement construct contraction joints at numfoot num m intervals using steel separator plates a grooving tool or saw according to item num .
construct joints to a minimum depth of num inches num mm .
where the medians or traffic islands are anchored to the pavement construct the same type of joints in the median or traffic island as used in the pavement .
construct joints to a minimum depth of num inches num mm using steel separator plates a grooving tool or saw according to item num .
space the joints identically with the joints in the pavement .
leave forms in place until their removal will not crack shatter or otherwise injure the concrete .
b .
placing .
immediately before placing a concrete median or traffic island on subgrade bring the subgrade to a thoroughly moistened condition by sprinkling with water at such times and in such a manner directed by the engineer .
place the concrete in forms prepared as described above and vibrate the concrete to eliminate all voids .
c. slipform placement .
the contractor may use a selfpropelled machine to place medians and traffic islands .
force the concrete through a mold of the proper crosssection to obtain the proper density and crosssection .
if using a track set and secure the track on which the machine operates to the exact line and grade given by the engineer .
use concrete of a consistency that provides the desired shape and remains as placed without slumping of the faces .
d. finishing .
without adding extra mortar finish the top of the median or traffic island to a broom texture .
round the edges using a tool specially designed for this purpose .
immediately after removing the forms rub the exposed faces with a float to eliminate unnecessary tool marks .
provide a finished surface free of irregularities and waves and a uniform texture .
e. protection .
cure concrete according to item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure sandstone curb curb combination curb and gutter and asphalt concrete curb by the number of feet meters complete in place measured along the front face of the curb section .
the department will measure concrete traffic island and concrete median by the number of square yards square meters or the number of cubic yards cubic meters complete in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter sandstone curb num foot meter curb type ___ num foot meter combination curb and gutter type ___ num foot meter asphalt concrete curb type ___ num square yard or concrete traffic island cubic yard square meter or cubic meter num square yard or concrete median cubic yard square meter or cubic meter item num cellular retaining walls num description num approval by department num materials num manufactured units num excavation num backfill num wall construction num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing retaining walls composed of a series of cells formed by assembling precast reinforced concrete or galvanized metal units to form stable walls .
concrete cellular walls consist of a series of rectangular or triangular cells formed by building up tiers of precast reinforced concrete units .
metal cellular retaining walls consists of pairs of columns one column in the plane of the front of the wall and the other column in the plane of the rear of the wall .
the column pairs are spaced longitudinally with overlapping sshaped facing and rear members and transversely with overlapping ushaped members .
num approval by department .
submit to the department for acceptance num days before the work is to begin drawings of the units to be furnished .
only submit information for walls produced by manufacturers whose type of wall and design of units comprising same has been in successful commercial use for a period of at least num years .
num materials .
furnish manufactured units conforming to a .
concrete cellular wall .
use concrete conforming to item num class qc num .
use reinforcing steel conforming to num .
b .
metal cellular wall .
provide units made from galvanized metal sheets .
use base metal conforming to aashto m num .
ensure that both sides of the sheets are galvanized by the hotdip process .
provide an average spelter coating of not less than num ounces per square foot num gmnum on each side of the sheet and a spelter coating of at least num ounces per square foot num gmnum on any num num num numinch num num mm area on each side of double exposed surfaces .
provide finished sheets that are free from injurious defects such as blisters flux and uncoated spots .
use metal sheets with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm unless otherwise shown on the plans .
furnish three copies of the manufacturers analysis and coating test certificate containing the following information covering each project or order on which galvanized metal walls are furnished .
a .
heat or heats used for units .
b .
analysis of each heat .
c. amount of spelter coating for each heat .
d. total units of each size and thickness .
e. name of contractor .
f. name of county interstate u.s. or state route number and section .
g. project number or state purchase order number .
send one copy of the certificate to the laboratory and two copies to the engineer .
with each copy of the certificate include a written statement signed by a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer that the information and test results are correct and that the material complies with all contract requirements .
furnish numinch num mm diameter bolts galvanized according to num and at least num num inches num mm long measured from the underside of the bolt head .
num manufactured units .
a .
concrete cellular wall .
cast concrete cellular wall units in substantial unyielding steel forms .
properly assemble clean and oil the forms before placing concrete in the forms .
during the placing and setting of the concrete hold the forms rigidly in place on a smooth and level platform .
secure the reinforcement to ensure that it remains in the required position while placing concrete .
vibrate the fresh concrete to fill all space in the form with concrete to densify the concrete and to surround the reinforcement .
reject units with segregated areas .
cure the units by covering with burlap that is kept wet at least num days or by applying steam for at least num hours .
all openings to be filled with nonshrink mortar per num including all lifting device voids the engineer will reject reinforced concrete units for any of the following reasons num .
exposure of the reinforcing .
num .
defects that indicate imperfect mixing placing or curing .
num .
fractures and cracks .
b .
metal cellular wall .
fabricate galvanized metal cellular wall units so that units of the same nominal size are fully interchangeable .
do not drill punch or drift holes to correct manufacturing defects .
replace all units with improperly punched holes .
if possible maintain a minimum forming radius of num inch num mm .
hotdip galvanize all units formed with less than numinch num mm radius after forming .
num excavation .
excavate according to item num .
obtain the engineers approval that the bearing for the foundation of the walls is firm and to the proper elevation before erecting the wall .
num backfill .
below the elevation of the proposed ground line at the face of the wall fill the cells formed by the units with soil as defined in num.r .
above the elevation of the proposed ground line at the face of the wall fill the cells with material conforming to num granular material type b except that the percent passing the no .
num num m sieve shall not exceed num percent .
place the material in layers that compact to a depth not to exceed num inches num mm .
compact the material to the density established by the engineer using approved tampers or compactors .
add water as directed by the engineer .
fill the space behind the wall according to num except as noted below .
backfill around the wall and in the interior cells concurrent with wall erection and as close to the wall elevation as allowed by the type of construction .
do not use rolling equipment directly over a portion of the wall until placing at least num inches num m of compacted fill .
num wall construction .
construct the wall types as follows a .
concrete cellular wall .
place sills to the required grade and alignment and support the entire sill length on the foundation material .
do not shim the sill .
place and interlock the headers perpendicular to the sills and stretches .
use templates to ensure that members are placed in the proper position and with the proper face batter .
before placing sills spread two layers of asphalt impregnated paper on all points of contact between the sills and the foundation material to ensure a uniform bedding .
after constructing two tiers of the wall check and if necessary adjust the alignment grade and batter of the units and backfill to this height before adding subsequent units .
complete the remainder of the wall .
b .
metal cellular wall .
use templates to ensure that members are placed in the proper position and with the proper face batter .
after placing the columns and constructing two tiers of the wall check and if necessary adjust the alignment grade and batter of the units and backfill to this height before adding subsequent units .
complete the remainder of the wall .
carefully handle members and remove and replace damaged members .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure cellular retaining wall by the number of square feet square meters of facial area complete in place .
num basis of payment .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials backfilling including the interior filling watering and disposing of surplus materials .
the department will not pay for replacing any unit with improperly punched holes .
the department will not pay for removing or replacing members damaged during handling .
the department will pay for excavation not including embankment construction under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num square foot cellular retaining wall square meter item num pipe culverts sewers drains and drainage structures num description num materials num definitions num submittals num excavation num bedding and backfill num laying conduit num joining conduit num exterior coatings and membrane waterproofing num drainage structure construction num field paving of new or existing conduit num performance inspection num conduit evaluation num drainage structure evaluation num surface settlements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing conduits and constructing and reconstructing drainage structures .
this work also includes preparing installation plans performing inspections and providing reports and other required documentation .
num materials .
furnish pipe of the specified conduit type and size or one size larger with the approval of the engineer .
conduit shown in the plans is designed for hydraulic capacity and durability only .
furnish conduit that meets the performance requirements of this specification and meets the durability and hydraulic capacity specified in the plans .
if the material is not specified in the plans furnish conduit conforming to any of the material requirements listed for that conduit type .
all listed materials for each conduit type can meet the performance requirements .
however different materials may require varying installation procedures .
the contractor may furnish concrete or plastic pipe of the same type with greater strength than specified .
the contractor may furnish metal pipe with a greater thickness than specified so long as the pipe has the same corrugation profile and is the same type .
a .
type a conduit culverts nonreinforced concrete pipe class num num reinforced concrete circular pipe num reinforced concrete pipe epoxy coated num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe num precast reinforced concrete box sections num precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culverts num precast reinforced concrete arch sections num precast reinforced concrete round sections num vitrified clay pipe extra strength only num corrugated steel conduits num or num structural plate corrugated steel structures num precoated galvanized steel culverts num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches with paved invert num type b or num type b corrugated aluminum alloy pipe num or num aluminum alloy structural plate conduits num corrugated steel box culverts num polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth interiorliner num aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .. num galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner num corrugated aluminum box culverts num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe num polyethylene plastic pipe based on outside diameter od num polyethylene profile wall pipe num polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe num polypropylene corrugated triple wall pipe num steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ss num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe num b .
type b conduit storm or sanitary sewers under pavement nonreinforced concrete pipe class num num reinforced concrete circular pipe num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe num precast reinforced concrete box sections num vitrified clay pipe extra strength only num corrugated steel spiral rib pipe num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe num or num polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth interior liner num aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .. num galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner num corrugated aluminum spiral rib pipe num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe num polyethylene plastic pipe based on outside diameter od num polyethylene profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe num polyvinyl chloride abs composite pipe num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe num abs drain waste and vent pipe num polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe num polypropylene triple wall pipe num steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ss num ductile iron pipe sanitary num polyvinyl chloride pipe sanitary num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe num c. type c conduit storm or sanitary sewers not under pavement nonreinforced concrete circular pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe num precast reinforced concrete box sections num vitrified clay pipe num corrugated steel spiral rib pipe num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe num or num polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth interior liner num aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .. num galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner num corrugated aluminum spiral rib pipe num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe num polyethylene plastic pipe based on outside diameter od num polyethylene profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe num polyvinyl chloride abs composite pipe num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe num abs drain waste and vent pipe num polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe num polypropylene triple wall pipe num steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ss num ductile iron pipe sanitary num polyvinyl chloride pipe sanitary num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe num d. type d conduit drive pipes and bikeways nonreinforced concrete pipe class num num reinforced concrete circular pipe num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe num vitrified clay pipe extra strength only num corrugated steel conduits num or num structural plate corrugated steel structures num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe num or num aluminum alloy structural plate conduits num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe num polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe num e. type e conduit miscellaneous small drain connections and headers nonreinforced concrete pipe num reinforced concrete circular pipe num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe num concrete drain tile extra quality num vitrified clay pipe num clay drain title extra quality num corrugated steel conduit num or num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe num or num corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe num smoothwall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe nonperforated .
num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe num polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe num polyvinyl chloride abs composite pipe num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe num abs drain waste and vent pipe num f. type f conduit conduit on steep slopes underdrain outlets corrugated steel conduits steep slope conduit num type c or num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe steep slope conduit num or num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe underdrain outlets num smoothwall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe nonperforated underdrain outlets num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe underdrain outlets num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe underdrain outlets num g. for constructing or reconstructing drainage structures furnish materials conforming to concrete class qcnum .
num num brick and masonry units num precast reinforced concrete manhole catch basin and inlet sections num precast reinforced concrete outlet num preformed expansion joint filler num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num cast frames grates and covers num num or num welded frames and grates num and num steps num num or num resilient and flexible gasket joints num curing materials num num curing membrane for inlets num type num or numd mortar num nonshrink mortar num h. for bedding and backfill furnish materials conforming to bedding num num structural backfill num num final backfill granular structural backfill num natural soils num.anum granular embankment materials num.bnum granular embankment material types a b c and d num.cnum coarse aggregate table num fine aggregate num.a num or num.a num num.a num num and num num.anum low strength mortar backfill lsm num num use any type of material defined as suitable materials for embankment construction except for steel slag pcs and rap .
i .
for concrete collars and encasement furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num num num reinforcing steel num j .
for field paving of conduit inverts furnish materials conforming to concrete class qcnum qc misc num num coarse aggregate size no .
num num or num num galvanized welded wire fabric num for material in items not specified above furnish materials conforming to mortar num nonshrink mortar num concrete sealers num bituminous pipe joint filler num resilient and flexible gasket joints for concrete pipe num vitrified clay pipe num preformed flexible joint sealant num type num membrane waterproofing num type num membrane waterproofing num geotextile fabric num type a joint wrap astm c num type iii buried liner waterproofing membrane num for class qcnum concrete provide batch plant tickets according to num .
if a precast reinforced concrete box culvert num is specified the engineer may allow the contractor to substitute either a precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culvert a precast reinforced concrete arch culvert or a precast reinforced concrete round section num num or num .
if a num num or num is specified the engineer may allow the contractor to substitute one for the other .
refer to num for submittal requirements .
if bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe or pipe arch with paved invert num or num is specified the contractor may furnish conduit with a coating conforming to num .
num definitions .
the following terms when used in this specification are defined as follows backfill .
material used to fill the trench or excavation further defined as structural backfill and final backfill not including the bedding material .
bed .
the bottom of the trench or excavation .
bedding material .
material placed above the bed and below the conduit or drainage structure .
conduit .
includes pipe culverts sewers and drains .
conduits are classified as type a b c d e and f. corrugated metal conduit .
includes all conduit made from corrugated steel or corrugated aluminum .
either material may also have coatings .
this includes all of the following types of materials num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num .
cut .
a situation where the top of the conduit is below the existing ground surface or where a proposed embankment is constructed at least num feet num m above the top of the conduit before installation .
deflection .
uniform or symmetrical flattening or ovalization of the pipes crosssection .
design service life .
the average usable life of a conduit or structure .
drainage structures .
manholes catch basins inlets inspection wells junction chambers and precast reinforced concrete outlets .
fill .
a situation where the top of the conduit is above the existing ground surface in an area where an embankment will be constructed .
final backfill .
material used to fill the trench or excavation above the structural backfill .
flexible conduit .
plastic corrugated metal ductile iron num or steel casing pipe num .
infiltration .
water or other material that enters the conduit or drainage structure through the joints or conduit connections in excess of the limits for soil tightness or for the type of joint specified .
lay length .
the length of a standard section of pipe as normally supplied by the manufacturer .
plastic conduit .
corrugated polyethylene polyvinyl chloride or abs conduit .
this includes all of the following types of materials num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ss num and num .
racking .
nonsymmetrical deflection or ovalization of a pipes crosssection .
rigid conduit .
concrete pipe vitrified clay pipe or clay drain tile .
this includes all of the following types of materials num num num num num num num num num and num .
run of conduit .
the conduit placed between drainage structures between a drainage structure and an open outlet between an open inlet and a drainage structure or between the open inlet and open outlet .
span .
span is the conduit opening measured along the centerline of the roadway .
multiple cell openings are considered one span if the clear distance between the openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
spring line .
a line along the length of the pipe at its maximum span .
for circular pipes the spring line is located at midheight of the pipe rise divided by two .
structural backfill .
material adjacent to the conduit used to fill the trench from the top of bedding material to numinches above the top of conduit or greater as required by the manufacturer .
for drainage structures material used to fill the trench from the top of bedding material to subgrade in pavement or topsoil in vegetated areas .
num submittals a .
shop drawings .
prepare shop drawings and calculations for cms items num num num and special design num as required below .
have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings and hydraulic calculations .
provide a cover sheet containing the preparers and checkers first name last name initials and content responsibility .
preparers and checkers shall initial each sheet for their content responsibility .
the preparers and checkers shall not be the same individual .
have an ohio registered engineer review approve sign seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter and hydraulic calculations according to orc num and oac num .
submit load rating report in accordance to the most current version of odots bridge design manual along with one copy of the shop drawings and one copy of the calculations to the office of structural engineering for all structures with a num foot or larger span .
submit an additional copy of the shop drawings and calculations to the engineer .
num .
if reinforced concrete circular pipe num requires a special design with a specified dload requirement other than tables num through num submit shop drawings and design calculations .
design the pipe to meet the dload requirements to ensure the performance of this specification .
include the following information in the submittal all structural design and loading information all material specifications all dimensions and the installation plan .
num .
submittals for precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culverts precast reinforced concrete arch sections or precast reinforced concrete round sections num num or num shall include structural analysis methods structural design criteria and calculations structure details and shop drawings .
include details for a precast slab bottom if required .
num .
to substitute a precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culvert num a reinforced concrete arch section num or a precast reinforced concrete round section num for one another the submittal shall include hydraulic calculations .
the proposed culvert shall meet or exceed the same hydraulic requirements as the specified culvert and minimum cover requirements .
if the specified culvert is on pedestal walls include the shop drawings for the pedestal wall design in the submittal because numsided flat topped culverts arch culverts and round sections require different pedestal wall designs .
num .
to substitute either a precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culvert a precast reinforced concrete arch section or a precast reinforced concrete round section num num or num placed on a precast or castinplace slab bottom for a precast reinforced concrete box culvert num the submittal shall include hydraulic calculations .
the proposed culvert shall meet or exceed the same hydraulic requirements as the specified box culvert and minimum cover requirements .
the department may allow the bottom slab to be castinplace but will not issue a time extension for any delays resulting from the use of a castinplace bottom slab .
department approval of shop drawings and calculations is not required .
b .
installation plan .
submit a written installation plan to the engineer for installing all conduit and drainage structures for review and acceptance .
submit the installation plan at least num days before any conduit or drainage structure work begins .
do not perform work without an accepted installation plan .
include the following required information for each conduit run num .
trench and excavation crosssections with dimensions .
num .
completed capnuma conduit installation plan form .
num .
other installation details as necessary .
num .
provide written confirmation from the conduit manufacturer that the pipe material and strength supplied are appropriate for the material and density requirements described in the installation plan for the backfill and bedding as well as the height of cover .
ensure the pipe material meets the durability design specified in the plans .
this confirmation by the conduit manufacturer will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for obtaining the required results .
include the following required information for each drainage structure num .
trench and excavation crosssections with dimensions .
num .
completed capnuma drainage structure installation plan form num .
other installation details as necessary .
deviations from the installation plan during construction require a revision of the installation plan .
resubmit all revisions to the installation plan to the engineer within num days of the change with the conduit manufacturers written confirmation that the conduit material and strength supplied are appropriate for the material and density requirements described in the newly revised installation plan for the backfill and bedding .
if the conduit manufacturer does not provide this written confirmation to the newly revised installation plan all the conduit installed according to the unconfirmed plan must be replaced .
no new installation plans will be considered until all previous installation plans have been confirmed and accepted .
provide the conduit manufacturers structural calculations when specified or within num days when requested by the engineer .
ensure the conduit structural design is performed in accordance to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
have an ohio registered engineer sign and seal the calculations .
for structural plate and metal pipe arch conduit with a span of num inches num mm or larger ensure the manufacturer provides matchmarked ends on the conduit .
include a layout drawing in the installation plan .
for metal conduit with two structural plate thicknesses specified identify the location of the thicker plates .
for precast concrete numsided flat and arch topped structures num and num provide a num inch num mm deep keyway centered on the leg and at least num inches num mm wider than the thickness of the leg at the bottom .
for precast concrete round sections num provide an numinch num mm deep keyway for spans up to num feet num m and a numinch num mm deep keyway for spans greater than num feet num m. center the keyway on the precast arch base .
the width of the keyway must be num inches num mm greater than the thickness of the precast arch base .
for nonvertical leg arches set on pedestal walls a one sided keyway is acceptable if the required pedestal wall design thickness is not sufficient for a full keyway .
c. construction inspection forms .
perform work so that it can be verified by the contractors representative doing the inspection .
submit construction inspection forms to the engineer for each run of conduit and each drainage structure .
use construction inspection form capnum for conduit and use construction inspection form ca pnum for drainage structures .
inspection form capnum is not required for precast reinforced concrete outlet structures num .
ensure that all deviations from the installation plan are noted on the construction inspection form .
ensure that the information on the construction inspection form is complete and accurate and that the form is signed by a representative of the contractor certifying that the information on the form is accurate .
the contractors representative must make the following statement on the form i certify that the information on this form is accurate and all deviations from the current installation plan have been noted .
submit each days construction inspection forms before the start of the next work day .
if the engineer gives notice that the information on the form is incomplete or not accurate do not continue related work until complete and accurate forms are submitted and accepted by the engineer .
construction inspection forms capnum and capnum require trench and bedding measurement checks to be taken every num feet with a minimum of two per run .
record measurements to the nearest num foot num mm .
if these measurements are not taken do not continue related work until the contractor submits a plan in writing to the engineer for approval that explains how these measurements will be determined .
d. performance report .
provide a performance report for each performance inspection .
include the following in each performance report num .
project number and countyroutesection .
num .
date of performance inspection .
num .
type and size of conduit .
num .
time of video recording .
num .
location e.g .
station and offset and viewing direction .
num .
summary of all defects including type measurement and location .
num .
for remote inspections using a mandrel indicate in the performance report the size of the mandrel and how it was calculated .
document all locations where the mandrel was unable to advance through the conduit .
num .
for remote inspections using a crawler mounted camera with laser profiler include a .
three dimensional model of the conduit based on the laser profile measurements .
b .
digital profile of conduit extracted from the inspection video .
c. calculations of the ovality capacity and delta of the conduit d. explanation as to why data was unattainable for any section of the conduit .
num .
conduit evaluation submit a performance report to the engineer within num days of completing the performance inspection of the conduit run or drainage structure .
submit the performance report in a digital format that allows the department to make additional copies .
num excavation .
excavate as described in the installation plan .
record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan .
excavate trenches along the centerline of the conduit .
when installing conduit in a fill situation construct the embankment to the elevation of the spring line for the conduit or higher before excavating the trench .
remove any unsuitable material exposed in the bed for the width of the trench and a depth of at least num inches num mm .
replace the unsuitable material with structural backfill type num or num .
remove any rock or shale exposed in the bed to a depth of at least num inches num mm .
replace the rock or shale with structural backfill type num or num .
the department will pay for this work according to num unless otherwise noted in the contract documents .
if the engineer changes the flow line by more than one foot num m the department will pay according to num unless otherwise noted in the contract documents .
num bedding and backfill .
place and compact bedding and backfill as described in the installation plan .
record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan .
wrap coarse aggregate bedding and backfill with geotextile fabric type a below groundwater elevation .
place geotextile fabric type a above coarse aggregate backfill for the full width of the trench .
shape the bedding with recesses to receive the bell of bellandspigot conduit .
loosen the bedding in the middle third to seat the conduit .
if using lsm for bedding also use lsm for backfill to at least num inches num mm over the top of the conduit .
install bedding and backfill for type f conduits for underdrain outlets according to num.c .
conduit manufactures may approve materials listed in num for final backfill for use as bedding and structural backfill for type f conduits on slopes num or greater .
conduit manufacturers may approve materials listed in num for final backfill for use as structural backfill for conduit types d and e and drainage structures not located in pavement .
identify the use of final backfill materials proposed for bedding and structural backfill in the installation plan and crosssection details .
ensure compaction density complies with the installation plan by performing compaction testing according to supplement num and the manufacturers recommendation .
final backfill shall meet or exceed the requirements of num .
if structural backfill type num or open graded material is used vibrate tamp or compact to the compaction level required by the manufacturer in the installation plan .
num laying conduit .
maintain flows and drainage at all times until the new facilities are completed and in service .
any planned temporary diversion of flows and drainage is the responsibility of the contractor .
maintain temporary diversion at no additional cost to the department .
visually inspect all conduit before it is placed in the trench .
replace all conduit that is damaged as determined by the engineer .
before installation measure and record on the capnum the widest inside dimension of each lay length of conduit .
this measurement is to be taken three times along each run of conduit .
for corrugated metal conduit measure to the inside peak of the corrugations .
lay the conduit in the center of the trench at the invert elevation shown on the plans .
any deviation must be approved by the engineer .
if the engineer does not approve the deviation stop all related work until the conduit is relaid .
ensure that the conduit is in contact with the bedding for its full length and maintain the line and grade of the conduit .
the contractors representative doing the inspection will visually inspect all conduit before placing any backfill .
rejoin relay or replace conduits that have settled or that are damaged .
lay all conduits as described in the installation plan and according to the following requirements .
the installation plan can not change the following requirements .
meeting these requirements does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for obtaining the required results .
record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan .
a .
if the welded seam in a metal conduit is longitudinal place the seam at the spring line .
b .
for all metal conduit use only lifting devices that do not require a hole through the material .
c. lay metal conduit so that match marks align .
d. for all metal conduit that is cut at a drainage structure or headwall treat the cut end with the same coating as the conduit .
do not treat any cuts within the run .
e. where two structural plate thicknesses are specified place the thicker plates according to the installation plan .
f. set precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culvert sections num in the keyway .
place the units in a numinch num mm bed of mortar .
if proper line and grade of the structure can not be maintained on the bed of mortar set the sections on num numinch num num mm masonite or steel shims .
fill the entire keyway joint with mortar .
g. set precast reinforced concrete arch sections num in the keyway .
place the units on num numinch num num mm masonite or steel shims to provide a minimum numinch num mm gap between the footing and the bottom of the leg .
fill the entire keyway joint with mortar .
h. set the precast reinforced concrete round sections num in the keyway .
place the units on masonite or steel shims to provide a minimum numinch num mm gap between the footing and the bottom of the precast arch base .
fill the entire keyway joint with mortar .
provide num psi .
num mpa mortar .
for arches that gain structural continuity by a castinplace closure at the project site provide concrete with the same compressive strength as the precast arch .
i .
for precast reinforced concrete culverts num num num and num fill the lifting devices with mortar .
cover the exterior of the lifting devices with jointwrap material if they are outside the limits of the membrane waterproofing .
use jointwrap with a minimum width of num inches num mm .
use only lifting devices that do not require a hole through the structure .
j .
the inlet of all rigid conduit used in a type a application open inlet must have a bell .
if field cutting is necessary to furnish a bell at the inlet locate the cut end at an interior joint by removing part of a section within the run .
join the conduit as described below and encase the joint with a concrete collar to ensure a stable connection .
k. the top and bottom of reinforced concrete pipe that has elliptical or quadrant mat reinforcing will be clearly marked on the pipe .
handle and place this pipe so that the markings remain in a vertical plane through the center of the pipe .
l. handle and place reinforced concrete pipe with auxiliary reinforcements stirrups with the centerline of the auxiliary reinforcement system stirrups in a vertical plane through the center of the pipe .
m. fill all lifting holes in rigid conduit with concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations or using a method approved by the engineer .
n. immediately after placing conduit construct the end treatments at both the outlet and inlet ends .
show this activity as part of the conduit construction on the progress schedule .
these end treatments include headwalls concrete riprap rock channel protection sod or other erosion control items .
o .
when conduit is installed under pavement perform the following immediately after the completion of backfill placement and compaction remove and dispose of all surplus material according to num clear the site and replace all pavement necessary to restore traffic .
show this activity as part of the conduit construction on the progress schedule .
p. lay all conduit from outlet end to inlet unless approved by the engineer .
num joining conduit .
ensure the joints are clean and free from dirt or debris .
join the conduit sections as described below .
visually inspect all conduit joints and gaskets before placing any backfill .
rejoin relay or replace any conduit that does not meet the requirements .
the engineer may allow joint materials other than those listed below provided the contractor demonstrates the proposed material will result in durable sealed joints .
join conduit as described in the installation plan and according to the requirements below .
for conduit material not listed below join conduit as recommended by the manufacturer .
record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan .
a .
corrugated metal conduit .
join corrugated metal conduit types a b c d and f using either coupling bands or bell and spigot joints .
join the conduit according to the following requirements .
num .
coupling bands .
furnish coupling bands conforming to num or num and having the same coating as the conduit being joined .
use either coupling bands with gaskets or wrap the joints with geotextile fabric type a .
num .
bell and spigot joints .
if using bell and spigot joints place a gasket in the first corrugation of the spigot end and thoroughly lubricate the gasket and the bell end of the receiving conduit before assembly .
drive the spigot securely into the bell .
num .
for coorugated metal conduits with smooth steel interior liner furnish a joint conforming to num num and num .
b .
rigid conduit .
join rigid conduit types a b c d and f according to the following requirements .
num .
for all concrete pipe num num num that is not epoxy coated and vitrified clay pipe num seal the joints using one of the following methods a .
fill the joint with bituminous pipe joint filler providing a smooth transition on the inside and a complete seal on the outside .
b .
use preformed flexible joint sealant to seal the joint .
before installing the joint sealant prime both surfaces of the joint with asphalt based primer according to the joint sealant manufacturers recommendations .
c. use resilient and flexible gasket joints .
if the conduit is a sanitary sewer pipe test the joint for infiltration and exfiltration according to astm c num or astm c num .
if any joint does not meet the test requirements make corrections until the joint meets the test requirements .
num .
for epoxy coated concrete pipe num seal the joint using fibrated coal tar joint compound applied according to the conduit manufacturers recommendations .
num .
for precast reinforced concrete box culverts precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culverts precast reinforced concrete arch sections and precast reinforced concrete round sections num num num and num place the sections according to the installation plan .
clean the joint gap of all debris and apply one of the following a .
for joints in precast reinforced concrete box culverts num fill the top exterior joint gap and the bottom and side interior joint gap with mortar .
next for any exterior joint not covered by membrane waterproofing cover the exterior joint with a numinch num mm wide strip of joint wrap in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
center the joint wrap on the joint .
b .
for precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culverts num fill the top keyway joint with nonshrink mortar .
if the side or leg joints are tongue and groove types fill the joints as described above for concrete box culverts .
if the side or leg joints are keyway types fill with nonshrink mortar .
prepare place and cure the nonshrink mortar according to the nonshrink mortar manufacturers recommendations .
wet all surfaces of the keyway joint but do not allow free standing water in the joint .
next cover the exterior joint with a numinch num mm wide strip of joint wrap .
center the joint wrap on the joint .
use a continuous length of joint wrap sufficient to extend from the bottom of the vertical face on one side to the bottom vertical face on the other side .
apply membrane waterproofing to the precast sections after they are installed .
c. for precast reinforced concrete arch sections and precast reinforced concrete round sections num and num install a num x num numinch num x num mm preformed flexible joint sealant num along the outside joint chamfer .
use a continuous length of joint sealant sufficient to extend from the bottom of the vertical face on one side to the bottom vertical face on the other side .
before installing the joint sealant prime the joint chamfer with a primer according to the joint sealant manufacturers recommendations .
for num and num cover all exterior joints with a numinch num mm wide strip of joint wrap centered on the joint .
use a continuous length of joint wrap sufficient to extend from the bottom of the vertical face on one side of the structure to the bottom vertical face on the other side .
next apply all waterproofing as shown on the plans .
apply membrane waterproofing to the precast sections after they are installed .
d. for precast reinforced concrete box culverts precast reinforced concrete numsided flat topped culverts precast reinforced concrete arch sections and precast reinforced concrete round sections num num num and num apply an approved epoxyurethane sealer per the plans to all top surfaces not covered by membrane waterproofing .
extend sealer num foot num m below the backfill on all sides of the culvert sections including the joint .
c. plastic conduit .
join plastic conduit types a b c d and f using either coupling bands bell and spigot joints or bellbell couplers .
join the conduit according to the following requirements .
num .
coupling bands .
furnish coupling bands of the same size as the conduit and that engage at least two full corrugations on each conduit section .
furnish gasketed coupling bands of the same material as the plastic conduit .
num .
bell and spigot joints .
if using bell and spigot joints drive the spigot securely into the bell .
for gasketed joints ensure that the gasket is properly seated after joining .
num .
bellbell couplers .
if using bellbell couplers drive the conduit securely into the coupler .
d. type e conduit .
join type e conduits with open joints by butting the ends and wrapping with a minimum num inch num mm wide tarred paper or tarred burlap .
place soil around this material to hold it in place during backfilling .
num exterior coatings and membrane waterproofing .
apply exterior coatings and membrane waterproofing as specified below .
protect the exterior coatings and membrane waterproofing from damage during placing of the bedding backfill and embankment .
a .
for num.b.num .
concrete conduit clean the surfaces before placing the membrane waterproofing .
apply membrane waterproofing as specified .
apply the membrane waterproofing to all surfaces that will be in contact with the backfill top and sides according to the membrane waterproofing manufacturers recommendation .
b .
for structural plate metal structures and corrugated metal box culverts num num num and num apply waterproofing by one of the following methods .
num .
coat the exterior of the conduit above the limits of the bedding and within the limits of backfill .
ensure that all plate seams and bolts are thoroughly sealed .
furnish coating material and apply it according to aashto m num .
allow asphalt mastic material to dry num hours and tar base material to dry num hours before placing the conduit backfill .
rib stiffeners do not need to be coated .
num .
construct buried liner waterproofing membrane protection in the fill according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the buried liner waterproofing membrane protection must be a continuous sheet placed over the conduit and extend at least num feet numm outside of the paved shoulder and for the width of the trench .
seams constructed in the field are not acceptable .
num drainage structure construction .
install drainage structures as shown on the plans and standard construction drawings .
maintain flows at all times until the new facilities are completed and in service .
visually inspect all precast drainage structures before they are placed .
replace all drainage structures that are damaged as determined by the engineer .
install each drainage structure casting to the elevation station and offset shown on the plans .
any deviations must be approved by the engineer .
if the engineer does not approve the deviation stop all related work until the drainage structure is reinstalled .
the offset is to the center of the casting .
place each manhole base so that it is in alignment with the pipe and its invert elevation according to the standard construction drawings .
use flat slab top manholes as shown on the standard construction drawing .
do not remove the flat slab top manhole lifting devices .
locate or cut conduits so any protrusion inside the structure wall is minimized .
set iron frames tops and covers in mortar with a flush joint .
prevent earth or debris resulting from construction operations from entering the drainage structure .
remove any debris resulting from construction .
thoroughly grout the underdrain outlet pipe to the precast reinforced concrete outlet with a flush mortar joint .
take adequate precautions to prevent concrete or mortar from freezing .
preheat the brick concrete block or precast concrete structure throughout the entire mass to a temperature between num to num f num to num c before placing mortar if the ambient temperature is num f num c or less .
a .
brick and block masonry .
for brick and block masonry drainage structure construction thoroughly wet the units before placing in mortar .
lay the units with a flush mortar joint .
cure the exposed surfaces of all brick and block masonry by covering with wet burlap or by applying a curing membrane according to num .
keep burlap wet for at least num hours .
b. modular precast concrete .
for precast concrete modular drainage structures furnish precast bases on a compacted bed with or without a bedding material as described in the installation plan .
ensure that the bed is level and uniformly supports the entire area of the base .
seal all joints between modules as described above for concrete conduit .
all penetrations through precast drainage structures must be either manufactured or cored .
after placing the conduit grout all openings less than num inches num mm between the pipe and structure with mortar .
grout all openings greater than num inches num mm between the pipe and structure with nonshrink mortar .
furnish the same curing membrane for barrier inlets as that used on the barrier .
apply the curing membrane according to num .
c. reconstruction to grade .
when reconstructing an existing manhole catch basin or inlet to grade follow the procedure below .
num .
carefully remove and clean the existing castings .
num .
remove the existing walls of manholes down to the spring line of the conduit or below as necessary .
remove existing walls of catch basins and inlets below the window openings grates or any points of wall failure .
num .
using the salvaged casting reconstruct the structure to the new grade conforming as nearly as practicable to the existing dimension and type of construction .
d. adjustment to grade .
when adjusting an existing manhole catch basin or inlet to match grade follow the procedure below .
num .
carefully remove and clean the existing frame adjust the height of supporting walls and reset the existing frame in mortar or concrete to the new grade .
num .
carefully remove the existing cover or grate and install a casting or an acceptable adjusting device on file at the laboratory or an adjusting device approved by the engineer to the new grade and install according to the adjusting device manufacturers recommendations .
num field paving of new or existing conduit .
field pave the bottom of the conduit with concrete as shown on the plans .
installation plans are not required for field paving of existing conduits .
include any field paving details in the installation plan for all new conduit .
for new pipe installations do not pave until at least num feet num m of fill is placed on top of the conduit or the top of subgrade is reached .
if the paving is placed before completion of the entire fill clean any gaps between the conduit and concrete paving and then fill with heated bituminous material conforming to num .
reinforce the paving with num x numwnum x wnum galvanized welded wire fabric or epoxy coated reinforcing steel meeting the material requirements of num .
provide galvanized wire fabric or epoxy coated reinforcing steel with a width num inches num mm less than the finished paving .
provide support beneath the mesh where necessary using galvanized support chairs or num epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
securely fasten the mesh to the conduit near each edge and at the center of the mesh at points not more than num feet num m apart along the flow line of the culvert .
securely fasten the epoxy coated reinforcing steel to the conduit at each end and along the length of the steel not more than num feet num m apart .
repair any damage to the galvanizing or other coating material caused by placement or by tack welding .
use wire brushing and zinc rich paint to make the repairs .
for aluminum structural plate securely fasten the mesh to the circumferential seam bolts with galvanized tie wire .
construct paving so that it is num inches num mm thick measured from the top of the corrugations of the conduit to a height equal to num of the rise .
maintain the position of the mesh while placing concrete .
after placing the concrete strike it off with a template to produce the proper radius and finish with a float to produce a smooth finish .
cure the concrete according to num .
when field paving existing conduits maintain flows in accordance with num .
when standing water is encountered and cofferdams are necessary construct and pay for cofferdams per item num .
num performance inspection .
notify the engineer at least five workdays before conducting a performance inspection .
ensure the engineer is present during all performance inspection activities .
for all type a b and c conduits inspect all lengths greater than num feet with slopes of num percent or less and all new drainage structures .
performance inspections are not required for all type d e and f conduits .
a performance inspection is not required for projects that meet all of the following all conduit is type c conduit plan quantities are less than num feet numm all conduit has less than num feet numm of maximum fill height in each phase of construction of a conduit perform the inspection no sooner than num days and no later than num days after the completion of the finished grade when not below pavement and after the completion of the rough subgrade when any portion of the conduit is below pavement .
the engineer may permit inspection beyond the num day limit .
if any corrections are made to the installed pipe after the completion of the finished grade or rough subgrade and prior to the performance inspection wait num days after the correction was made to do the performance inspection .
if the contract duration will not permit a num day waiting period then the engineer may adjust the waiting period .
visually inspect for surface settlements within the trench limits or within num feet of a drainage structure .
document all locations of surface settlement in the inspection report .
furnish a video recording of all conduit and drainage structure inspections .
on the recording identify the date and time of the inspection a description of the conduit or drainage structure being inspected the location and the viewing direction .
record the entire run of conduit being inspected .
provide a source of light that allows all areas of concern to be readily observed on the video recording .
furnish the video recording in a digital reproducible format on one of the following media types portable hard drive flash drive or as determined appropriate by the engineer .
provide the video files with a naming format consistent with the installation plan references or as determine acceptable by the engineer .
ensure that the condition of the conduit will allow an accurate inspection .
perform a manual inspection on drainage structures .
perform either a manual inspection or remote inspection as follows noncircular conduits manual inspection conduits with a rise of num inches num mm and greater manual inspection conduits with a rise of num inches nummm up to num inches nummm manual or remote inspection conduits with a rise of num inches or greater up to num inches num to num mm remote inspection conduits with a rise less than num inches num mm and type d e and f conduits remote inspection as directed by the engineer .
the department will pay for this inspection according to num .
a. manual inspection .
perform a manual inspection by entering the conduit or drainage structure to record video and to make measurements .
if the conduit or drainage structure is considered a confined space provide entry for all project inspection personnel according to osha requirements .
measure the deflection of the conduit using either a metal tape fabric tape or equipment accepted by the engineer and read to the nearest  inch num mm .
measure crack width using either a crack comparator or a feeler gage capable of measuring num inch num mm .
measure joint gaps using a tape or ruler and read to the nearest  inch num mm .
other measuring devices may be used if approved by the engineer .
record the measurements and include them in the performance report .
measure the following num .
for all conduits measure the location length and greatest width of each crack .
num .
for flexible conduit measure the smallest inside diameter three times for each conduit section in the run .
take the first measurement vertically from the crown to invert num oclock to num oclock positions .
take the second measurement by rotating num degrees from vertical num oclock to num oclock positions .
take the third measurement by rotating num degrees from vertical num oclock to num oclock positions .
for all measurements stretch tape to full extent across inside of pipe .
for corrugated metal conduit the inside diameter is defined as the distance between the inside peaks of the corrugations .
num .
for all conduits measure the widest gap at each joint in the run .
num .
for conduit with manufactured seams measure the location length and greatest width of any separation at the seam .
num .
for drainage structures measure the location length and greatest width of each crack and the widest gap at each conduit entering the drainage structure .
record the location of any other defect not listed above and describe the defect .
for each measurement location in a conduit record the length from the nearest drainage structure .
b .
remote inspection .
perform a remote inspection by using a crawler mounted camera to record video and using equipment described below to make measurements .
use equipment that meets the requirements of supplemental specification num .
remove all debris from the conduits being inspected according to num .
dewater the conduit if the water level hinders the performance of the equipment .
based on the type of conduit make measurements using the equipment listed in the following table .
also record the location of any other defect not listed below and describe the defect .
table num.b conduit type measurement equipment type of measurement rigid conduit and num mortar lined corrugated steel pipe crawler mounted camera according to numwith crack measuring capabilities according to num c joint gaps crack widths plastic conduit num corrugated steel spiral rib conduit num corrugated aluminum spiral rib conduit num ductile iron pipe and num steel casing pipe and circular corrugated metal conduit not listed below crawler mounted camera with laser profiler according to num a b and c or mandrel according to num and crawler mounted camera according to num with crack measuring capabilities according to num c joint gaps crack widths deflection the following types of corrugated metal conduit num precoated galvanized steel culverts num and num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe with paved invert num and num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe crawler mounted camera with laser profiler according to num a b and c joint gaps crack widths deflection num conduit evaluation .
have an independent registered engineer review the conduit performance inspection and record all defects listed in table num or as otherwise identified from the inspection .
provide all recorded defects and the recommended repairs to the engineer .
evaluate the defects to ensure structural stability and hydraulic capacity are in conformance with the contract documents and as prescribed by aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications section num for metal conduit section num for concrete conduit and section num for plastic conduit with modifications according to this specification .
the independent registered engineer can not be an employee of the contractor or the conduit manufacturer .
when using a laser profiler the conduit deflection must be calculated from the actual inside diameter at the measured location or calculated by inputting the nominal diameter .
when using a mandrel the mandrel must be sized according to supplemental specification num .
if the evaluation determines repairs are not necessary and repairs are not required based on the type or size of the defect in table num have the independent registered engineer make the following statement in the evaluation i certify that repairs are not required to address the defects identified during the conduit evaluation .
the conduit will function in accordance with the contract documents .
if the evaluation determines repairs are necessary or if repairs are required based on the type or size of the defect in table num have the independent registered engineer prepare sign seal and date plans for the repair .
the independent registered engineer must make the following statement on the repair plans i certify that this repair plan was designed to ensure the repaired conduit will function structurally and provide hydraulic capacity in accordance with the contract documents .
table num metal conduit evaluate if infiltration is observed .
evaluate all racking buckling or denting .
evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in capnum .
evaluate if the joint gap exceeds the manufacturers tolerance .
repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the manufacturers tolerance .
repair all damage to coatings .
repair or replace conduit if the performance inspection per num indicates a deflection num .
replace conduit if the performance inspection per num indicates a deflection num rigid conduit evaluate if infiltration is observed .
evaluate if joint gap exceeds the manufactures tolerance .
evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in capnum .
repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the manufacturers tolerance .
repair or replace conduit if cracks num inch .
repair or replace conduit if spalls or slabbing are observed .
plastic conduit evaluate if infiltration is observed .
evaluate all racking bulging or buckling .
evaluate if joint gap exceeds the manufacturers tolerance .
evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in capnum .
evaluate all cracks .
repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the manufacturers tolerance .
repair or replace conduit if performance inspection per num indicates a deflection num .
replace conduit if the performance inspection per num indicates a deflection num note the tolerance is defined as the maximum joint gap listed in the installation plan .
submit the evaluation repair plans and revised installation plan to the engineer at least num days before performing the repairs .
provide written confirmation from the conduit manufacturer that the repair methods are appropriate .
the department may review the submittal but department acceptance is not required .
if the department does not review the plan proceed with the repairs num days after delivering the submittal to the engineer .
if the department reviews the submittal and determines it does not conform to the contract revise resubmit and proceed with the repairs only after the department accepts the resubmittal .
perform the repair at no additional cost to the department .
perform an inspection to evaluate the repaired portion of the conduit and any conduit potentially affected by the repair work num days after the repair has been made .
perform the inspections according to num and at no additional cost to the department .
have an independent registered engineer evaluate the inspection according to num and at no additional cost to the department .
num drainage structure evaluation .
have an independent registered engineer evaluate the drainage structures and any defects listed in the table below .
the independent registered engineer can not be an employee of the contractor or drainage structure manufacturer .
table num defects requiring evaluation connection between conduit and drainage structure has free flowing water infiltration or has not been constructed in accordance with num .
grate is more than num ft num mm from horizontal or vertical location documented on construction inspection form capnum .
invert elevation is more than num percent of the conduit diameter or num ft num mm from plan elevation whichever is greater as documented on construction inspection form capnum grates do not properly seat in the frame .
grates are not placed on the required slope .
grates or frames are broken or cracked .
drainage structure does not match the details on the standard construction drawing .
steps do not line up .
manhole top does not match plans .
if the evaluation determines repairs are not necessary have the independent registered engineer make the following statement in the evaluation i certify that repairs are not required to address the defects identified during the drainage structure evaluation .
the drainage structure will function in accordance with the contract documents .
if the evaluation determines repairs are necessary have the independent registered engineer prepare sign seal and date plans for the repair .
the independent registered engineer must make the following statement on the repair plans i certify that this repair plan was designed to ensure the structure will function structurally and provide hydraulic capacity in accordance with the contract documents .
perform the repair at no additional cost to the department .
perform an inspection to evaluate the repaired portion of the drainage structure and any conduit potentially affected by the repair work num days after the repair has been made .
perform the inspections according to num and at no additional cost to the department .
have an independent registered engineer evaluate the inspection according to num and at no additional cost to the department .
num surface settlements .
repair any surface settlement within the trench limits or within num feet num m of a drainage structure .
have an independent registered engineer evaluate the conduit according to num or the drainage structure according to num .
perform all repair work at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure conduit by the number of feet meters measured from centertocenter of small drainage structures or between open ends including the length of pipe bends and branches .
the department will not deduct conduit length for catch basins inlets or manholes where the distance measured in the direction of flow including bends is num feet num m or less .
where the location of a drainage structure or an open end is changed with the approval of the engineer to accommodate full conduit sections the department will measure the length placed .
conduits placed on slopes steeper than numhnumv or with beveled or skewed ends will be measured along the invert .
the department will measure field paving of existing pipe by the number of feet meters .
the department will measure manholes inlets catch basins inspection wells junction chambers and precast reinforced concrete outlets whether new reconstructed or adjusted to grade by the number of each type of structure complete and accepted .
num basis of payment .
payment for all inspections is included with the contract unit price of the corresponding pay item .
when a pay item calls for concrete encasement the department will pay for furnishing and placing the concrete encasement and for any additional excavation required under the contract unit price for the encased conduit .
when a pay item calls for conduit to be field paved all work and materials necessary for the item are included in the contract unit price for each conduit .
all required repairs including any settlement problems must be made prior to acceptance .
payment for the repair is included with the contract unit price of the corresponding pay item .
the department will not make additional payment for repair work on conduit installed under this specification .
all conduits and drainage structures installed without required submittals per num are considered unacceptable materials per num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter ___ ___ mm conduit type ___ num foot meter ___ ___ conduit type ___ num foot meter ___ ___ mm conduit reconstructed type ___ num foot meter type ___ precast reinforced concrete threesided flat topped culvert ___ ___ mm span ___ ___ mm rise num foot meter type ___precast reinforced concrete arch sections ___ ___ mm span ___ ___ mm rise num foot meter type ___ precast reinforced concrete round sections ___ ___ mm span ___ ___ mm rise num foot meter ___ ___ mm rise ___ ___ mm span conduit type a corrugated steel box culvert ___ ___ mm minimum cover ___ ___ mm maximum cover num foot meter ___ ___ mm rise ___ ___ mm span conduit type ___ corrugated aluminum box culvert ___ ___ mm minimum cover ___ ___ mm maximum cover num foot meter ___ ___ mm conduit type ___ with field paving of pipe num foot meter ___ ___ mm conduit type ___ field paving of existing pipe num foot meter conduit type f for underdrain outlets num each manholes num each inlets num each catch basins num each inspection wells num each junction chambers num each manhole catch basin or inlet reconstructed to grade num each manhole catch basin or inlet adjusted to grade num each precast reinforced concrete outlet item num low strength mortar backfill num description num materials num mix proportioning num mix adjustment num alternate mixes num mixing equipment num mixing the materials num placing mortar num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of placing a low strength mortar backfill around conduits and at other locations .
perform the work for this item according to items num and num except as modified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to cement num or num fly ash num furnish fine aggregate consisting of foundry sand natural sand sand manufactured from stone gravel or air cooled blast furnace slag .
conform to the fine aggregate gradation requirements of num .
use fine aggregate that is fine enough to stay in suspension in the mixture to ensure proper flow .
furnish an airentraining admixture that is designed for use in low strength mortar mixtures also called controlled density fill or flowable fill .
num mix proportioning .
furnish a low strength mortar mixture listed below or provide an alternate mix conforming to num .
table num type num type num type num lbyd kgm lbyd kgm lbyd kgm cement num num num num num num fly ash class f num num num num num num fly ash class c num num num num num num num fine aggregate num num num num num num num water target num num num num num num num the contractor may add an airentraining agent specifically designed for the use in the low strength mortar mixture .
num entrained air is substituted for fly ash in this mix .
approximately num percent num saturated surface dry num class c fly ash may be substituted for class f fly ash in type num mixes with an approved mix design meeting the alternate mix design criteria of this specification .
these mixtures of materials are expected to yield approximately num cubic yard num mnum of material of a flowable consistency .
make small adjustments as necessary in the amounts of the materials in a mix to achieve the final product .
num mix adjustment .
make one or more num cubic yard num mnum trial batches at different water contents to ensure a flowable material .
the mixture is too dry if cracks develop in the mixture as it flows into place .
adjust the proportions to maintain the total absolute volume .
for large adjustments see num .
in order to expedite the settlement of a type num mixture without entrained air bleed water may appear on the surface immediately after the material is struck off .
a delay in bleeding indicates there are too many fines in the mixture .
the contractor may reduce the fly ash quantity in increments of num pounds num kg until the mixture is bleeding freely .
add approximately num pounds num kg of sand to replace each num pounds num kg increment of fly ash to maintain the original yield .
num alternate mixes .
the contractor may submit alternate mixes for approval .
furnish the mix design and test data from an independent test laboratory num days before the intended usage for approval .
submit an alternate mix design for all mixes that a .
vary more than num pounds num kg in fine aggregate num pounds num kg in water num pounds num kg in cement or num pounds num kg in fly ash from the num mixes .
these are considered large adjustments .
b .
have less than num pounds num kg of cement in the type num mixes or less than num pounds num kg of cement in the type num mixes .
c. use alternate materials .
d. contain foundry sand .
e. contain fly ash not conforming to num .
f. use fine aggregate gradations other than num .
the contractor may use foundry sand if it meets the requirements of the division of surface water policy num beneficial use of nontoxic bottom ash fly ash and spent foundry sand and other exempt wastes and all other regulations .
ten days before using a mixture containing foundry sand on the project submit written permission from the ohio epa to the engineer .
the contractor may elect to have an independent odot consultant prequalified in remedial design environmental site assessment review the proposed usage .
the consultant will provide all documentation utilized to ensure that the proposed usage obeys all ohio epa regulations .
the consultant shall coordinate all epa required meetings documentation and testing requirements .
the consultant shall certify the report or reports to the department .
provide alternate mixes with an unconfined compressive strength between num and num pounds per square inch num and num kpa at num days when tested according to astm d num .
ensure that the long term nummonth unconfined compressive strength is less than num pounds per square inch num kpa .
ensure that the final mix has the required strength fills the voids of the intended usages and sets up within num hours num hours for type num or type num alternate mixes .
the proportioning yield consistency workability compressive strength and all other requirements are the sole responsibility of the contractor .
num mixing equipment .
provide the mixing capacity and delivery equipment to place the material without interruption as much as practical .
deliver and place type num and num mixes or type num and num alternate mixes from ready mixed concrete trucks or deliver them from a batch plant .
deliver and place type num mix using volumetric mobile mixers .
calibrate volumetric mixers properly and sufficiently mix the materials in the mixer to produce a uniform material .
num mixing the materials .
discharge the mixture within num hours after adding water .
num placing mortar .
unless specifically shown on the plans do not place the mortar within num feet num m of the subgrade elevation .
discharge the flowable material from the mixer by any reasonable means into the space of the plan intended usage .
bring the fill material up uniformly to the fill line shown on the plans .
the contractor may begin placing the other fill material over low strength mortar backfill material as soon as the surface water is gone .
the engineer reserves the right to reject the mix if a flowable mixture is not produced .
before placing the low strength mortar backfill as backfill for num conduit secure the conduit to prevent it from floating during placement of the flowable material .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure low strength mortar backfill by the number of cubic yards cubic meters completed and accepted in place computed from the plan lines .
the department will not pay additional compensation for over excavated areas or for a change in the material blends .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num cubic yard low strength mortar backfill cubic meter num cubic yard low strength mortar backfill type ___ cubic meter item num maintaining traffic num description num traffic facilities num traffic control general num work zone marking signs num road closed num surface condition signs num detour signing num traffic maintained num flaggers num law enforcement officer num work zone traffic signals num work zone pavement markings num work zone raised pavement markers num pavement marking operations num asphalt concrete for maintaining traffic num performance num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of maintaining and protecting vehicular bicycle and pedestrian traffic according to these provisions .
for through traffic the special provisions or the plans will designate whether the highway will be closed with detours roads and runarounds provided or whether traffic will be maintained through all or portions of the project .
num traffic facilities .
construct and maintain facilities for vehicular bicycle and pedestrian traffic of the highway including all walks bicycle lanes roads bridges culverts and traffic control devices .
the department will maintain public highways used as a detour beyond the work limits of the contract .
a .
for local traffic provide and safely maintain drives roads runarounds walks structures and other facilities .
provide safe vehicular bicycle and pedestrian ingress and egress for all property adjacent to any improvement .
provide approaches and crossings of intersecting highways bicycle lanes and maintain them in a safe condition .
maintenance includes snow and ice removal as needed .
b .
when the highway under construction is being used by through traffic including periods of suspension of the work maintain it so that it is smooth free from potholes ruts ridges bumps and other pavement deficiencies .
furnish proper maintenance of traffic facilities and proper provisions for traffic control as per num .
for the portions of highway being used provide the necessary outlets to allow free drainage .
maintain pipe trenches or other openings left in hard surface pavements with material of comparable quality .
contractor maintenance responsibilities including pothole patching begins for a section of highway when the contractor begins the work in that section and ends with the acceptance of the work under num or num .
the two directions of a divided highway are considered separate highway sections and the start of work on one direction does not begin maintenance responsibilities on the other direction .
c. remove from the project as necessary abrasives and salt residues left by department or local government snow and ice control operations .
d. ensure positive drainage into structures that have inlet windows without grates during pavement overlay operations when traffic will be maintained on a pavement course lower than the inlet window .
provide a minimum of num inch num mm holes spaced at num feet num m or a minimum of three num inch num mm holes spaced at num feet num m drilled into the vertical wall of the existing drainage structure below the inlet window .
place steel or iron plating of at least  inch num mm thickness that completely covers the drilled holes prior to construction of the finished pavement course .
num traffic control general .
conform to the requirements of the plan standard construction drawings shown on the plans and the omutcd for the installation maintenance and operation of all traffic controls and traffic control devices .
when the plans or standard construction drawings do not cover a specific traffic control situation place the necessary traffic control devices according to the omutcd and use the procedures required by the omutcd .
furnish cones drums portable sign supports type num barricades portable changeable message signs arrow boards and impact attenuators that are prequalified according to the departments approved list .
furnish cones drums signs sign supports barricades and other traffic control devices that are certified to meet nchrp num or mash test level num do not use heavy nonyielding devices or supports that are not crashworthy .
use type g h or j reflective sheeting complying with num num and num respectively for faces of construction signs barricades vertical panels object markers and stripes on glare screen panels .
in addition the contractor may also use type g sheeting referred to as damage control for these devices provided it meets num .
use fluorescent orange reflective sheeting for all orange construction signs object markers and stripes on glare screen paddles .
use standard orange or fluorescent orange reflective sheeting for the orange portions of drums cones barricades and vertical panels .
furnish orange drums with reboundable reflective sheeting complying with the requirements of num and in conformance with the omutcd .
drums of colors other than orange shall not be permitted on the project .
ensure that owner identification markings on construction drums are no more than num inch num mm in character height and are located at least num inches num mm below the reflectorized bands or on the top or bottom horizontal surfaces of the drum .
ballast the drums according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish traffic cones consisting of a highly visible orange predominant color .
traffic cones of colors other than highly visible orange shall not be permitted on the project .
ensure that the pavement markings for traffic maintenance conform to item num .
furnish warning signs in advance of channelizing devices such as barricades drums vertical panels and cones .
furnish object markers that are a minimum size of num x num inches and that consists of reflective sheeting adhered to an aluminum or plastic plate .
keep retroreflective materials clean and in good condition .
equip all project motor vehicles with photo strobe lights led warning lights or rotating beacons meeting class num specifications for color and intensity as defined by the society of automotive engineers sae .
photo strobe lights led warning lights or rotating beacons shall be horizontally visible from all directions num degrees at a distance of num feet minimum .
in order to ensure this visibility the light shall in no way be obstructed from view by any signs or appurtenances on the vehicle .
activate the photo strobe lights led warning lights or rotating beacons and all hazard lights anytime the vehicle is entering exiting or operating in a traveled lane at a speed less than the posted speed within the limits of the work zone or one mile of either end of the work zone .
in addition equip all project motor vehicles and trailers having a gross vehicle weight rating of num pounds or greater in single or combination with conspicuity tape .
also delineate all nchrp num category iv equipment arrow boards portable changeable message signs etc .
with conspicuity tape .
conspicuity tape use red and white type g h or j retroreflective sheeting that complies with num num and num .
a .
apply one numinch wide minimum horizontal stripe of type g h or j retroreflective sheeting to a minimum of num percent of the length of each side of the payload portion of the motor vehicle rearward from the back of the cab nchrp num category iv equipment and trailers .
space lengths of tape evenly over the length of the payload portion of the motor vehicle rearward from the back of the cab nchrp num category iv equipment and trailers .
the centerline for each strip of retroreflective sheeting shall be between num inches and num inches above the road surface when measured with the vehicle empty or unladen or as close as practicable to this area .
b .
outline the lower rear facing area of the motor vehicle nchrp num category iv equipment and trailers with numinch wide minimum horizontal stripe of type g h or j retroreflective sheeting .
apply the lower horizontal markings extending the width of the motor vehicle nchrp num category iv equipment and trailer as close as practical to the edge of the motor vehicle nchrp num category iv equipment and trailer .
the centerline for each strip of lower horizontal retroreflective sheeting shall be between num inches and num inches above the road surface when measured with the vehicle empty or unladen or as close as practicable to this area .
c. outline the upper rear facing area with two pairs of strips of numinch wide minimum retroreflective type g h or j sheeting each pair consisting of strips num inches long must be positioned horizontally and vertically on the right and left upper corners of the rear of the body of each motor vehicle or trailer as close as practicable to the top of the motor vehicle or trailer and as far apart as practicable .
if the perimeter of the body as viewed from the rear is not square or rectangular the strips may be applied along the perimeter as close as practicable to the uppermost and outermost areas of the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer on the left and right sides .
escort transport or delivery vehicles without proper photo strobe lights led warning lights or rotating beacons or conspicuity tape to and from the work zone only with the approval of the engineer .
this exception is intended for limited use at the discretion of the engineer and will only be considered following a written request by the contractor .
otherwise equip all project vehicles with photo strobe lights led warning lights or rotating beacons and conspicuity tape as described herein .
all temporary traffic control devices shall conform to the quality standards for temporary traffic control devices and acceptable delineation methods for vehicles .
num storage of equipment vehicles and material on highway rightsofway .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer locate all equipment vehicles and material stored or parked on highway rightsofway a .
at least num feet behind the face of existing barrier and not within the num foot long by num foot wide recovery area behind the existing barrier run or b .
not less than num feet from the nearest edge of the traveled way or c. at least num feet behind raised curbs .
additionally at night encompass any such equipment vehicles or material with drums equipped with type a warning lights spaced at num feet on center .
for locations with traffic approaching from more than one direction or side e.g .
medians between mainline and ramps etc .
ensure the requirements are met for all traffic approaches .
existing barrier for purposes of num only includes and is limited to existing permanent guardrail existing concrete barrier temporary or new permanent guardrail installed in accordance with the plans temporary portable barrier installed in accordance with the plans or new permanent concrete barrier installed in accordance with the plans .
other types of barrier not listed such as cable barrier are excluded as a means of protecting drivers from stored equipment vehicles and material on highway rightsofway .
recovery area for purposes of num shall have slopes num or flatter and be free of workers hazards equipment vehicles dropoffs and material storage .
the recovery area length is to begin at the terminus of the existing barrier run .
any gating impact attenuator length shall not be included as part of the recovery area length .
num work zone marking signs .
furnish install maintain and subsequently remove work zone marking signs and their supports within the work limits according to the following requirements a .
erect a no edge lines sign in advance of any section of roadway lacking omutcd standard edge line markings .
ensure these signs are in place before opening the roadway to traffic .
erect these signs on each entrance ramp num to num feet beyond the far shoulder or curb line of intersecting through roads to warn entering or turning traffic of the conditions and at least once every num miles num km along the roadway .
remove these signs when they no longer apply .
b .
erect a do not pass sign at the beginning and a pass with care sign at the end of each no passing zone lacking omutcd standard center line markings .
num road closed .
when the highway is closed to traffic furnish erect maintain and subsequently remove advanced warning signs and supports barricades road closed signs on the barricades and type b yellow flashing lights at the following locations a .
work limits of the project .
b .
work limits on all intersecting roads .
c. any other points specified in the contract .
throughout construction furnish erect maintain and subsequently remove all signs lights barricades and other traffic control devices required by the omutcd plans or standard construction drawings for the maintenance of local traffic .
num surface condition signs .
erect a grooved pavement sign num feet num m in advance of any section of roadway where traffic must travel on a planed surface .
ensure these signs are in place before opening the roadway to traffic .
erect these signs on each entrance ramp and at intersections of through roads to warn entering or turning traffic of the conditions .
payment for these signs to be included in item num maintaining traffic .
num detour signing .
a .
department detour signing .
when the contract documents do not require the contractor to furnish the signing for designated detour routes the department will furnish erect maintain and subsequently remove the detour routing signs and supports required on the designated detour highways outside the project .
b .
contractor detour signing .
when the contract documents provide a pay item for detour signing and the plans provide a detoursigning plan provide maintain and subsequently remove all required detour signing and supports according to the detour signing plan .
num traffic maintained .
where the highway under construction is being used by through traffic including periods of suspension of the work furnish and maintain pavement markings lights construction signs barricades guardrail sign supports and such other traffic control devices .
maintain preexisting roadside safety hardware at an equivalent or better level than existed prior to project implementation .
also provide law enforcement officers watchmen and flaggers as necessary to maintain safe traffic conditions within the work limits as directed by the engineer .
the department will furnish and erect regulatory signs and guide signs unless otherwise shown on the plans within the work limits on all traffic maintained projects .
the contractor is responsible for maintenance of these signs .
the engineer will approve the erection and removal of any regulatory signs not shown on the plans .
keep existing signs including num specific service and touristoriented directional signs and traffic control devices in use within the work limits during the construction period unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
if existing signs and other traffic control devices must be relocated or modified as a consequence of the work provide suitable supports and modify the devices with prior approval of the engineer and the concurrence of the maintaining agency .
keep existing stop or yield signs functioning at all times .
the contractor may adjust the position of these signs with the engineers approval .
relocate existing signs that must be adjusted laterally according to the omutcd .
restore relocated or modified signs to the position and condition that existed before construction as directed by the engineer .
when signs are to be covered provide an opaque covering that covers the entire message symbol and all of the sign within the border .
do not use fastenings that damage the sign or reflective face however the contractor may use rivets to attach rigid overlay panels .
do not apply adhesive tapes directly to the face of the sign .
when an existing signal operation must be interrupted for a period of time provide a traffic control method approved by the engineer .
whenever it is necessary to divert the flow of traffic from its normal channel into another channel clearly mark the channel for such diverted traffic with cones drums barricades vertical panels pavement markings or arrow boards .
also use this method of marking where working adjacent to the part of the highway in use by the public .
obtain the approval of the engineer before closing a traffic lane or establishing a oneway traffic operation .
num flaggers .
whenever oneway traffic is established use at least two flaggers unless the engineer authorizes otherwise and erect signs cones barricades and other traffic control devices according to the omutcd .
reflectorize traffic control devices as previously noted .
maintain positive and quick means of communication between the flaggers at the opposite ends of the restricted area .
equip flaggers according to the standards for flagging traffic contained in the omutcd .
during a flagging operation other than an intersection or a spot location best controlled by a single flagger ensure that each flagger uses a stopslow paddle conforming to the omutcd .
mount the paddle on top of a num numfoot num m handle .
ensure that each face of the paddle is made of type g reflective sheeting meeting the requirements of num .
while flagging do not allow flaggers to perform other work activities .
the contractor may instead of using flaggers or supplemental to them furnish install maintain and operate a traffic signal or signals for the purpose of regulating traffic according to a written agreement approved by the engineer .
the contractor may supplemental to using flaggers furnish install maintain and operate automated flagger assistance devices afads with incidental items for the purpose of assisting the flaggers in regulating traffic according to a written agreement approved by the engineer .
afads shall be furnished per the departments approved list and shall be used in accordance with supplemental specification num .
num law enforcement officer .
when shown on the plans furnish the services of a law enforcement officer and patrol car equipped with flashing lights .
num work zone traffic signals .
if shown on the plans furnish erect maintain and subsequently remove signal equipment conforming to items num and num and signal controller equipment of a proper type and capacity to provide the required operation .
furnish and install uninterruptible power supplies ups conforming to num .
subject to the engineers approval the contractor may use new equipment that is to be installed later on the project or may install used equipment in good condition provided such used equipment meets current department specifications .
the performance test in num and the working drawing requirements of num are waived .
recondition used equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation .
operate work zone traffic signals conforming to the requirements of the omutcd and subject to the approval of the engineer .
procure and pay for electric power for work zone traffic signals .
do not alter the operation of an approved work zone traffic signal without the engineers approval .
correct any malfunctions or failures without delay .
cover or remove work zone traffic signals not in use .
num work zone pavement markings .
furnish install maintain and when necessary remove work zone retroreflective pavement markings on existing reconstructed resurfaced or temporary roads within the work limits according to the following requirements .
a .
acceptability and expected duration .
the engineer will evaluate the markings according to the three performance parameters contained in supplement num .
repair or replace the markings when the numerical rating is seven or lower for durability visual effectiveness and night visibility .
repair or replace unsatisfactory markings immediately and at no additional cost to the department if the markings were in place for num calendar days or less .
the department will compensate under the applicable contract pay item for work zone pavement marking for the ordered replacement of worn markings after num calendar days under traffic .
b .
work zone marking specifications .
equip traffic paint striping equipment for class i and class iii markings with a computerized data logging system dls conforming to num when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports according to num .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the contractor may use num type num or type numa paint or num type i or type ii preformed material for work zone pavement markings .
furnish painted markings according to item num except that num .
for class i or class ii work zone pavement markings use the specified application rate from table num num .
table num type of pavement marking line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num numfoot dashed line num num numfoot dashed line num num dotted line num num arrows symbols and words num gallons per num square feet glass beads num type a num pounds per num square feet table numm type of pavement marking line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num m dashed line num num num m dashed line num num dotted line num num arrows symbols and words num liters per square meter glass beads num type a num kg per square meter num .
for class iii work zone markings use the specified application rate from table num .
table num type of pavement marking line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num numfoot dashed line num num dotted line num num arrows symbols and words num gallons per num square feet glass beads num type a num pounds per num square feet table numm type of pavement marking line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num num m dashed line num num dotted line num num arrows symbols and words num liters per square meter glass beads num type a num kg per square meter ensure that type i and ii preformed material conform to num except do not place any preformed material containing metal on any surface unless it will be removed later .
remove work zone pavement markings of num preformed material before placement of num or num surface course markings at that location .
ensure that preformed material conforms to item num .
c. work sequence .
ensure that work zone markings are complete and in place on all pavement including ramps before exposing the pavement to traffic .
when work zone markings conflict with the traffic pattern remove them according to num .
d. layout and premarking .
layout and premark all class i and class iii markings according to num .
obtain the engineers approval of the layout and premarking lines before marking operations are started .
e. tolerances .
place lines for final surfaces according to the tolerances of num .
on surfaces other than final the department will allow tolerances twice that in num .
f. classes of work zone pavement markings .
num .
class i markings full pattern full rate .
use class i markings on all surfaces exposed to traffic for more than num days prior to application of final markings and to overwinter the project with the following exception do not use class i markings on a surface course if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied to the surface course .
if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied to the surface course use class iii markings on that course .
apply class i work zone markings to the standard dimensions as defined in item num except as follows a .
edge lines .
class i edge lines shall match existing edge line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
b .
lane lines .
class i lane lines shall match existing lane line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
c. channelizing lines .
class i channelizing lines shall match existing channelizing line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
num .
class ii markings abbreviated full rate .
use class ii markings for shortterm use when traffic is to be maintained in parallel lanes nominally in the same location as permanent lanes and where tapers or transitions are not required or other features will not likely divert traffic from the intended path .
class ii markings are limited to center lines lane lines and gore markings defined as follows a .
center lines .
class ii center lines consist of single yellow numinch num mm wide by a minimum of num feet num m long dashes spaced at a maximum of num feet num m intervals .
no passing zones must be marked with class i or class iii markings or final markings within num calendar days according to num.h.num .
passing zones must be marked with class i or class iii markings or final markings within num calendar days according to num.h.num .
b .
lane lines .
class ii lane lines consist of white and shall match existing lane lines in width num or num inches num or num mm by a minimum of num feet num m long dashes spaced at a maximum of num feet num m intervals .
class ii lane line markings must be marked with class i or class iii markings or final markings within num calendar days according to num .
h. num. c. gore markings .
class ii gore markings are continuous white numinch num mm wide lines in a chevron crosshatched pattern placed within the theoretical gore of an exit ramp or diverging roadways .
class ii gore markings must be marked with class i or class iii markings or final markings within num calendar days according to num.h.num .
computerized data logging systems dls are not required for class ii markings .
num .
class iii markings full pattern low rate .
use class iii markings on surface courses that are expected to receive thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings within num days .
class iii markings use a lower application rate which reduces the surface preparation needed prior to application of thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings .
if class iii markings have been applied and weather conditions are expected to prevent thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings application for num days or more reapply class iii markings if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings application is expected to occur within num days or apply class i markings as necessary to carry the project through the season or over the winter .
apply class iii work zone markings to the standard dimensions as defined in item num except as follows a .
edge lines .
class iii edge lines shall match existing edge line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
b .
lane lines .
class iii lane lines shall match existing lane line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
c. channelizing lines .
class iii channelizing lines shall match the existing channelizing line in width num or num inches num or num mm .
g. conflicting markings .
conflicting markings are considered to be any markings not actively in use not behind channelizing devices or portable barrier andor could be misinterpreted by the traveling public or cause confusion to the driver as determined by the engineer .
before placing work zone markings remove or cover all conflicting existing markings visible to the traveling public .
num .
removal and covering of markings .
a .
removal methods .
remove the markings so that less than num of the line remains visible .
repair damage to the pavement that results in the removal of more than num inch of pavement thickness .
use sand shot or water blasting to remove markings on all asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces .
use only sand shot or water blasting for removal of all pavement markings in preparation for placing item num chip seal or item num microsurfacing .
a grinder may only be used to remove markings on temporary pavement or pavement that will be covered or removed prior to project completion e.g .
intermediate asphalt course .
when a grinder drum is mounted to a skid steer loader the drum must be able to accommodate a minimum of num teeth .
b .
covering conflicting markings .
with the engineers approval use removable nonreflective preformed blackout tape to cover conflicting markings .
remove or replace the blackout tape within num days of installation .
furnish products according to the departments qualified products list qpl .
num .
raised pavement markers .
remove the prismatic retroreflector within any raised pavement marker that is in conflict with the work zone pavement markings .
when the work zone pavement markings are removed and the raised pavement marker is no longer in conflict thoroughly clean the recessed reflector attachment area of the casting and install a new prismatic retroreflector of the same kind and color .
the cost for this work is incidental to the various pay items .
h. allowable duration of work zone markings .
num .
no passing zones .
when existing permanent nopassingzone markings are removed or obliterated as the result of a construction operation pavement grinding asphalt concrete pavement overlays etc .
and the section of pavement continues to be used by the traveling public place class i center line markings or final center line markings as specified by the plan within num calendar days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course place class iii center line markings or final center line markings as specified in the plan within num calendar days .
a .
subsequent work in no passing zones .
if after the original markings are removed or obliterated the contractor returns to the subject no passing zone and places a planspecified pavement course within the num calendar day limit or performs work in preparation for a subsequent pavement course the contractor shall have temporarily satisfied the conditions of the previous paragraph .
in this event the numcalendar day limit will begin again .
b .
liquidated damages .
for each calendar day beyond num days that this work remains incomplete the department will assess liquidated damages in the amount of num per calendar day .
the department will treat the time for the completion of nopassingzone markings as an interim completion date .
num .
passing zones .
sections of pavement where passing is permitted in both directions must be marked with class i center line markings or final center line markings as specified by the plan within num calendar days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course place class iii center line markings or final center line markings as specified in the plan within num calendar days .
num .
allowable duration of class ii lane lines and gore markings and absence of edge lines .
any time existing permanent lane lines gore markings or edge lines have been removed or obliterated as the result of a construction operation pavement grinding asphalt pavement overlays pavement widening etc .
and the section of pavement continues to be used by the traveling public place class i markings or final markings as specified by the plan within num calendar days unless thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course .
if thermoplastic spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course place class iii markings or final markings as specified in the plan within num calendar days .
a .
subsequent work .
if after the original markings are removed or obliterated the contractor returns to the subject section of pavement and places a planspecified pavement course within the numcalendar day limit or performs specified work that requires a lane closure except routine maintenance required by num the contractor shall have temporarily satisfied the conditions of the previous paragraph .
in this event the numcalendar day limit will begin again .
b .
liquidated damages .
for each calendar day beyond num days that this work remains incomplete the department will assess liquidated damages in the amount of num per calendar day .
the department will treat time for the completion of these markings as an interim completion date .
num continuous project .
if a section of pavement is in a continuous part of the project then a new numday limit for renewed work on a section applies to all sections in that part .
num project in sections .
if the project is in parts and the traveling public could not discern the parts as one continuous project then a new numday limit in one part will not apply to the other parts .
num freeways and divided highways .
treat the two directional sides of a freeway as separate parts .
work on one side of a freeway does not create a new numday limit for the other side .
i .
removal of work zone markings .
remove work zone retroreflective pavement markings when necessary .
accomplish removal of work zone pavement marking by using removal methods specified in num.g.num.a for removal of existing markings .
num work zone raised pavement markers .
furnish install maintain and subsequently remove work zone raised pavement markers wzrpms .
work zone raised pavement markers may serve as a substitute for or supplement to work zone pavement markings .
they are provided in both yellow and white versions to match the appropriate pavement marking color .
white units provide reflectorization in one direction while yellow units may provide reflectorization in either one direction or two .
they are available as units which are readily visible both night and day as a result of retroreflectors and brightly colored white or yellow housing type a or visible only at night due to their retroreflectors type b .
a .
materials .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
only use adhesives that are recommended by the reflector manufacturer and are not epoxy .
provide markers of sufficient strength and properly shaped so as not to be dislodged or broken by impacts from vehicle tires including those of high pressure truck tires loaded to num pounds num kilograms .
provide reflectors having an area of num square inches num square millimeters for type a or num square inches num square millimeters for type b with brightness or specific intensity when tested at num degree angle of observation and the following angles of incidence meet or exceed the following wzrpm specific intensity type incidence angle white yellow a num num num a num num num b num num num b num num num b num num num angle of incidence formed by a ray from a light source to the marker and the normal to the leading edge of the marker face also horizontal entrance angle angle of observation formed by a ray from a light source to the marker and the returned ray from the marker to the measuring receptor specific intensity the mean candlepower of the reflected light at given incidence and divergence angles for each footcandle num lux at the reflector on a plane perpendicular to the incident light type a markers when viewed from above have a visible area of not less than num square inches num square millimeters .
when viewed from the front parallel to the pavement as from approaching traffic type a markers have a width of approximately num inches num mm and a visible area of not less than num square inches num square millimeters .
b .
patterns .
the patterns of wzrpms required for the various types of pavement markings are shown in table num .
table num supplemental delineation type a or b type of line color spacing edge line numway white or yellow num ft num m cc lane line numway white num ft num m cc or at center of gap dashed center line numway yellow num ft num m cc or at center of gap double center line numway yellow num units num ft num m cc channelizing line numway white num ft num m or num ft num m cc exit gore outline numway white num ft num m cc simulated delineation type a only type of line color spacing edge line numway white or yellow num ft num m cc edge line on numlane numway numway white and numway yellow white yellow units backtobacknum num ft num m lane line numway white num units at num ft num m cc num ft num m gap dashed center line numway yellow num units at num ft num m cc num ft num m gap double center line numway yellow num unitsnum num ft num m cc channelizing line numway white num ft num m cc exit gore outline numway white num ft num m cc num place units side by side about num inches num mm apart .
num face the proper color and reflector to the oncoming traffic .
place the units back to back about one quarter inch num mm apart .
c. installation .
attach work zone raised pavement markers to clean dry and sound pavement .
remove all loose gravel sand and dirt from the area of the line .
the minimum pavement temperature for installation is num f num c. when markers are being attached to new concrete pavement with curing compound remaining remove the curing compound membrane by sandblasting or other mechanical cleaning method .
install markers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
work zone raised pavement markers are not suitable for use from october num to april num .
if the contractor elects to start or continue work zone pavement markers during this period and they fail or are subsequently removed or destroyed by snow and ice control activities immediately at his expense provide a substitute traffic guidance system which is effective during day and night and which is acceptable to the engineer .
other than for replacement of failed wzrpms new installations of wzrpms are not permitted from october num to april num .
place markers accurately to depict straight or uniformly curving lines .
the longitudinal location of wzrpms are described in table num except that the spacing of an individual wzrpm may be varied by as much as num feet num m or num percent of the nominal spacing in order to avoid poor pavement conditions but the average spacing remains unchanged .
poor pavement conditions include separated joints cracks deteriorated pavement usually uneven pavement or where pavement marking material will interfere with the bond .
the lateral location of wzrpms follows num .
edge lines install the wzrpm num inches num mm outside the work zone pavement marking if any or the theoretical edge of the lane .
this offset may vary num inches num mm as necessary to avoid poor pavement conditions .
num .
lane lines and dashed center lines install the wzrpm in the center of the gap between pavement marking dashes if any .
if a pavement joint exists locate the marker approximately num inches num mm clear from the joint and to the left of it for lane lines .
otherwise center the wzrpm on the theoretical edge of the lane .
num .
double center line install each wzrpm of the pair in line with the appropriate pavement marking stripe if any .
if the edge of lane is demarcated by a crack or joint the pair of wzrpms straddle the joint and install each approximately num inches num mm clear from the joint .
otherwise center the pair on the theoretical edge of lane .
num .
channelizing line install the wzrpm in line with the pavement marking stripe or immediately adjacent to the line except when used at exit gore outlines where the wzrpm is installed within the painted gore vee and approximately num inches num mm from the pavement marking stripe .
do not install wzrpms directly on a painted line .
d. replacement .
maintain wzrpms in good condition .
a marker will be considered to have failed when the marker is broken the marker is worn to the extent that daytime visibility is significantly diminished or of an unacceptable color type b only the reflector is broken or detached the marker is detached from the adhesive the adhesive is detached from the pavement or the marker or reflector is covered by tar or paint .
individual replacement of each failed marker as it occurs is not recommended due to increased exposure of workers to traffic .
however maintain the following minimum levels of marker effectiveness num .
for a given line no more than num percent of the wzrpm units failed in any manner num .
for a segment of any line the number of failed units does not exceed the maximums permitted in table num .
table num line type normal spacing feet meter segment length feet meter normal no .
contained in segment maximum no .
permitted to fail edge num num num num num num num num num num center doublesolid num num num num num num num num num num lane or dashed center num num num num num num numstripe num num channelizing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num replace all failed units within any line or segment before conditions deteriorate below the minimums established in table num .
replace all failed units within the line or segment within num hours after notification by the engineer .
e. removal .
accomplish removal of work zone raised pavement markers in such a manner that no adhesive remains on the pavement .
do not cause permanent pavement surfaces to be scarred broken or significantly roughened .
num pavement marking operations .
perform moving marking operations with a truck equipped with necessary flashers and signs and protect the operations with a similarly equipped vehicle or vehicles separated a sufficient distance to provide adequate advance warning .
use the extreme left or right lane for the marking operation when possible .
where three or more lanes exist in one direction perform the marking operation so that traffic passes on one side only .
protect stationary marking operations in intersections school zones gores and other areas with traffic control devices such as advance warning signs and cones .
for stationary operations such as loading material and cleaning equipment make every effort to have all equipment completely off the traveled way .
when equipment can not be removed from the traveled way operate all traffic control devices on the vehicles and station flaggers and vehicles to protect the worksite and the traveling public while maintaining traffic .
num asphalt concrete for maintaining traffic .
the contractor may use either a type num or type num mix of item num asphalt concrete pg num or an asphalt concrete surface course the engineer approves .
where materials are placed in small quantities or under adverse conditions the engineer may waive specification requirements for placing and finishing if in the judgment of the engineer it is determined that the contractor can obtain satisfactory results in providing a smooth and durable pavement surface .
this material is intended to be used to maintain pavement free from defects as described in num.b .
num performance .
if in the opinion of the engineer the contractor is not furnishing proper maintenance of traffic facilities and proper provisions for traffic control the department may take the necessary steps to place them in proper condition and the department will deduct the cost of such services from any money that may be due or become due the contractor .
identify all pavement deficiencies within the work area .
repair deficiencies as soon as possible and within num hours from notice of the deficiency .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure work zone marking signs as the number of sign installations including the sign necessary supports and all attachment hardware .
the department will include all other work zone signs under maintaining traffic unless separately itemized .
the department will measure work zone pavement markings complete in place by class and material in the units designated .
line quantities will be the length of the completed stripe including gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
work zone pavement markings will include the layout application and removal of the markings when required .
the department will measure line quantities as the length of the completed stripe including gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
the department will measure sign months for portable changeable message signs by the number of months each sign is at the project or project storage yard and immediately available to the project for use .
measurement will begin when each unit is in active service and will continue until the engineer determines the portable changeable message sign is no longer needed for the remaining duration of the project .
a sign month will be deducted if a pcms is not working properly for more than num hours in one sign month or if the contractor removes the pcms from the projectproject storage yard without the engineers determination that it is no longer needed for the project .
num basis of payment .
the department will make partial payments according to num and as modified by the following schedule a .
if the project duration from first day of physical work to original completion date is greater than or equal to num calendar days num .
the department will pay num percent of the lump sum amount bid for maintaining traffic with the first estimate but not sooner than num days after the start of work at the project site .
num .
the department will pay the remaining num percent of the lump sum amount bid for maintaining traffic according to num .
b .
unless separately itemized the lump sum price bid for maintaining traffic shall include the cost of removal or covering of conflicting pavement markings layout application and removal of pavement markings when required maintaining the existing highway in a safe condition for public use removing abrasive and salt residue remaining from snow and ice control performed by the department or local governments providing flaggers and their equipment and furnishing maintaining in an acceptable condition and subsequently removing the following work zone traffic control items as required by the contract documents num .
signs supports and warning lights .
num .
drums cones gates barricades and vertical panels .
num .
arrow boards .
num .
work zone traffic signals .
num .
lighting for work zone signals and flaggers .
c. if traffic permanently damages beyond use any of the following items the department will compensate the contractor for the fair market value of the damaged item according to num provided the contractor has pursued but failed to obtain compensation from the motorist .
follow the procedures given in num for compensation for traffic damage to completed permanent items of work to obtain compensation from the motorist before requesting compensation from the department .
num .
arrow board .
num .
work zone signal pole or controller .
num .
lighting unit or pole .
num .
changeable message sign .
num .
work zone impact attenuator the lump sum price bid for detour signing includes the cost of the contractor furnishing installing maintaining and removing the detour signing shown on the plans and their necessary supports .
the department will pay for the following items under their associated item numbers num bridges num roads and pavement num concrete barrier .
the department will pay for aggregate and calcium chloride authorized by the engineer and used for maintaining traffic under items num and num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum maintaining traffic num lump sum detour signing num each replacement drum num each replacement sign num each object marker ___ way num each mile foot work zone pavement markings kilometer meter num each work zone raised pavement marker num sign month portable changeable message sign num each work zone speed limit sign num each work zone marking sign num hour law enforcement officer with patrol car num each barrier reflector num each work zone crossover lighting system num each work zone impact attenuator num mile kilometer work zone lane line class ___ ______ num mile kilometer work zone center line class ___ ___ num foot meter work zone channelizing line class ___ ______ num mile kilometer work zone edgeline class ___ ______ num foot meter work zone gore marking class ii ___ num foot meter work zone stop line class i ___ num foot meter work zone arrow class i ___ num foot meter work zone crosswalk line class i ___ num foot meter work zone dotted line class i ___ num cubic yard asphalt concrete for maintaining traffic cubic meter width of marking num or num for lane lines and edgelines num or num for channelizing lines .
type material num paint num type i or type ii or left blank to allow any of the three .
item num roads and pavements for maintaining traffic num description num fences num earthwork num guardrail num pavement num sidewalk num maintenance num removal num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of providing maintaining and subsequently removing roads and appurtenances and pavements for maintaining traffic .
num fences .
if necessary replace permanent fencing with temporary fencing while occupying any temporary rightofway provide erect and maintain comparable temporary fencing during the period of construction .
take ownership of the existing fence .
the contractor may use this material in the erection of the temporary fence .
before occupancy of the temporary rightofway is terminated and before removal of the temporary fence the engineer will notify the property owner to reinstall permanent fencing according to the rightofway settlement .
num earthwork .
excavate and construct embankment necessary for providing and maintaining temporary roads and any associated drainage facilities as well as subsequent removal of temporary roads and restoration of the areas to their original condition according to item num .
construct adequate side ditches in cut sections and provide drainage pipe and culverts where necessary .
ensure the side slopes are not steeper than num unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num guardrail .
where the height of the embankment is num feet num m or more measured at the outside edge of the paved surface and the side slope is steeper than num provide guardrail at a distance of at least num feet num m from the edge of the required width of the surface course .
conform to one of the types of guardrail specified in item num except that the department will allow the contractor to reuse material in good condition .
num pavement .
ensure that the pavement surface is constructed to the width shown in the plans of the materials and in the manner specified .
prepare the subgrade in accordance with num and num .
provide subgrade conforming to item num .
soft subgrade will be determined and replaced according to item num .
where class a or class b pavement is shown on the plans provide either rigid pavement or flexible pavement conforming to the following minimum requirements minimum course thickness required pavement type course makeup class a class b rigid num num in num mm num in num mm flexible num num type num num num in num mm num in num mm num type num num num num in num mm num in num mm num num num num in num mm num in num mm num num num num in num mm num in num mm num meet surface course requirements .
num meet intermediate course requirements .
num the contractor may use num or num type num intermediate course .
num the contractor may use num inches num mm num num or num type num intermediate course in lieu of num inches num mm of num .
num the engineer may waive maximum placement lift thicknesses if quality control testing conforming to supplement num is performed and a final density between num and num percent is achieved .
num the contractor may use num in lieu of num .
for the indicated pavement type and courses conform to the requirements of the specified items except as modified below .
for rigid pavements conform to item num .
tiebars or hook bolts for longitudinal joints are not required .
use dowels only at transverse expansion and construction joints .
conform to the quality requirements set forth in num for the materials except the requirements of num .
use class qcnum concrete .
for any part of the num pavement that is to be incorporated into the permanent pavement the above exclusions do not apply and conformance to items num and num is required .
for a num course if the contractor spreads and finishes the materials by acceptable hand methods the department will waive the requirements for smoothness .
use a pg num asphalt binder for temporary asphalt pavement .
if any part of the temporary pavement will be incorporated into the project permanently then use the contractspecified pg asphalt binder grade for the pavement course .
for a num course if the contractor spreads the aggregate by approved hand methods the department will not require side forms .
if the num course is to be removed the contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement .
determine the thickness of the courses by field measurement .
num sidewalk .
if temporary walks are required provide the type of walk shown in the plans in accordance with item num .
num maintenance .
maintain all portions of the temporary facilities in good condition with respect to both safety and smoothness for travel as long as it is needed for maintenance of traffic .
if the engineer determines that the contractor is not properly maintaining the temporary facilities the department may put them into proper condition according to num .
num removal .
if the temporary facilities are no longer needed remove them except such portions of the embankment as are shown on the plans to be a part of the new roadway embankment and leave the area in a neat condition .
take ownership of all material removed unless otherwise shown on the plans .
use all suitable material in the work or legally use recycle or dispose in accordance with num and num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of pavement by the number of square yards square meters of pavement surface placed maintained and removed as directed measured complete in place .
the department will measure areas of soft subgrade undercut and replaced according to num .
num basis of payment .
payment for roads for maintaining traffic includes the installation maintenance and removal of all fencing earthwork guardrail sidewalk and all other items as necessary to provide a complete functional and safe installation for public use .
the department will pay for areas requiring undercut and replacement conforming to num according to num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard pavement for maintaining traffic class a square meter num square yard pavement for maintaining traffic class b square meter num lump sum roads for maintaining traffic item num dust control num description num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of applying water or dust palliative for the alleviation or prevention of dust nuisance originating from earthwork construction operations from within the project construction limits .
num construction requirements .
perform dust control operations at the time and location and in the amount ordered by the engineer .
maintain control of the application of water or dust palliative at all times to minimize dust but not to create saturated soil conditions .
the engineer will determine whether water or dust palliative is to be used to alleviate or prevent dust nuisance and the amounts of each material to be used .
do not apply calcium chloride to areas that will be subsequently seeded or sodded .
furnish and apply water used for dust control by means of tanks equipped with suitable sprinkling devices .
use dust palliative consisting of num calcium chloride or a brine solution containing a minimum of num percent by weight of calcium chloride .
spread the calcium chloride uniformly over the surface .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure water by the number of m gallons num gallon units cubic meters applied and measured either in tanks tank wagons or trucks of predetermined capacity or by means of meters of a type and furnished and installed by the contractor at no expense to the department or determined by weight conversion .
the department will measure calcium chloride by the number of tons metric tons by weight measurement furnished and applied .
when brine is used the department will determine the weight of calcium chloride by multiplying the number of gallons cubic meters by the factor num num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num m gallons water cubic meter num ton metric ton calcium chloride item num reconditioning shoulders num description num materials num prosecution num shoulder preparation num furnishing and compacting additional aggregate num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing the shoulder and furnishing and compacting additional aggregate on the existing or prepared shoulder .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to num .
num prosecution .
if reconditioning shoulders as part of a resurfacing project and traffic is maintained place shoulder material along with the paving operations as rapidly as possible .
complete all shoulder reconditioning within four days following the placement of the surface course or any course that results in a drop off of num inches num mm or greater .
num shoulder preparation .
if shoulder preparation is specified loosen the existing surface to a depth of num to num inches num to num mm .
if the surface is an asphalt mix or seal cut the surface along the edge of the pavement with a blade or disc to give a straight vertical edge .
reduce pieces of loosened material that exceed approximately num num inches num mm in size to at least this maximum size or consider these pieces unsuitable material .
remove and dispose of oversized or other unsuitable material that would interfere with placing of aggregate .
reshape the loosened material as necessary to conform to the requirements for placing aggregate .
num furnishing and compacting additional aggregate .
spread aggregate with approved spreaders .
do not dump or store aggregate on the pavement .
remove spilled aggregate from the pavement as spreading progresses .
where the shoulder is relatively level compact the material using crawlertype tractors tamping rollers trench rollers suitable pneumatic tire rollers or other suitable equipment .
use a minimum of four passes with compaction equipment weighing at least num tons num metric tons .
perform the final compaction of the surface of the shoulder using a pneumatic tire roller .
where it would be unsafe to use the above compaction equipment due to the grade or width of the shoulder use a sidemounted roller or sidemounted vibrating plate compactor that is securely attached to a tractor or other construction equipment .
the sidemounted roller or sidemounted vibrating plate compactor must be able to adequately compact the aggregate while the equipment to which it is mounted remains on the paved surface .
use a minimum of four passes with the sidemounted roller and two passes with the sidemounted vibrating plate compactor .
compact the aggregate immediately after the spreading operation to prevent the loss of contained moisture and displacement of the material .
apply water as directed by the engineer when required to aid compaction and to prevent segregation of the material .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure shoulder preparation by the number of square yards square meters .
the department will measure compacted aggregate by the number of cubic yards cubic meters in place computed from the profile grade and typical sections .
the department will measure water by the number of m gallons or num gallon units cubic meters according to num .
if the plans provide for the use of aggregate in a variable width or depth course and the department can not readily calculate the quantity from profile grade and typical sections the department will measure the cubic yards cubic meters by converting from weight using the following conversion factors table num material conversion factor crushed stone num lbydnum num kgmnum crushed gravel num lbydnum num kgmnum crushed slag num less than num lbftnum num kgmnum num lbydnum num kgmnum num to num lbftnum num to num kgmnum num lbydnum num kgmnum more than num lbftnum num kgmnum num lbydnum num kgmnum recycled portland cement concrete num lbydnum num kgmnum recycled asphalt pavement num lbydnum num kgmnum num based on average dry rodded weight of standard sizes of slag aggregates on record at the laboratory .
the conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights .
these numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of no .
num num or num gradation .
the department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the original source .
the department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority of the mixture .
the moistures of the delivered material will be less than num percent above saturated surface dry condition or the payment will be based on the dry densities and dry weights .
furnish freight bills or certified weigh bills according to item num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard shoulder preparation square meter num cubic yard compacted aggregate cubic meter num m gallons water cubic meter item num rumble strips on shoulders num description num construction num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of grinding depressions rumble strips in paved shoulders .
construct rumble strips according to the standard construction drawings .
num construction .
furnish equipment with a rotary cutting head that will grind the depressions to the required dimensions .
equip the cutting head with a pattern of cutting tips to produce a smooth cut with approximately num inches num mm between peaks and valleys .
ensure that the cutting head is on its own suspension system independent from that of the power unit to allow the head to align itself with the slope of the shoulder or any irregularities in the shoulder surface .
equip the cutting tool with guides or a guidance system clearly visible to the operator to provide for consistent alignment .
take effective measures to control dust during the grinding operation .
remove and dispose of all grinding materials deposited on the roadway pavement in a manner approved by the engineer and before opening the roadway to traffic .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure rumble strips by the number of feet meters or mile kilometer as the sum of the lengths of the individual segments .
the department will measure lengths along the inside edge of the shoulder from the center of the first depression in a segment to the center of the last depression in that segment .
if rumble strips are provided on more than one shoulder the department will measure lengths separately for each shoulder segment and add the individual lengths together to obtain the total length .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for repairing surface damage and extraneous marks caused by the contractors operations .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num feet meter rumble strips asphalt concrete num mile kilometer rumble strips asphalt concrete num feet meter rumble strips concrete num mile kilometer rumble strips concrete item num field office num description num general num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of providing maintaining and subsequently removing a field office for the exclusive use of the department for the duration of the contract at a location approved by the engineer .
num general .
furnish a completely functional field office of the type specified in the contract by the date directed by the engineer .
furnish each field office with a means for maintaining a room temperature between num and num f num and num c. furnish electric service for each field office .
furnish potable hot and cold water for each field office .
furnish neat sanitary enclosed toilet accommodations for each field office .
furnish associated lavatory and sanitary supplies .
portable facilities may be provided with the approval of the engineer .
for projects requiring moisture and density control of construction materials provide the field office with a lockable wood or metal storage box of sufficient size to store a nuclear density gauge and with a working electrical connection to charge the gauge .
provide two independent lock systems one that locks the box the gauge is stored in and the second one that locks the box to the facility within which the box is housed .
the second lock system may consist of bolting the box to the office floor or wall .
the storage box must be at least num feet num meters from any occupied work area .
for the type of field office specified provide the items indicated in table num table num field office item type a type b type c minimum ceiling height ft m num num num num num num floor space ft m num num num num num num separate enclosed room ft m part of specified floor space num num num num num num telephone service telephones num num num num internet service connection num num num num multifunction copier that is setup for scanning printing faxing and copying .
num num num num num num num calculator with tape num num num desk and chair set num num num work table num numinch num num mm num num num numdrawer legal size lockable metal file cabinet num num numdrawer metal file cabinet num num num portable fire extinguishers num num num num plan rack num num num num allweather parking spaces num num num num for each telephone specified provide the telephone itself all wiring necessary to connect the phone and multi function copier to the phone company system and a working separate phone number for each telephone .
connect one phone to a recorded answering device .
for types b and c provide one speakerphone .
num copier must meet minimum specifications provided for each field office type .
contractor responsible for paper supplies copier supplies and maintenance of copier .
type a copyprint speed num pages per minute letter num pages per minute legal num pages per minute ledger or higher duplex printing support automatic document feeder with num sheet duplexing document feeder copier memory num mb data security kit paper capacity num sheet num trays numsheet bypass tray network interface numbasetx numbasetx analog fax support included with machine color scanning with following requirements up to num num dpi scan area up to num num scanning protocol support tcpip smtp smb ftp popnum ncp file scan types supported single page tiff jpeg pdf multi page tiff pdf and scanning support for scantoemail smb folder url and twain network protocol support for tcpip client and server print driver support for pcl print drivers server operating system support for windows server num and windows server num rnum num bitnum bit client print driver support for windows xpwindows num both pclnum bit and num bit minimum printcopy resolution of num num dpi type b and c color printcopyscan copyprint speed num pages per minute letter num pages per minute legal num pages per minute ledger or higher duplex printing support automatic document feeder with num sheet duplexing document feeder copier memory num gb installed hdd num gb data encryption and hdd erase support included with machine internal stapler support paper capacity num sheet num trays numsheet bypass tray network interface numbasetx numbasetx analog fax support included with machine color scanning with following requirements up to num num dpi scan area up to num num scanning protocol support tcpip smtp smb ftp popnum ncp file scan types supported single page tiff jpeg pdf multi page tiff pdf and ocr pdf scanning support for scantoemail hdd smb folder url and twain network protocol support for tcpip client and server print driver support for pcl print drivers server operating system support for windows server num and windows server num rnum num bitnum bit client print driver support for windows xpwindows num both pclnum bit and num bit minimum printcopy resolution of num num dpi secure printing with password or pin from client to copier num type numanumbc numpound num g size num capable of handling the breakdown of num numinch num num mm sized plans into ten sections .
num provide a broadband internet connection capable of minimum download speeds as follows num mbps download num mbps upload network latency less than num milliseconds .
if speeds are not available through an individual or singular circuit provide the highest speed available in the area and install multiple circuits to achieve the specified speeds .
when multiple broadband services are available the following is the preferred order cable dsl cellular and wireless radio satellite communication is not compatible with odot vpn connection and will not be accepted .
supply modems capable being configured in bridge mode .
if a cellular network is used provide the cellular equipment including software and router equipment to connect to the odot provided cisco asa num firewall .
supply odot with all documentation for the broadband circuit including all usernameuser ids passwords and account information .
verify that the broadband internet connection is active and working as specified .
odot it personnel will confirm that bandwidth and network latency are compliant with the required field office specifications .
all field office internet connections are for odot use only .
with the engineers written approval the contractor may modify the requirements for the field office .
maintain all utility services e.g .
electric security telephone water for the duration of the project .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure field office type ___ by the number of months the office is maintained .
a partial month at the end of the project will be paid as a full month .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num month field office type ___ item num delineators num description num materials num layout num removal num installation num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing delineators removing existing delineators for disposal and restoring the surface where delineators are removed .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to reflectors num posts flexible num steel hardware num brackets num stainless steel hardware num aluminum hardware num reflective sheeting num num delineators consist of reflectors mounted on flexible posts or brackets .
reflectors are reflective sheeting adhered to either a flexible post or an aluminum plate .
the colors of reflectors of each type are type c white type d yellow type e red delineator reflector and flexible post color shall match that of the nearest edge line .
num layout .
lay out all delineator locations to ensure their proper placement .
the engineer will approve the layout before installation is started .
num removal .
remove delineators including reflectors posts brackets and miscellaneous hardware .
the delineator becomes the property of the contractor .
remove and dispose of concrete for delineator post embedment .
restore surfaces where delineator posts or concrete for embedment are removed .
num installation .
install delineators facing traffic except install red reflectors facing wrongway traffic .
do not remove the protective paper covering the face of flexible postmounted reflectors until after installation .
ensure that posts are not more than num out of plumb .
if soil conditions may cause the post to be out of plumb the contractor may drive a pilot shaft before installation .
install flexible posts using methods and equipment that conform to the post manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure delineator by the number including reflectors supports and hardware in place completed and accepted .
the department will measure removal of delineator by the number .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each delineator num each removal of delineator item num raised pavement markers rpm num description num materials num layout num installation rpm casting num installation rpm retroreflector num reflector replacement num reflector color num raised pavement markers removed num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing the pavement and furnishing and placing plowable raised pavement marker castings rpms and prismatic retroreflectors and removing existing rpms for disposal .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to castings num prismatic retroreflectors and adhesive num casting adhesive num num layout .
before placing rpms lay out the location of all rpms .
locate rpms within num percent of specified spacing .
do not place rpms under the following conditions a .
on pavement surfaces with cracking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
b .
within num foot num m of active signal detector loop wires .
exercise care to ensure that detector leadin cables are not cut .
c. over pavement markings except with the engineers approval .
d. closer than num inches num mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint or within an intersection .
e. within num feet num m of a bridge expansion joint .
if the initial location of a rpm is determined to violate one of the aforementioned conditions relocate the affected rpm longitudinally .
relocate the rpm within a distance not exceeding num percent of the specified rpm spacing .
if necessary to relocate the rpm to a distance greater than num percent of the specified rpm spacing do not install the affected rpm .
rpms along double yellow centerline are to be placed in line or on line but no closer than num inches num mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
rpms installed along a channelizing line are to be placed no more than num inch num mm from the edge of the painted line and no closer than num inches num mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
place the rpms installed along a lane line or dashed yellow centerline between and in line with the dashes no closer than num inches num mm to a pavement construction transverse or longitudinal joint .
install replacement rpms within num feet num m longitudinally of the damaged or missing rpm .
num installation rpm casting .
cut parallel slots with num to num inch num to num mm clearance on each side for installing rpm castings .
pavement cuts should be inspected prior to adding casting adhesive .
when a casting is inserted in the cut without casting adhesive to test proper cut at least num of the num leveling lugstabs must contact the pavement surface and all four keelends of castings must be below the pavement surface .
each casting must be centered lengthwise and should have num to num inch num to num mm clearance between pavement cut and casting for casting adhesive to bond properly .
only the leveling lugstabs should be in contact with the pavement surface after insertion of casting in pavement so that a minimum of num inch num mm of casting adhesive is the bonding adhesive between the casting and pavement .
the casting adhesive must fill all voids .
the pavement cut must be completely dry and free of dust dirt or any other material that will interfere with the adhesive bond to the casting and the pavement .
casting adhesive on the active reflector face must be removed immediately .
install the rpm casting within num hours after cutting the slots into the pavement .
on new pavement surfaces the contractor may begin rpm placement as soon as the pavement markings for that section are completed and dry .
ensure that the rpm casting is free of dirt dust oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter that impairs adhesion to the pavement .
place rpms when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least num f num c and the pavement is dry .
heat both parts of the rpm casting adhesive to num num f num num c during installation when either the pavement surface or ambient air temperature is between num and num f num and num c. ambient air temperature minimum period protected from traffic f c minutes num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num do not allow traffic on the rpms until the adhesive has cured .
two component approved casting adhesive is used to fill the pavement cut to within approximately num inch num mm of the top of the pavement cut .
a minimum of num of the num leveling lugstabs must be in contact with the pavement surface and the casting adhesive should ooze out from under the casting from all sides filling all voids around the casting and be level with the pavement surface .
mix the casting adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
complete the mixing operation and placing of the rpms rapidly .
do not use any mixed batch that becomes so viscous that it can not be readily extruded from under the rpm with light pressure .
num installation rpm retroreflector .
attach the reflector to the casting before installation or after the adhesive in the pavement slots has cured .
remove all dirt dust oil grease rust moisture parts of damaged reflectors or any foreign matter that impairs adhesion of the reflector to the casting .
peel the release liner from the back of the reflector with butyl pad .
apply a wide bead approximately num inch num mm of reflector adhesive sufficient to squeeze out on all sides when pressure is applied to seat the reflector .
apply approximately num pounds num kg of pressure on the reflector or foot pressure for num to num seconds .
do not allow adhesive material on the reflective surface of the reflector .
any adhesive on the active reflector must be removed immediately .
apply the reflector when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least num f num c and the casting surface is dry .
do not attach the reflector to the casting when rain over the work site is imminent .
num reflector replacement .
replace damaged nonretroreflective or missing reflectors within the existing marker installations where the casting remains intact with the appropriate reflector type .
the engineer will determine the location of replacement reflectors .
perform the cleaning and attachment procedure for replacing reflectors within existing rpm installations according to num .
num reflector color .
use the appropriate reflector color for the following applications a. channelizing lines .
whitered twoway reflectors with white facing traffic .
b .
lane lines .
white oneway or whitered twoway reflectors as specified with white facing traffic .
c. edge lines .
oneway reflectors facing traffic matching the edge line color or twoway reflectors with the edge line color facing traffic and red in the opposite direction .
d. center lines .
yellow twoway reflectors .
num raised pavement markers removed .
as designated remove existing raised pavement markers .
fill all depressions caused by removing the castings with asphalt concrete by the end of the next workday .
remove all standing water from the hole before filling .
compact the asphalt concrete flush with the pavement .
removed raised pavement markers become the property of the contractor .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure rpms by the number of each furnished complete with reflectors in place and accepted .
the department will measure rpm reflectors by the number of each complete in place for use on existing rpm castings in the pavement and accepted .
the department will measure raised pavement markers removed by the number .
payment will include the cost of asphalt concrete to fill depressions caused by removal of the castings .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each rpm num each rpm reflector num each raised pavement marker removed item num concrete barrier num description num materials num placing concrete num portable barrier num joints num finish num curing num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing portland cement concrete barrier on the accepted and prepared subgrade subbase course or existing pavement .
this item also consists of furnishing placing maintaining and removing portable barrier .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc num num reinforcing steel and wire fabric num forms num preformed filler num curing materials num num or num type num precast concrete num dowel bars num thru num steel num replacing coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with recycled concrete aggregate conforming to supplement num is an option num placing concrete .
construct concrete barrier by castinplace precast or slipform methods .
for slipform construction conform to num.c .
num portable barrier .
furnish individual sections not less than num feet num m long .
if intending to use the barrier at one location on the project the contractor may slipform barriers in place without joints or with grooved or sawed joints to facilitate removal .
as directed by the engineer repair or replace barrier sections damaged during handling or by traffic for the life of the project .
the contractor may substitute approved proprietary portable barrier products which can be found on the office of roadway engineerings website .
num joints .
construct joints for castinplace or slipformed barrier of the type and dimensions and at the locations specified .
a .
contraction joints .
the contractor may construct unsealed contraction joints by either sawing using metal inserts inside the forms using a grooving tool or using fullwidth numinch num mm thick preformed joint filler conforming to num .
make joints that are sawed tooled or formed by inserts a minimum of num inch num mm wide and num inches num mm deep .
saw joints as soon as curing allows sawing to the required depth with minimal spalling of the concrete surface .
b .
expansion joints .
use numinch num mm preformed joint filler conforming to num to construct expansion joints at locations as shown in the plans .
c. horizontal construction joints .
if and as shown on the plans the contractor may place horizontal construction joints .
num finish .
immediately following removal of fixed forms or slipform construction check the surface of the barrier with a straightedge and correct all irregularities of more than num inch in num feet num mm in num m. finish and make corrections to the barrier surface according to num .
num curing .
cure concrete according to num method b and the following additional requirements .
apply the curing compound using an approved mechanical sprayer equipped with a shield to protect the spray from wind .
for small areas the engineer will allow the use of other acceptable methods .
do not apply any load or conduct any work that will damage newly placed concrete .
allow a minimum of num hours of cure time to elapse on any concrete placed first at a horizontal construction joint .
the contractor may cure precast sections according to num .
with the engineers approval the contractor may also use radiant heated forms for curing .
the contractor may use num method a for curing of short sections of barrier leaveouts however before the curing is completed for any leaveouts apply material conforming to num type num at the normal rate specified in num method b .
the contractor may cure horizontal construction joints between the foundation and the upper portion of the barrier and between portions of the upper barrier placed separately according to num method a or b .
do not remove the membrane before placing the next portion of the concrete barrier .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure concrete barrier by the number of feet meters along the centerline of the top of the barrier including all transitions and bridge pier sections as specified complete in place excluding end anchorages and excluding sections .
the department will measure reinforced end anchorages of the type specified by the number each complete in place .
the department will measure end sections of the type specified by the number each complete in place .
the department will measure portable barrier and portable barrier bridge mounted by the number of feet meters for each application of the barrier placed according to the plans .
the department will measure each re use of barrier sections at a different location required by the plans separately .
the department will not measure repaired or replacement barrier sections damaged during handling or by traffic .
num basis of payment .
the cost of all inserts sleeves fittings connectors reinforcement dowels preformed filler excavation aggregate base and backfill is incidental to these items .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num foot meter concrete barrier type ___ num each concrete barrier end anchorage reinforced type ___ num each concrete barrier end section type ____ num foot meter portable barrier ___ ___ mm num foot meter portable barrier ___ ___ mm bridge mounted item num construction layout stakes and survey monuments num description num materials num definitions num verification num placement protection and restoration of survey monuments num primary project control num rightofway staking num construction layout staking num providing electronic instrumentation num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing and maintaining construction layout stakes necessary to perform the work under the contract .
this work also includes verification placement protection and necessary restoration of primary project control monuments monument assemblies reference monuments which include centerline monuments and centerline reference monuments and rightofway monuments .
ensure that all work associated with locating and setting reference monuments rightofway monuments and steel rods in monument assemblies is performed by a registered surveyor .
ensure that all other surveying and layout work described below is supervised by a registered engineer or a registered surveyor .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc misc or qc num num cast frames and covers num num or num concrete sand fine aggregate num.a stainless steel bolts num steel rods num pipe num num or num num definitions a .
survey monuments .
includes primary project control monuments including azimuth marks and temporary benchmarks monument assemblies centerline monuments centerline reference monuments and rightofway monuments .
b .
primary project control monument .
a surveyed position that is established and constructed according to the departments survey and mapping specifications .
primary project control monuments will have associated azimuth marks and may have associated temporary benchmarks .
c. monument assembly .
a surveyed position typically set inside pavement that consists of a steel rod housed inside a monument assembly box with a cast frame and cover according to scd rmnum .
d. reference monuments num .
centerline monument .
a surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod and aluminum cap encased in concrete according to scd rmnum that defines the centerline .
num .
centerline reference monument .
a surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod and aluminum cap encased in concrete according to scd rmnum that defines the centerline based on a specific offset from that centerline .
e. rightofway monument .
a property boundary monument set according to scd rmnum to comply with ohio administrative code section num standards for boundary surveys in the state of ohio and recited in the rightofway deeds to convey the property or easement rights .
rightofway monuments are set at property corners property line intersections points along the rightofway and angle points on the rightofway .
f. azimuth mark .
a project control monument set at the end points of the project for use as a backsight point .
g. temporary benchmark .
a vertical position transferred from a primary project control monument .
num verification .
verify the position of all survey monuments shown in the contract documents prior to construction activities .
use standard acceptable surveying measurement techniques suitable to meet the requirements of ohio administrative code section num standards for boundary surveys .
have a registered surveyor prepare a verification report with the coordinates station offset and a description of each survey monument found before beginning earth moving resurfacing or paving activities .
include the size material condition any cap stamping or markings and note any differences from the plan locations of the survey monuments .
have the registered surveyor sign and seal the verification report and submit it to the engineer and the district survey operations manager .
if additional survey monuments not shown in the contract documents are encountered protect reference and preserve them in the same manner as survey monuments that are shown in the contract documents .
include the additional survey monuments in the verification report .
num placement protection and restoration of survey monuments .
when specified in the contract documents locate construct and position primary project control monuments according to the departments survey and mapping specifications .
construct all other survey monuments according to scd rmnum .
do not disturb survey monuments cornerstones or boundary monuments during construction unless specified in the contract documents .
restore survey monuments damaged or destroyed by construction activities unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
have a registered surveyor prepare a report and drawing with the coordinates station offset and description of each survey monument that is constructed or restored .
have the registered surveyor sign and seal the verification report and submit it to the engineer and the district survey operations manager .
if the department must repair replace or resurvey the location of any survey monuments cornerstones or boundary monuments that are damaged destroyed or made inaccessible by the contractor or its employees subcontractors or their agents then the engineer will deduct the costs incurred by the department from the estimates to the contractor .
num primary project control .
primary project control governs all positioning for department projects .
use project control information provided in the plans for all project related survey operations .
establish and construct primary project control monuments according to the departments survey and mapping specifications .
num rightofway staking .
stake rightofway lines where work will be performed before beginning the work .
stake rightofway lines by placing tall stakes properly identified and readily discernible at points of change in width or direction of the rightofway line and at points along the line so that at least two stakes can be seen distinctly from any point on the line .
the engineer will not require the contractor to set additional stakes to locate a utility line that is not included as a pay item in the contract or to determine the property line between properties .
num construction layout staking .
furnish construction layout staking as required to construct the project and along both sides of the centerline of construction num feet num m outside of the grading limits at maximum spacing intervals shown in the table below .
replace staking as directed by the engineer .
table num maximum spacing of construction layout stakes length of project spacing length of project spacing less than num mile num feet less than num km num m num mile to num mile num feet num km to num km num m over num mile num feet over num km num m before performing a portion of the work submit a copy of the construction layout notes for that portion to the engineer .
the construction layout notes must contain information sufficient for the engineer to verify the construction layout .
the contractor is responsible for having the finished work conform to the lines grades elevations and dimensions shown on the plans .
any inspection or checking of the contractors layout by the engineer and the acceptance of all or any part of it does not relieve the contractor of that responsibility .
the removal of construction layout stakes at the completion of the work is a final cleanup item that is required as a condition of full payment for item num mobilization .
num providing electronic instrumentation .
if specified as a pay item provide the engineer with electronic instrumentation so that the department can verify the construction layout perform check sections and document pay items .
provide a surveygrade global navigation satellite system gnss receiver and data collector .
provide equipment that meets the requirements of the departments survey and mapping specifications .
provide equipment software and all three dimensional models needed to verify layout perform check sections and document pay items .
train the engineer on how to use the provided equipment and software and provide technical assistance during the duration of the work .
upon completion of the work the electronic equipment computer and software will remain the property of the contractor .
if using gnss methods to construct the project and a pay item for providing electronic instrumentation is not specified provide the engineer with the three dimensional models in electronic format when requested .
provide the models at no additional expense to the department .
num method of measurement .
estimated quantities for replacement of primary project control monuments monument assemblies reference monuments and rightofway monuments expected to be destroyed that are within the project construction work limits are included in the contract documents .
estimated quantities for new monuments are also included in the contract documents .
primary project control monuments monument assemblies reference monuments rightofway monuments and boundary monuments on or outside the project construction work limits are the contractors responsibility to protect and restore as required .
the department will not pay for restoration of these items .
num basis of payment .
payment for construction layout stakes and surveying includes payment for rightofway staking and verifying the location of existing survey monuments .
the department will consider the cost for locating new survey monuments to be included in the unit price bid for the survey monument .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num lump sum construction layout stakes and surveying num lump sum providing electronic instrumentation num each primary project control monument type a num each primary project control monument type b num each monument assembly num each reference monument num each rightofway monument item num mobilization num description num limitation num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of the preparatory work and operations including but not limited to those necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site for the establishment of all field offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project for all other work and operations that must be performed or costs incurred before beginning the work on the other contract items and for demobilization .
if mobilization is not included as a pay item in the contract the department will not pay for this work separately but will consider it incidental to the other contract items .
num limitation .
the department will limit the sum of the partial payments specified in num.a and num.b to the amounts shown in table num under maximum total of partial payments .
the department will pay the balance of the lump sum amount bid as specified in num.c .
table num total contract amount maximum total of partial payments more than up to inclusive num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if the lump sum amount bid for mobilization exceeds the total shown in table num for partial payments the department will pay the excess upon completion of the project .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure mobilization as a unit acceptably performed .
num basis of payment .
the department will make partial payments according to num and as modified by the following schedule a .
the department will release num percent of the lump sum amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the amount shown in num whichever is less to the contractor with the first estimate payable but not sooner than num days after the start of work at the project site .
b .
the department will release an additional num percent of the lump sum amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the amount shown in num whichever is less with the first regular estimate after num percent of the original total contract amount including payments for delivered materials but excluding mobilization is earned .
c. upon completion of all work on the project including final cleanup the department will release payment of the remaining num percent of the lump sum amount bid for mobilization and any amount of the lump sum price bid for mobilization in excess of the total amount shown in num for partial payment .
final cleanup includes but is not limited to the removal of construction layout stakes and sediment and erosion control items .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num lump sum mobilization item num highway lighting num description num definitions num codes num permits num materials num shop drawings num incidentals num luminaires num luminaire supports num foundations num junction boxes handholes pull boxes manholes num raceways and conduits num trenching num jacking or boring num power service control equipment num grounding num wiring and cabling num connections num testing of installations num plastic caution tape num removal of lighting equipment num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing highway lighting equipment complete and ready for service .
this work shall also include necessary excavation and backfill disposal of discarded materials restoration of disturbed facilities and surfaces and testing as specified .
num definitions .
lighting terminology herein is defined in the american national standard practice for roadway lighting .
num codes .
follow the national electrical code as adopted by the state of ohio the national electrical safety code and local codes where applicable .
num permits .
obtain all permits required as an incidental to the construction of the lighting installation .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to concrete qc misc or qc num num num reinforcing steel num sand num cable num unit type ductcable systems num conduit num num num pull boxes num num num num junction boxes num luminaires num lamps num cable connectors and connector kits num cable splicing kits num ground rods num power service components num wood service poles num multiple cell conduit num anchor bolts and nuts num light poles num light towers num portable power units num plastic caution tape num num shop drawings .
submit to the engineer prior to incorporation two copies of the shop drawings and catalog cuts which identify and describe each manufactured item which is being incorporated into the construction .
certify in writing that each manufactured item is in conformance with all contract requirements for that item .
ensure that the documents describing each item indicate the project number including the construction year and the bid reference number under which the item is being installed and that the documentation contains all of the information needed to allow the engineer to determine that the item to be supplied meets all applicable requirements along with all of the information needed by the maintaining agency to obtain an identical replacement unit from the manufacturer .
when a given item is to be incorporated into the construction under multiple bid item reference numbers furnish a separate and complete documentation package for each bid item reference number under which the item is to be installed .
when multiple items are to be incorporated under a single bid reference number submit the documentation for all such items together .
num incidentals .
furnish and install all incidentals necessary to provide a complete and practical working unit or system .
num luminaires .
a luminaire consists of a housing with a lamp a lamp socket the optical components to direct the output from that lamp and the electrical components needed to operate the lamp .
ensure that luminaires of the same type i.e .
high mast low mast conventional underpass post top etc in a given installation i.e .
interchange rest area weigh station etc .
are of the same brand .
align each luminaire vertically and horizontally to the roadway as specified .
where the profile grade exceeds num percent and the luminaire is mounted less than num feet num m above the roadway adjust the luminaire to be perpendicular to the roadway rather than gravimetric level .
at the locations designated in the plans or as directed by the engineer furnish and install glare shields obtained from the manufacturer of the luminaire .
apply a clearlyvisible liberal coating of metalfree molybdenum disulfide and graphitebased antiseize compound to all fasteners used in accessing the lamp for replacement .
after all other work has been completed clean the reflector refractor and other components of the optical assembly just prior to leaving the job .
num luminaire supports .
luminaire supports fall into three categories bracket light pole light tower .
a bracket is the attaching hardware used to mount a luminaire onto the face of a wall or pier cap or hang a luminaire from the bottom of a deck or beam or other similar installation .
a bracket is often supplied for the luminaire by the luminaire manufacturer to facilitate the installation of the luminaire .
a more complex situation will require extensive work to fabricate a bracket for the situation .
a light pole is the pole with one or more fixed brackets or arms for supporting luminaires above the roadway to be lighted .
a light pole also includes a lower portion of the pole which is embedded or a mounting plate any base for housing components or wiring and when specified a breakaway device such as a frangible base frangible couplings or slip plates .
a light tower is a shaft with a base plate head frame ring or similar structure on which one or more luminaires are mounted with a mechanism for lowering the mounting ring and luminaires for servicing and a lightning protection system .
ensure that luminaire supports of the same type i.e .
high mast low mast conventional underpass post top etc .
in a given installation i.e .
interchange rest area weigh station etc .
are of the same brand .
plumb each light pole and each light tower .
when shims are used use only shims of an approved design and installed in an approved manner .
do not install more than the minimum number needed to plumb the pole and neither exceed the maximum allowed total thickness of the shim pack nor the maximum number of shims permitted .
when leveling nuts are used ensure that such nuts are installed in approved locations and that both the anchor and the leveling nuts are properly tightened according to aashto ltsnum specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num section cnum .
ensure that the grounding connections for each light pole or light tower have been made and that the resultant ground is within the earth resistance limit specified apply a suitable lubricant to prevent seizing to each cover fastener and install all such fasteners .
after erection the engineer shall inspect each pole for defects in the surfaces and determine for each defect discovered whether the defect is minor enough that the contractor may be allowed to field repair the finish or major enough that the contractor must replace the pole .
make finish repairs and provide and install replacement poles as directed by the engineer for no additional charge to the project .
label each light pole and light tower with the alpha numeric identifier .
place the identifier on the quadrant of the surface of the pole that faces oncoming traffic at approximately num feet num meters above the roadway surface .
apply the identifier letters and numerals when the ambient air temperature the temperature of the labeling material and the temperature of the surface to which the labels are applied are all above num f num c. identification of the light poles or light towers and the removal of any previous such identifier in the case of light poles or light towers being reassigned shall be considered as incidental work .
num foundations .
excavate for each foundation to the dimensions given .
if a cave in should occur during excavation excavating using casing sleeving or other methods may continue with the approval of the engineer .
where in the opinion of the engineer the excavation for a foundation has revealed an unstable condition at the bottom of the excavation drill the foundation shaft deeper enlarge the diameter of the drilled shaft or make other modification to the foundation as directed by the engineer who shall initiate the appropriate arrangements to compensate the contractor for the addition work required .
when rock is encountered continue excavation to a minimum of num feet num meter into rock .
the engineer may then decrease the total depth of the foundation to not less than num feet num meters for a light pole or num feet num meters for a light tower .
reinforce each foundation with steel as specified and such steel reinforcing shall be placed in accordance with num .
install the anchor bolts for the light pole or light tower in each foundation using anchor bolt setting templates .
place class qc misc or qc num concrete for the foundation in accordance with num except that forms will not be required for portions of foundations extending more than num inches num mm below the ground line unless the soil does not have sufficient stability to stay in place during the placing of the concrete .
finish the top of each foundation smooth and level .
after forms have been removed backfill the excavated spaces around each foundation with suitable material placed and tamped in thin layers as directed by the engineer .
num junctions boxes handholes pull boxes manholes .
furnish and install a junction box of the size and type specified .
furnish each junction box embedded in concrete with a drain .
lubricate each cover screw with a compound to prevent the screw from seizing and install all cover screws .
furnish and install a pull box of the size and type specified .
excavate for each pull box as nearly as practicable to the outside dimensions of the pull box .
install a num inch num mm gravel base with a num inch num mm underdrain to a suitable outlet below each pull box .
after setting the pull box to proper grade backfill the excavated spaces around the pull box with suitable material placed and thoroughly tamped in thin layers .
when a pull box is to be installed in a paved area remove an adequate area of the paving by saw cutting the sides of the area to be removed or by removal of the paving back to an expansion joint as instructed by the engineer .
after setting the pull box to proper grade backfill the excavated spaces around the pull box with suitable material placed and thoroughly tamped in thin layers and restore the pavement base and paving to match the surround .
metal pull box lids shall be bonded by attachment of the equipment grounding conductor to the frame diagonal and a braided strap .
num raceways and conduits .
furnish and install conduit of the sizes and types specified .
when the location type or size of a conduit has not been indicated submit to the engineer working drawings showing the location and size and type of each such conduit along with the number and size of wires contained in each such conduit and secure the approval of the engineer prior to installing the conduit .
use of consuit material shall comply with the nec .
when not otherwise specified all conduit and fittings on an individual run of conduit shall be of the same material except for approved manufactured transition fittings required at end of the run when the item into which the conduit terminates is not of the same material as the conduit .
hdpe conduit shall not be used where exposed or within buildings .
install each conduit with a minimum amount of bending and ensure that the total bending between adjacent access points junction boxes pull boxes light poles control equipment enclosures etc .
does not exceed num degrees .
do not bend any conduit to a bend radius of less than num times the internal diameter of the conduit .
bend each conduit in such a manner as to avoid damage to the conduit and any protective coating and such that the internal diameter of the conduit will not be reduced .
remove the rough edges from the cut end of each conduit .
in addition ream the cut end of each metallic conduit .
bush each end of each conduit to further protect the wire insulation and cable jackets from damage .
where threads have been cut onto ferrous metallic conduit after galvanizing paint the threaded area with a ul listed anticorrosion compound in such a manner that there will be no unprotected surfaces .
make each conduit joint tight to provide structural integrity in all conduits and to electrically bond the jointed sections of metallic conduit .
provide an equipment grounding conductor that is not in a jacketed cable assembly in metallic conduits when not otherwise available and bond the conduit to this grounding conductor .
securely fasten onto or build into the structure each conduit .
install the appropriate expansion or deflection joint in each conduit at all locations where movement must be accommodated such as expansion joints on structures and install suitable bonding to assure electrical continuity of the grounding system .
bond all metallic items enclosing electrical conductors together and to good earth ground .
furnish each enclosure junction box pull box and conduit with a drain .
when the low point of a conduit does not occur at a drained access point install a t coupling at the low point of the run and route the side outlet to drain .
where underground conduits are to be encased in concrete use class qc misc or qc num concrete and furnish a minimum of num inches num mm of concrete on all sides using spacers .
after installation of the conduit and prior to installing the cables run a mandrel whose diameter is at least num of the interior diameter of the conduit through the conduit .
if the new conduit contains cabling install a flat woven polyester pulling tape rated for num pound minimum in the conduit .
if the new conduit is to remain empty install an hdpe insulated copper tracer wire num awg minimum in the conduit .
allow for num feet of slack in each adjacent pull box .
temporarily seal the ends of a conduit immediately after placement of conduit when the conductors or cable can not be installed promptly .
after installing the wire or cable and conduit bushings seal all open conduit ends .
use polymerbased mineral filled reusable nondrying elastic duct sealing putty identified for use with the cable insulation shield or other components .
do not use expanding foams or foam of any kind .
num trenching .
follow the routing shown on the plan .
keep the trench within num inches num mm of the designated line where the trench is adjacent to and parallel with a curb or pavement .
in unpaved areas a plow may be used in lieu of trenching with the approval of the engineer .
use a machine that can install the duct uniformly at the specified depth without stretching or abrading the duct and which leaves a narrow self closing slit which presents no significant hazard during the self closing period .
in unpaved areas make the trench a minimum of num feet num m deep and not more than num inches num mm in width .
backfill the trench in layers not more than num inches num mm in loose depth and compact each layer with a mechanical tamper or other approved method as directed by the engineer .
use suitable soil to backfill a trench in earth .
use granular material to backfill a trench in an aggregate .
ensure that the backfill material around and in the first num inches num mm above the top of unit type duct cable not encased in concrete is sand or earth with no stones larger than num inch num mm .
in paved areas either make a slit or t type trench .
cut the pavement along existing joints or grooves where possible .
mark the pavement with cut lines and secure the engineers approval of the location of the cut before cutting the pavement .
num jacking and boring .
in addition to the requirements of num to furnish and install conduit use jacking or horizontal boring when the plan calls for such methods to be used .
use these methods in lieu of trenching only with the approval of the engineer .
jack only rigid galvanized steel conduit .
use only a machine designed for jacking conduit not the bucket or blade of a machine designed for earthwork .
horizontal boring may be used to install any conduit or duct which has the adequate strength flexibility and joints to withstand the process .
make the diameter of the bore no more than num percent larger than the outside diameter of the conduit or duct being installed .
num power service .
furnish and install all equipment necessary to provide a complete electrical service to the roadway lighting facilities .
follow the national electrical code nec article num for enclosures in the construction of all enclosures for power service and lighting control centers .
the power service equipment includes but is not necessarily limited to poles or other support structure for the mounting of the equipment hardware for dead ending an overhead service drop or trench and conduit for receiving an underground service line nec article num type num surge arrestor surge protector device spd meter base customer service disconnect magnetically held lighting contactor photoelectric cell and handoffautomatic switch for control of contactor overcurrent protection devices for each individual lighting circuit enclosures conduits fittings cables and connectors .
assure all control equipment included in the power service is capable of operating within the provided enclosures over appropriate temperature and humidity conditions .
assure that power service equipment that includes daytime lighting controls shall operate continuously with the enclosure placed in a location fully exposed to sunlight and daytime temperature of numf ambient .
construct the lighting electrical system to provide selective coordination of overcurrent devices per nec num .
overload indications per nec num are allowed but not required as part of a standard odot lighting control system .
provide to the engineer a. individual catalog sheets and device timecurrent curves andor tables and b. combined graphical overlays that document acceptable installed overcurrent device coordination .
provide this documentation for all installed overcurrent devices including the service disconnect fuses the lighting control center branch circuit breakers and tower circuit breakers pole fuses if present .
tabular data if used shall include the following time points as a minimum num num num num num num num num and num seconds and additional points as needed to clearly show the overcurrent device operating characteristics .
include minimum melt time and maximum clearing time for fuses include minimum and maximum clearing time for circuit breakers .
provide documentation of the utilityinstalled transformer ansi fuse link type e.g .
k or t and fuse rating if available .
provide documentation of the utilityinstalled power service size in kva .
provide to the engineer a compiled list or catalog sheets showing the shortcircuit current rating sccr of all fuses and fuse holders circuit breakers switches and contactors pursuant of the requirements in nec article num .
if the power service has multiple enclosures mark each enclosure in white letters engraved on a black plastic placard with the function of the equipment contained therein such as service disconnect lighting contactor lighting panel or other appropriate designation .
apply a durable weatherproof adhesive arc and shock hazard warning label to the outside of each electrical enclosure that contains applicable voltage andor arc hazard levels .
when an apparatus enclosure contains circuits above the num volt class mark the enclosure in white letters on a red plastic placard with the warning dangerhigh voltage on each enclosure door .
install each photoelectric cell facing north unless the engineer directs that a specific cell face otherwise to reduce interference from surround lighting .
bond all metallic portions of the supporting structure equipment housings and conduits properly and to an adequate earth ground .
install a wood or plastic wire moldings from grade to num feet num meter above grade over any grounding cables installed on a wood pole .
coordinate and cooperate with the power company in the making of the connections to establish electrical service .
charges made by the power company for establishing of the account extension of company facilities connection of customer equipment to the power company facilities and energy will be borne by the maintaining agency .
num grounding .
connect each light pole or light tower to a local earth ground .
connect each power service to a local earth ground .
provide continuity of grounding by bonding the metallic portions of fixtures apparatus enclosures supports conduits raceways junction boxes and pull boxes together and connecting to earth ground .
at a light pole or a light tower install a bonding cable between the grounding bushing on each metal conduit and the ground lug or bolt in the pole base .
at a junction box or a pull box install a grounding bushing on each metallic conduit not bonded to the box through the conduit connector and install a bonding cable between the grounding bushings on the conduits and the ground lug or bolt in the box .
for a light pole light tower power service or other such item mounted independently install one or more grounding electrodes .
for a luminaire light pole light tower switch enclosure or other such item mounted in or on major highway structures i.e .
bridges connect the item to the structure grounding system .
for a lighting contactor lighting circuit panel or other such item mounted in a building i.e .
motorists services building weigh station scale house etc .
connect the item to the grounding system provided for the building .
for each bridge wall or other structure having electrical elements contained therein or attached thereto furnish all materials necessary including grounding electrodes and install a complete structure grounding system to bond all exposed metallic portions of the structure i.e .
beams railings etc .
electrically together and connect those items to good earth ground .
in the case where structures are separate but adjacent connect the multiple structures together to avoid any difference in earth potential between the structures .
make the permanent connection between the each ground rod and the grounding conductor by exothermic welding .
if the earth resistance measurement exceeds num ohms for a ground for a traffic signal controller or a light tower or num ohms for any other ground install a second ground rod at least num feet num meters from the first and temporarily connect the second rod to the first .
if the earth resistance still exceeds the above specified values permanently connect the first two rods using the same type of cable used for the grounding conductor and continue to add rods one at a time as directed by the engineer .
where rock does not permit the driving of ground rods develop an earth connection by constructing a grid from the partially driven rods supplemented by buried bare cable as directed by the engineer .
num wiring and cabling .
furnish and install electrical wires and cables of the types and sizes required with no inline splices between terminations at devices unless specifically called for by the plan or directed by the engineer .
install wire mesh cable grips on vertical runs of wire or cable in poles and attach said grips to the j hook at the tops of the poles in such a manner as to prevent the weight of the vertical run from abrading the wire insulation or cable jacket where the wire or cable passes into or from the pole .
identify all wires and cables except bare ground bonding cables as to circuit and function with tags or bands in the base of each light pole or light tower each junction box or pull box each apparatus cabinet and other similar locations .
pay out each wire cable and duct cable by unwinding it from the shipping reel spool or coils and not allow the wire cable or ductcable to spiral from off the side of the spool reel or coil .
in addition when wire cable or duct cable is being placed in trench move the reel spool or coil along the side of the trench to allow the wire or cable to pay out into the trench as directly as practical .
seal the ends of each run of duct cable in the same manner as conduit as each run is installed .
do not install duct cable when the temperature of the ductcable can not be kept above num f num c except with the permission of the engineer .
if the end of a wire or cable or duct must stand exposed to the elements or construction activities protect said exposed end by enclosing it in a plastic bag or wrapping it with tape until the termination or connection can be made .
num connections .
make each wire and cable connection above grade i.e .
bases of light poles or light towers junction boxes on structure or in concrete barrier medians etc .
with an approved cable connector kit .
use quick disconnect type kits in the base of each light pole with a fused type in each line or phase conductor .
plug unused line side wire opening in each connector kit installed in the base of the light pole at the outer end of a circuit .
make each cable connection below grade i.e .
pull boxes junction boxes in retaining walls etc .
with a cable splicing kit .
protect partially assembled connections from damage and the elements .
num testing of installations .
furnish equipment and personnel to perform each test as an incidental to the construction of the lighting installation .
the engineer shall witness each test and judge the results .
a .
equipment calibration .
submit to the engineer the types styles or catalog numbers of all testing equipment to be used for such tests .
include a current certificate of calibration for each instrument showing that the instrument is in current calibration using standards traceable to the national institute of standards in accordance with the manufacturers recommended process by a service center authorized by the manufacturer to calibrate the instrument .
certify and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that the instrument has remained sealed since the calibration and that the manufacturers recommended process for ensuring that the instrument is in working order and producing valid results has been followed in conducting the test .
b. grounding electrodes and grounding systems .
furnish two certified copies of the completed test records to the engineer on test reporting forms supplied to the contractor by the engineer or on alternate forms approved by the engineer .
measure the earth resistance in ohms of each ground immediately after it is installed and before the ground is attached to the item being grounded .
when the ground connection is by driven ground rods measure each rod separately .
in the event that a ground rod has a high resistance and additional rods are being added measure the earth resistance of the combined group .
measure a structure grounding system at each point where an exposed metallic item is to be connected to the system .
where driven ground rods are used as the electrodes of the structure grounding system measure each ground rod separately prior to measuring the system .
measure each ground grid at the each point where equipment is to be connected to the grid .
c. circuit continuity .
upon completion of each lighting circuit but prior to energizing the circuit verify the continuity of each conductor of the lighting circuit from the power service to the load side socket in the line side of the quick disconnect connector kit in the base of each light pole and the line side of each disconnect switch at each light tower lighted sign and underpass lighting system shall be verified .
demonstrate that there is no cross connection between the conductor being tested and any other conductor including conductors for other circuits or earth ground .
conduct this test by applying a low test voltage between the conductor under test and one of the companion conductors for the same circuit and demonstrating that the test voltage is available between only those two conductors at the power service the load side socket in the line side of the quick disconnect connector kit in base of each light pole and the line side of each disconnect switch for a light tower a lighted sign or an underpass lighting system and repeating the process until all possible pairs have been so checked .
throughout this test ensure that each disconnect switch is in the open position and that the load side of each connector kit is unplugged .
temporarily disconnect the grounded neutral conductor from earth ground and check all pairings involving the neutral after which again connect the neutral to earth ground and check all pairings both those involving the neutral and those that do not .
d. cable insulation .
after the continuity of a conductor has been verified test the insulation of that conductor and its connections .
ensure that each disconnect switch is in the open position and that the load side of each quick disconnect connector kit is unplugged during this test .
temporarily disconnect a grounded neutral conductor from earth ground when it is being tested .
in addition when a grounded neutral is under test and the circuit utilizes local equipment earthing rather than a continuous equipment grounding back to the power service temporarily connect one of the companion line conductors to provide the equivalent of the continuous equipment grounding cable .
when the circuit conductor is comprised of both new wire or cable and wire or cable installed prior to the current project test the insulation by the megohmmeter method and the resistance of the conductor under test to earth ground or any other conductor shall exceed num megohms .
when the circuit conductor is comprised of entirely new wire or cable test the insulation by the high potential method in accordance with supplement num .
e. lowering device operation .
demonstrate to the engineer that lowering devices on any luminaire supports so equipped operate properly by lowering and raising the luminaire assembly through the full range of motion of the device for each device on two separate occasions at least num days apart .
the engineer shall record the dates of operation for each device and in case of failure the details of both the failure and the date and details of the correction .
the engineer will consider a particular unit satisfactory when the device has operated twice in succession on separate occasions without malfunction .
f. system performance .
prior to acceptance and after all other tests are done the completed lighting system shall be operated on electrical energy from the power company through the permanent customer service connection in its intended normal manner for ninety consecutive days .
notify the engineer at least num days prior to the commencement of this performance test .
in addition to the beginning and ending dates of the test period the engineer shall record the date and details of each failure and the date and details of the repair .
the engineer will consider the performance satisfactory when the lighting installation has operated for ninety consecutive days without a failure due to the workmanship of the contractor .
num plastic caution tape .
install tape approximately num to num inches num to num mm below the final finished grade .
place with the printed side up and parallel with the finished surface .
insure that the tape is not pulled distorted or otherwise misplaced in completing the trench backfill .
num removal of lighting equipment .
a. luminaire removal .
remove the luminaire from its support taking care not to damage the luminaire support or wiring connections .
if the luminaire is to be reused within the same project carefully store the luminaire on the project site .
if the luminaire is to be reused but not within the same project carefully store the luminaire on the project site for pick up by the owner .
if the luminaire is not to be reused properly dispose of the luminaire off the project site .
b. luminaire support removal .
remove the luminaire support taking care not to damage the luminaire support foundation or structure to which it is attached or wiring connections .
if the luminaire support is to be reused within the same project carefully store the luminaire support on the project site .
if the luminaire support is to be reused but not within the same project carefully store the luminaire support on the project site for pick up by the owner .
if the luminaire support is not to be reused properly dispose of the luminaire support off the project site .
c. luminaire support foundation removal .
remove the luminaire support foundation a minimum of one foot num m below finished grade or clear of proposed construction backfill the resultant depression with compacted soil and restore the disturbed area .
d. pull box removal .
remove the pull box properly dispose of it off the project site backfill the resultant depression and restore the disturbed area .
e. disconnect existing circuit .
disconnect the portion of the lighting circuit to be removed or abandoned from the portion of the circuit to remain in service at the designated node point .
remove the cable from the link no longer to remain in service from the node point enclosure .
remove the conduit or duct for the link no longer in service from the node point enclosure and properly close the resultant openings in the enclosure unless the conduit or duct is to be left in place to allow another circuit link to enter the node enclosure .
f. power service removal .
remove the existing power service equipment and properly dispose of the equipment off the project site .
equipment to be removed includes the wood pole or other supporting structure foundation work pads equipment enclosures photoelectric cell and associated conduits wiring overhead or underground service lateral and all other appurtenances .
cut the cable enclosed in conduit which runs into the ground at the lower end of the bend to horizontal approximately num feet num m below grade .
backfill the resultant depression and restore the disturbed area .
coordinate with the power company to insure that the company disconnects the service and that items which belong to the power company that are removed such as the meter base are returned to the power company .
num method of measurement .
bracket arms will be included with the light pole light tower or combination support on which they are mounted for payment .
however when a bracket arm is to be mounted onto an existing support or a support provided by another aspect of the project it may be a separate item for the purpose of payment in which case payment will be made for each bracket arm .
transformer bases will be included with the light pole light tower or combination support on which they are mounted for payment .
however when a transformer base is to be fitted to an existing light pole it may be a separate item for the purpose of payment in which case payment will be made for each transformer base .
light pole anchor bolts will be furnished with the light pole and the setting of the anchor bolts included with the foundation .
however in the case of a light pole mounted onto structures such as bridges and retaining walls where the bolts normally furnished with the light pole are not of the proper length and shape andor the setting of the bolts must be done when the structure is constructed rather than being at the time of construction of the light pole foundation the bolts shall be a separate item for payment in which case payment will be for each bolt with the count being the number of bolt ends projecting for the anchoring of the light pole .
separate payment shall also be made when the bolts are being set in a normal light pole or light tower foundation but the light pole or light tower is not being furnished by the contractor or by others to the contractor .
foundations for light poles or light towers include excavation dewatering sleeving casing reinforcing steel raceways concrete backfilling and when required the num foot or num foot foundation section of concrete barrier and the disposal of surplus excavation .
for light poles or light towers mounted on median barrier or retaining walls the junction box at the point where the stub conduit to the light pole or tower joins the main lighting circuit raceway and the stub conduit from the junction box to the light pole or light tower are also included .
anchor bolts conduit ells and surface restoration not included elsewhere are also included with the foundation .
junction boxes include the drain .
pull boxes include the aggregate for base .
power service includes the control equipment the support and foundations on which the equipment is mounted the pull boxes with underdrain for gathering the lighting circuits into the control equipment at the power service location ground rods and incidentals required for a completed power service .
also included are any poles conduits wire and cable to be provided by the owner to receive the incoming power from the power company .
structure grounding system includes any ground rods or ground grids required as part of the system .
ground grids include any ground rods required as part of the grid and includes the associated grounding conductor and connections from the resultant grid to the first point or points of connection .
ground grids that result from the addition of ground rods as a result of earth ground resistance measurements will be the sum of each ground rod installed such sum will also include all connecting cable and trenching .
a ground rod includes the associated grounding conductor and connections from the rod to the first point of connection .
trench will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation the center of a light tower foundation the center of a pull box the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service the center of the foundation for a power service with a foundation or the wall of the building when the power service for the lighting in on or within the building with no allowance for elevation change .
the payment for trench includes all excavation granular and other backfill material compaction disposal of surplus materials and restoration to match surrounding surface including any seeding sodding or other plantings which were disturbed and the replacement of any minor items such as guardrail or fence panels and return to former position and mounting of items such as trash containers planter boxes or parking meters and small signs which were temporarily moved to facilitate the trenching .
the payment for trench in paved areas includes the aforementioned and in addition sawing and removal of pavement along with the repaving over the trench .
trench in paved areas shall be separated for payment into type a for pavements or sidewalks less than num inches num mm thick and type b for pavements num inches num mm or greater .
conduit will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation the center of a light tower foundation the center of a pull box the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service the center of the foundation for a power service with a foundation or the wall of the building when the power service for the lighting in on or within the building with no allowance for elevation change .
the payment for conduit includes couplings plain expansion and alignment bends hubs bushings condulets and other such appurtenances but not junction boxes and pull boxes .
conduit to be encased in concrete or installed by jacking or boring will be paid separately from conduit to be traditionally installed .
concrete and other materials for encasement or the jacking or boring are included with such conduit where specified .
distribution cable will be measured to the center of foundation pull box junction box or power service plus an allowance of num feet num meters at each pull box and terminating points for slack and connections end except for a power service where the allowance will be num feet num meters to allow for slack and connections with the sum multiplied by the number of conductors required .
pole and bracket cable will be measured as the light pole support height plus the designated arm length with the sum multiplied by the number of conductors required .
for twin arm poles the sum shall be increased by the length of the second arm plus the length of the first arm .
duct cable will be measured to the center of foundation pull box junction box or power service plus an allowance of num feet num meters on each end except for a power service where the allowance will be num feet num meters to allow for slack and connections with no multiplier for the number of conductors .
ductcable includes the cables and being a factory assembly is differentiated by the number and size of the conductors in each assembly .
plastic caution tape will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation the center of a light tower foundation the center of a pull box the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service the center of the foundation for a power service with a foundation or the wall of the building when the power service for the lighting in on or within the building with no allowance for elevation change .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each luminaire functional type housing size if conventional light distribution lamp wattage light source voltage num each glare shield num each light pole pole styledesign number num each light towerdesign number num each light pole anchor bolts num each light pole foundation num each light tower foundation num each junction box length height depth num each pull box material type length height depth num foot meter conduit material type nominal diameter num foot meter trench num foot meter trench in paved areatype num foot meter conduit jacked or drilledmaterial type nominal diameter num each power service num each ground rod num each ground grid num each structure grounding system num foot meter pole and bracket cable size of conductors in awg voltage rating num foot meter distribution cable size of conductors in awg voltage rating num foot meter duct cable duct diameter with number of conductors size of conductors in awg voltage rating conductors num each connection num each service to underpass lighting num each portable winch drive power unit num each luminaire removed num each luminaire support removed num each luminaire support foundation removed num each pull box removed num each disconnect circuit num each power service removed num foot meter plastic caution tape item num barrier reflectors num description num materials num layout num installation num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing barrier reflectors on guardrail blockouts concrete barrier retaining wall and bridge parapets .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to barrier reflectors num conform to the manufacturers recommendations for corrosion resistant fasteners brackets or adhesives .
use barrier reflectors that are mountable on guardrail blockouts concrete barriers retaining walls and bridge parapets .
for wall or parapet mount the barrier reflector may not extend further than num inches num mm in a horizontal direction towards the traffic lanes .
num layout .
lay out all locations to ensure proper placement .
the engineer will approve the layout before installation of the reflectors .
furnish reflectors at the beginning and the end of all barrier runs and at least one additional point evenly spaced between the termini .
space the reflectors at num feet num m on tangents and on curves of less than num degrees more than num m radius .
space the reflectors at num feet num m for curves of greater than num degrees num m radius or less .
the contractor may vary the spacing on tangents and curves of less than num degrees more than num m radius from num feet to num feet num m to num m in the final num feet num m to achieve even spacing of the reflectors .
if using a buffer end section or similar device on the end of the guardrail place the first reflector so that it is visible to approaching traffic .
if tying guardrails barriers retaining walls or bridge parapets together in a continuous run use the total length of the run for determining the number and location of reflectors .
if installing a run of rail or barrier that is at varying distances from the edge of pavement place a reflector where the run first approaches closest to the pavement .
if this results in spacing greater than num feet num m or num feet num m in cases where numfoot num m standard spacing is required install an additional reflector .
if a non reflectorized impact attenuator is in place place an additional reflector on the face of the attenuator nearest to and directed toward approaching traffic .
num installation .
attach the reflector with a suitable corrosion resistant fastener or adhesive conforming to the manufacturers recommendations .
on concrete barriers retaining walls and bridge parapets place the top of the reflector so its height is num inches num mm above the near edge of pavement except that the top of the reflector is at least num inches num mm below the top of the concrete barrier .
install guardrail blockout reflectors on top of the blockout or on the side of the blockout away from traffic .
install guardrail blockout reflectors on the top or side of the blockout nearest the edge of pavement .
install the guardrail blockout reflector so that the reflective surface is above the guardrail .
for guardrail blockout reflectors that are installed on top of the blockout angle the reflective face approximately num degrees towards the nearest travel lane .
remove loose concrete rust dirt and other loose material from the surface of the concrete barrier using a wire brush .
remove dust created by wire brushing before applying adhesive .
apply adhesive to clean and moisturefree surfaces according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the reflector face is clean and free of dust dirt adhesive or any foreign material after installation .
except if mounted on a guardrail blockout rotate the reflective face of oneway reflectors upward from the vertical or plumb position num to num degrees to facilitate rain washing of the reflector face .
when replacing reflectors on a concrete surface locate the new reflector approximately num inches num mm horizontally in either direction from the old location .
use barrier reflectors that are the same color as the adjacent edge line .
use oneway and bidirectional barrier reflectors in accordance with the following guidelines barrier reflectors color direction oneway reflector bidirectional reflector left edge right edge left edge right edge twolane twoway na whitewhite interchange ramp yellowred whitered multilane undivided na whitewhite multilane divided multilane divided with median barrier white yellowyellow multilane divided without median barrier na white concrete wall guardrail or cable rail if median concrete wall is present the department will classify the reflectors as follows mounting location concrete barrier retaining walls bridge rail or bridge parapets type num barrier reflector guardrail type num corrosion resistant metal guardrail blockout reflector type num acrylic or polycarbonate plastic guardrail blockout reflector type num spring loaded guardrail blockout reflector type num ltype guardrail blockout reflector num method of measurement .
the department will measure barrier reflector by the number of each in place completed and accepted .
if a bidirectional reflector consists of two oneway reflectors mounted backtoback the department will measure it as one bidirectional reflector .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each barrier reflector type ____ oneway or bidirectional item num traffic signs and sign supports num description num materials num shop drawings num sign fabrication num foundations num sign supports num sign erection num sign shipment and storage num specific service and touristoriented directional signs num covering of signs num removal and delivery storage reerection or disposal of signs and supports num inspection num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signs sign supports and foundations complete and ready for service .
this work also includes necessary excavation and backfill disposal of discarded materials and restoration of disturbed facilities and surfaces to a condition equal to that existing before this work started .
num materials .
the acceptance of materials and products is based on certified test data furnished in triplicate or on test results of samples according to num as required by the laboratory .
transfer manufacturers guarantees or warranties on all traffic sign material to the department or other maintaining agency upon completion and acceptance of the project .
furnish materials conforming to concrete class qc misc or qc num num num steel structural steel num reinforcing steel num uchannel posts num square posts num wooden box beam num tube and pipe num anchor bolts and nuts num poles and arms num base and arm plates num handhole covers num pole caps num arm caps num hardware num stainless steel num stainless steel hardware num messenger wire num aluminum sheet and plate num extrusions num tube and pipe num castings num forgings num welding rods num hardware num other materials decals num reflective sheeting type f num reflective sheeting type g num reflective sheeting type h num reflective sheeting type j num nonreflective acrylic opaque sheeting num silk screen inks num transparent acrylic electronic cuttable films num num shop drawings .
furnish shop drawings according to num .
submit sign support certified drawings that cover all design types such as ground mounted rigid overhead span wire mounted and overpass structure mounted supports .
on the drawings show overall height sign clearance above foundation span length sign locations sign overall heights and widths and glare shield height and location if applicable .
num sign fabrication .
sign types include flat sheet double faced extrusheet and temporary overlay .
flat sheet signs consist of onepiece units made of aluminum .
double faced signs consist of flat sheet aluminum or extruded aluminum blanks with legend on both sides .
extrusheet signs consist of a number of horizontal panels assembled to form a complete sign .
temporary overlay signs consist of an aluminum sheet covering portions or entire surfaces of extrusheet signs .
prior to reflective sheeting application clean aluminum sign surfaces either by total immersion in a tank containing an alkaline solution of the manufacturers specification or by steam cleaning with an alkaline solution of the manufacturers specification followed by a thorough rinsing with running water .
after cleaning etch the surface with an acid solution and dry .
do not allow cleaned and etched surfaces to become contaminated by contact with oil or grease .
drill or punch bolt holes to finish size .
use sign legends according to the omutcd and the sign designs and markings manual .
for projects sold before july num num use clearview font or the standard alphabets for traffic control devices for positive contrast legends on freeway and expressway guide signs and on all other guide signs when permitted in the sign designs and markings manual .
for projects sold on or after july num num use the standard alphabets for traffic control devices for positive contrast legends on all guide signs .
do not revise overall sign sizes from what is shown in the plans .
the edge space between the border and the text may be adjusted from what is normally used to achieve the sign widths shown .
do not use clearview font for projects sold on or after july num num .
for negative contrast legends use the standard alphabets for traffic control devices .
use capital legends and upperlower case legends in accordance with the sign designs and markings manual .
when either is permitted in the sign designs and markings manual use upperlower case legends .
for flat sheet double faced mile marker double faced street name and ground mounted extrusheet signs use type g h or j reflective sheeting for background and reflective legends .
for overhead extrusheet signs use type g h or j reflective sheeting for the background and use type h or j reflective sheeting for reflective legends shields and symbols including hazardous material plaque airport symbol arrows and borders .
apply reflective sheeting to the surface according to the manufacturers recommendations with no blisters wrinkles tears or blemishes .
do not use reboundable or damage control sheeting for permanent signs .
for reflective legends on flat sheet double faced mile marker and double faced street name signs use reverse silk screen transparent ink transparent acrylic electronic cuttable film or direct applied reflective sheeting copy .
when using direct applied reflective sheeting copy apply all legend on a sign with the same rotation angle orientation .
for nonreflective legends use direct silk screen black ink or direct applied nonreflective acrylic opaque black sheeting copy .
for double faced mile marker signs use flat sheet aluminum and apply reflective sheeting and legend to both sides .
for double faced street name signs use extruded aluminum blanks with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm and thicker stiffened edges and apply reflective sheeting and legend to both sides .
extrusheet panels consist of flat sheet aluminum reinforced with aluminum extrusions attached by spot welding .
panels extruded in a single operation may be used in lieu of spot welded panels .
do not use extruded panels and spot welded panels in the same sign .
bolt together the minimum number of full length sheeted panels to achieve the sign height using aluminum bolts washers lock washers and nuts .
for reflective legends shields and symbols including hazardous material plaque airport symbol arrows and borders use direct applied reflective sheeting .
apply all reflective legend on a sign with the same rotation angle orientation .
for nonreflective legends use direct applied nonreflective acrylic opaque black sheeting copy .
for temporary overlay signs use numinch num mm thick flat sheet aluminum with a maximum panel size of num num feet num num m. apply sheeting and legend as described above for extrusheet signs .
attach temporary overlays to extrusheet signs in the shop or field using aluminum blind rivets at a maximum spacing of num inches num m on the peripheries of the temporary overlays and num inches num m within the interior .
use fluorescent yellowgreen reflective sheeting for the following signs and plaques school snum school bus stop ahead snum school bus turn ahead snum school entrance snumhnum school snump school speed limit ahead snum snuma yellow portions of school speed limit snumhnum pedestrian crossing rnum rnumb rnum bicycle wnum pedestrian wnum handicapped wnum bicyclepedestrian wnum trail crossing wnuma playground wnum and safety zone wnumhnum .
fabricate supplemental warning plaques such as advisory speed wnump share the road wnump distance wnump wnumap wnum nump wnumap supplemental arrow wnump wnump wnump and ahead wnump from fluorescent yellowgreen reflective sheeting when used with a sign above .
use fluorescent yellow reflective sheeting for all yellow signs yellow portions of multicolored signs and yellow sign post reflectors except for signs and portions of signs required to be fabricated with fluorescent yellowgreen reflective sheeting .
for lighted signs cover glare shield and rectangular luminaire support tube with nonreflective acrylic sheeting matching the predominant sign color .
furnish num num inch num num mm sign identification stickers of type f reflective sheeting as shown in figure num .
for signs fabricated in english based sizes use white stickers with red ink legend .
for signs fabricated in hard metric based sizes regardless of the sign message units contained on the sign face use yellow stickers with red ink legend .
place the stickers on the back side of the sign in the lower right corner of rectangular signs or in an equivalent location for other sign shapes approximately num inches num mm from side and bottom sign edges for smaller signs these dimensions may be reduced .
position the sticker so it can be read horizontally and is clearly visible not near bolt holes or rivets and not obstructed by the sign support when erected .
silk screen the fabrication data onto the face of the sticker and include the sheeting manufacturer identification code and year of fabrication .
alternatively the numbers num and num may be silk screened onto the sticker with the correct sheeting manufacturer identification code and fabrication year punched out respectively .
at the time of sign erection indicate the erection data by scratching out the appropriate month and year .
figure num sticker design property of the state of ohio up to num fine and num years imprisonment for damaging or removing this sign ohio rev .
code sec .
num manu id fab .
erec num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num id no .
year of manufacture alternate design property of the state of ohio up to num fine and num years imprisonment for damaging or removing this sign ohio rev .
code sec .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num erec num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num fabricate sign post reflectors with flat sheet aluminum and type g h or j reflective sheeting .
install red sign post reflectors on each post with the following postmounted signs stop rnum yield rnum do not enter rnum num and wrong way rnuma .
install yellow sign post reflectors on each post with the following postmounted signs onedirection large arrow wnum twodirection large arrow wnum chevron alignment wnum and stop ahead wnum .
num foundations .
locate sign support foundations so the plane of the sign surface is at a right angle to the roadway lanes served except for signs not intended for this orientation .
install foundations in accordance with num .
furnish and install a ground rod at each rigid overhead and span wire sign support foundation in accordance with num .
before placing foundation concrete for embedded supports brace the supports in a vertical position .
seven days after concrete placement remove bracing for embedded supports and erect signs .
num sign supports .
sign supports consist of ground mounted rigid overhead span wire and overpass structure mounted types .
fabricate sign supports according to the applicable requirements of aws dnum structural welding codesteel .
the approval of fabricators according to num will not apply .
hotdip galvanize steel structural members according to num .
galvanize steel hardware according to num .
tighten threaded fasteners except anchor bolt nuts by the turn of the nut method according to num .
furnish anchor bolts with a leveling nut plain washer and anchor nut conforming to num .
use anchor nuts with a plain washer against the base plate upper surface .
tighten anchor bolt nuts according to num except that under table num use the nut rotation from snug tight condition from num to num turn instead of num turn .
apply anaerobic adhesive complying with federal standard mil s num type ii grade n to anchor bolts and other threaded connections numinch num mm diameter or larger according to the manufacturers recommendations .
a .
ground mounted supports .
ground mounted supports consist of structural sections of the material and weights required .
drive the ground mounted supports into the earth or embed them in concrete as specified .
install supports in exposed locations in accordance with the performance requirements of nchrp num .
the support lengths shown on the plans are approximate .
determine the exact length of supports before fabrication .
num .
post supports .
mark each driven post with a line of paint num inches num mm above the specified driving depth .
drive posts to the specified depth without bending distortion or end mutilation .
do not splice posts .
do not place posts in drainage ditches .
if unable to install the post at the specified location relocate the post with the engineers approval .
install posts located in paved areas through a hole provided by sleeving or core drilling .
after the post is in position patch the hole with asphalt concrete or an approved asphalt material .
for groupings of flat sheet signs in multiple arrangements mounted on posts provide sign backing assemblies .
for oneway and street name sign supports use square posts for mounting signs at right angles to other signs on the post .
for temporary sign supports and their placement conform to the omutcd .
num .
structural beam supports .
furnish ground mounted structural beam supports from rolled steel sections .
furnish slip base connections when specified .
bolt the pieces of each beam together and preload the assembly bolts before delivery to the project .
carefully handle assembled breakaway beams during transportation and erection .
upon erection perform the final specified torquing on all threaded fasteners .
at least num weeks after erecting signs on breakaway beams inspect the breakaway feature for evidence of shifting or loose fasteners .
retorque all loose fasteners to specified values .
loosen and retorque slip base plate fasteners even if no shifting or looseness is detected .
apply anaerobic adhesive to the retorqued nuts .
num .
pipe supports .
furnish ground mounted pipe supports from structural steel pipe and tubing .
furnish bolt down anchor installations in existing concrete .
furnish triangular slip base connection when specified .
num .
wooden box beam supports .
furnish wooden box beam supports from laminated veneers pressure treated with wood preservative .
install breakaway feature after installation for supports in exposed locations .
b .
rigid overhead supports .
rigid overhead supports consist of single poles with cantilevered arms or span types supported between end frames .
furnish anchor bolts and conduit ells at least one numinch num mm minimum diameter for installation in the foundation .
upon erection set support poles and end frames on their foundations and plumb using the leveling nuts followed by secure tightening of all leveling and anchor nuts on the anchor bolts .
plumb poles supporting cantilevered signs following erection of signs as required .
ensure that a minimum of one full thread remains on each anchor bolt above the top of the anchor nut after final tightening .
do not use concrete grouting in the space between the foundation surface and support base .
do not provide cover bases or individual anchor bolt covers on support anchor bases regardless of support location .
furnish overhead sign supports with sign attachment assemblies for attaching extrusheet signs andor sign hanger assemblies for mounting flat sheet signs to the support chords .
when specified furnish sign support identification stickers of type f reflective sheeting listing the support type design number spanarm length county route and section number example tcnum design num num ft span cuynum .
apply stickers only when the ambient temperature is above num f num c. locate the sticker approximately num feet num m above groundline on the quadrant of the sign support facing approaching traffic .
identify sign supports spanning opposing directions of traffic with two stickers each on a support member facing traffic .
rigid span supports consist of a box truss supported by single plane truss end frames .
fabricate box trusses from aluminum or steel tubular members with builtin camber and mark each section top .
do not erect box trusses unless at least one sign or damping device approved by the engineer is installed within num hours .
provide for the attachment of a luminaire bracket arm on combination overhead sign supports .
c. span wire supports .
furnish span wire sign supports with sign hanger and messenger wire assemblies .
furnish anchor bolts and conduit ells at least one numinch num mm minimum diameter for installation in the foundation .
achieve a span wire sag under load of num to num percent of the span .
adjust poles to be essentially vertical after span wire tensioning .
securely tighten all leveling and anchor nuts on the anchor bolts .
ensure that a minimum of one full thread remains on each anchor bolt above the top of the anchor nut after final tightening .
do not provide cover bases or individual anchor base covers on support anchor bases regardless of support location .
when specified furnish sign support identification stickers as described in num.b .
d. overpass structure mounted supports .
mount the supports on the overpass structure so the bottom of the signs are in a level position regardless of bridge slope .
e. sign attachments .
use sign attachment assemblies to attach extrusheet signs to rigid overhead supports .
use sign hanger assemblies to attach flat sheet signs to span wire or rigid overhead supports .
use sign support assemblies to attach flat sheet or extrusheet signs to poles or bridge parapets .
use sign backing assemblies for groups of signs attached to a sign post and to attach exit number or supplemental panels to an extrusheet sign .
num sign erection .
erect signs on ground mounted or overhead supports according to the schematic signing layout .
mount overhead signs so that the bottom of the signs are in a level position regardless of the sag of supporting messenger wire mast arm rise chord member or overpass slope .
do not remove an existing sign until the replacement sign is either erected or available for immediate erection .
do not erect a replacement sign on a new support more than num hours before the removal of the existing sign .
a .
flat sheet sign erection .
use steel bolts wide washers lock washers and nuts .
use bearing plates between the sign and uchannel post at each bolt .
field drill signs mounted on messenger wire or mast arms to match holes in brackets .
b. extrusheet sign erection .
use selfaligning aluminum mounting clips stainless steel tbolts stainless steel washers and stainless steel nylon insert lock nuts to attach extrusheet signs to sign attachment assemblies beam or uchannel post supports and for uchannel post sections used to attach exit number and supplemental panels to extrusheet signs .
use aluminum bolts washers lock washers and nuts to assemble extrusheet signs shipped in two pieces .
tighten nuts and lock nuts using hand tools only .
do not use pneumatic hydraulic battery electric or other powerassisted tools .
num sign shipment and storage .
package and ship finished flat sheet signs to assure adequate protection of the sign face using methods and materials as recommended by the reflective sheeting manufacturer .
ship extrusheet signs up to num feet num m high completely assembled .
extrusheet signs over num feet num m high may be shipped in two pieces for field assembly .
keep extrusheet signs rigid by back bracing or crating .
store signs whether provided by the contractor or furnished by the department off the ground in a vertical position with adequate covering or shelter to prevent packing material from getting wet .
immediately remove packing material that does become wet from contact with sign faces to prevent damage to the reflective sheeting .
identify extrusheet signs on a detachable form on the sign back giving the project number and year sign reference number sign legend sketch and station location .
identify the underlying sign for signs shipped with an attached temporary overlay sign .
num specific service and touristoriented directional signs .
maintain existing specific service logo signs and touristoriented directional signs tods in accordance with num unless indicated in the plans .
num covering of signs .
install temporary covers and subsequently remove and dispose of them as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
for the covering material use a sturdy opaque material and obtain the engineers approval of the proposed method of covering and attachment .
num removal and delivery storage reerection or disposal of signs and supports .
carefully dismantle signs and sign supports indicated for removal .
either deliver to the department facility as designated by the plan store on the project reerect or dispose of removed signs and sign supports .
to ensure maintenance of adequate traffic control at all times remove signs only with the engineers approval .
remove sign supports in a manner to avoid damage .
remove sign service to the support by disconnecting and removing cables at the service pullbox .
ensure that connection of remaining cables conforms to num .
remove support foundations to at least num foot num m below subgrade or finished groundline .
backfill and restore surfaces to a condition equal to that existing before the work started and dispose of surplus material according to num num and num at no cost to the department .
furnish mounting hardware for signs to be reerected .
field drill as necessary .
furnish anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation for overhead sign supports to be reerected .
remove temporary overlay signs so as not to damage the underlying sign .
num inspection .
after erection the engineer will inspect signs under both day and night conditions .
correct deficiencies in lateral position or visibility to the engineers satisfaction .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure ground mounted post support by the number of feet meters measured from the bottom of the support to the top of the support and will include driving hardware for anchor base installation and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas .
the department will not measure the overlap length of post for the anchor base installation .
the department will measure foundations for ground mounted pipe supports ground mounted structural beam supports rigid overhead sign supports and span wire sign supports by the number of each for one pipe structural beam pole end frame or strain pole and will include excavation dewatering sleeving casing reinforcing steel concrete backfilling raceways and when required the num foot numm foundation section of concrete barrier and the disposal of surplus excavation .
sealing of the num foot foundation section of concrete barrier shall be paid for under item num when specified in the plans .
the department will measure ground mounted structural beam support by the number of feet meters measured from the bottom of the foundation to the top of the sign and will include furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas .
the department will measure ground mounted pipe support by the number of feet meters measured from the bottom of the foundation to the top of the sign and will include ubracket tubing posts and hardware for sign attachment boltdown anchor and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas .
the department will measure ground mounted wooden box beam support by the number of feet meters and will include excavation backfilling disposal of surplus material and installation of breakaway feature .
the department will measure one way support and street name sign support by the number of feet meters measured from the bottom of the support to the top of the support and will include driving hardware for anchor base installation and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas .
the department will not measure the overlap length of post for the anchor base installation .
the department will measure temporary sign support by the number of feet meters or the number of each furnished erected maintained and removed .
the department will measure breakaway structural beam connection by the number of each set of connection parts with necessary welding and drilling of holes as required for the breakaway function in one beam and will include base plates fuse plate hinge plate bolt retainer plate and bolts assembled to specified torques .
the department will measure triangular slip base connection by the number of each set of connection parts with the necessary welding and drilling of holes as required for the breakaway function in one pipe and will include slip plate slip base casting locking collar bolt retainer plate coiled pin and bolts assembled to specified torques .
the department will measure overhead sign support by the number of each and will include anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for the foundation sign attachment assemblies sign hanger assemblies and identification stickers when specified .
the department will measure combination overhead sign support with light pole extension by the number of each and will include anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for the foundation sign attachment assemblies sign hanger assemblies and identification stickers when specified .
bracket arms and roadway lighting luminaires are not included .
the department will measure sign attachment assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies and will include one overhead sign bracket ubolts clamps and miscellaneous hardware .
the department will measure luminaire support assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies and will include one support arm other necessary structural members and miscellaneous hardware .
the department will measure span wire sign support by the number of each support and will include two strain poles with span wire clamps and anchor shackles anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for foundations messenger wire clamps thimbles and sign hanger assemblies with hangers braces lengths of post and miscellaneous hardware .
the department will measure overpass structure mounted sign support by the number of each support and will include attachment work and hardware to attach one individual sign .
the department will measure sign hanger assembly by the number of each and will include all parts necessary to attach one individual sign .
for pole mounted sign supports the department will measure sign support assembly by the number of each and will include brackets hardware and posts sufficient to attach each sign or set of signs to an individual pole .
for bridge mounted sign supports the department will measure sign support assembly by the number of each and will include post hardware and attachment work .
the department will measure sign by the number of square feet square meters of signs and will include the furnishing of identification stickers sign backing assemblies mounting bolts washers nuts bearing plates clips and rivets .
for square rectangular circular or irregular shaped signs the department will determine measurement by multiplying the largest dimensions of width and height .
for triangular shaped signs the department will determine measurement by multiplying the largest dimension of width and onehalf the largest dimension of height .
the department will include the area of the glare shields for lighted signs as an integral part of the sign .
the department will measure sign post reflector by the number of each and will include the furnishing of mounting bolts washers and nuts .
the department will measure sign doublefaced by the number of each and will include mounting fittings and hardware .
the department will measure sign erected by the number of square feet square meters of signs erected and will include mounting hardware the assembly of signs that are in more than one piece and the installation of required sign backing assemblies .
the department will exclude the furnishing of signs .
for square rectangular circular or irregular shaped signs the department will determine measurement by multiplying the largest dimensions of width and height .
for triangular shaped signs the department will determine measurement by multiplying the largest dimension of width and onehalf the largest dimension of height .
the department will include the area of the glare shields for lighted signs as an integral part of the sign .
the department will measure sign backing assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies and will include back bracing for each group of flat sheet signs attached to a post or posts or a single assembly for backing posts used to attach an exit or supplemental panel to a guide sign .
the department will measure covering of sign by the number of square feet square meters of sign face covered and will include the subsequent removal and disposal of the covering .
the department will measure removal and delivery storage reerection or disposal of sign by the number of each sign removed and delivered stored reerected or disposed of .
major signs are defined for measurement as being num square feet num m or larger .
the department will measure removal and delivery storage reerection or disposal of support by the number of each support removed and delivered stored reerected or disposed of and will include removal of foundations and restoration of surfaces .
with reerection the department will include furnishing of anchor bolts conduit ells necessary field drilling and hardware .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for relocating posts from their planned location without prior approval by the engineer .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each ground mounted structural beam support foundation num each ground mounted pipe support foundation num each rigid overhead sign support foundation num each span wire sign support foundation num foot meter ground mounted support ___ post num foot meter ground mounted structural beam support ___ beam num foot meter ground mounted support pipe num foot meter ground mounted wooden box beam support_____beam num foot meter oneway support ___ post num foot meter street name sign support ___ post num foot meter temporary sign support ___ post or each num each breakaway structural beam connection num each triangular slip base connection num each overhead sign support type tc___ design___ num each combination overhead sign support type tc___ design___ num each sign attachment assembly num each luminaire support assembly num each span wire sign support type tcnum design ___ num each overpass structure mounted sign support type tc___ design___ num each sign hanger assembly span wire mast arm num each sign support assembly pole or bridge mounted num square foot sign flat sheet ground mounted extrusheet square meter overhead extrusheet temporary overlay num each sign doublefaced street name mile marker num square foot sign erected flat sheet extrusheet temporary overlay square meter num each sign backing assembly num each sign post reflector num square foot covering of sign square meter num each removal of ground mounted major sign and delivery storage reerection or disposal num each removal of ground mounted structural beam post pipe wooden box beam support and delivery storage or disposal num each removal of overhead mounted sign and delivery storage reerection or disposal num each removal of overhead sign support and delivery storage reerection or disposal type tc___ num each removal of overlay sign item num sign lighting and electrical signs num description num general num materials and equipment num sign service num signs wired num disconnect switch num luminaire num controls num electrical signs num removal num inspection and testing num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing sign lighting or electrical sign equipment complete tested and ready for service .
num general .
perform installations according to the national electrical safety code the national electrical code and local codes for the area of installation .
furnish overhead sign lighting and integrate electric power with roadway lighting circuits .
furnish shop drawings according to num .
conform to the requirements of supplement num for the installation or testing of electrical items installed under num and num .
protect wire and cable by installing entirely within support structure interiors enclosures junction boxes and rigid or flexible conduit .
ensure that the methods materials and locations of splicing and the methods of connecting and identifying wire and cable conform to item num num and the plans .
furnish grounding systems according to num .
power service is furnished under item num .
num materials and equipment .
furnish materials and equipment that are new of first quality of current design and free from defects .
use electrical parts wire switches and other elements of the installations that are of ample capacity to carry the required current without excessive heating or drop of potential .
ensure that each item of equipment bears a nameplate indelible marking or brand that identifies the type model catalog number and manufacturer .
furnish materials conforming to the following ground rod num sealing conduit num cable and wire numvolt num conduit rigid num ballast num power service num disconnect switch num switch enclosure num changeable message sign electric type num internally illuminated fixed message sign num sign flasher assembly num school speed limit sign assembly num conduit flexible num timer with enclosure num num sign service .
sign service consists of all cable and other equipment to provide a complete electrical service from either an underground or overhead source to the disconnect switch .
route sign service cable from a pull box to the switch enclosure for overhead supported signs by means of underground conduit foundation conduit ell and the interior of the structural member supporting the enclosure .
route sign service for overpass structure mounted signs through underground and structure attached conduit terminating at a switch enclosure .
attach the conduit by numinch num mm thick by numinch num mm wide passivated stainless steel straps spaced at intervals of not more than num feet num m. route sign service cable from a distribution system direct drop to the switch enclosure by means of a conduit riser with weatherhead .
form a drip loop into the cable .
use either a cast aluminum or galvanized ferrous metal weatherhead of a threaded design .
attach the conduit by straps as described in the previous paragraph .
for sign service use single conductor stranded copper .
when the connection is to highway lighting distribution and circuit cable use the same cable for sign service .
in other applications use sign service cable rated at num volts minimum and not smaller than num awg .
num signs wired .
ensure that signs wired complete the electrical system from the disconnect switch to the luminaires .
furnish continuous wiring from the disconnect switch to a junction box mounted on the sign support or overpass structure .
install junction box in a manner that allows sign removal as a unit by the disconnection of the wires and the removal of sign attachment hardware .
install a junction box for each sign .
furnish continuous wiring from the junction box to the first luminaire and between additional luminaires .
use wire rated at num volts single conductor and not smaller than num awg .
route wire on overhead sign supports from the disconnect switch enclosure through structural member interiors .
support wire hanging within the interior of steel vertical members by looping over the jhook provided .
after wiring in the disconnect switch enclosure seal the nipple in the enclosure back with selffusing highdielectric insulating compound .
assemble flexible or rigid conduit on the sign structure or lighting support arms with condulets and attach them to the structure by clamps located within num inches num mm of each conduit end and separated by not more than num inches num m. num disconnect switch .
install lighted signs with a disconnect switch within a lockable weatherproof enclosure .
for the switch use a twopole minimum singlethrow fused safety disconnect type rated at num volts num amperes with the fuse size as specified .
furnish a solid neutral bar .
for the enclosure use stainless steel nema num type num .
furnish space for a chase nipple in the enclosure back .
field drill a hole through the enclosure and install the nipple .
ensure that enclosures also have a screened numinch num mm diameter weep hole located in the bottom surface .
furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock .
use padlocks with a bronze or brass lock body and a corrosion protected steel shackle .
key all padlocks for a project alike and obtain the appropriate master key number from the maintaining agency .
when specified furnish and install bracket assemblies on existing overhead sign supports or on concrete structures .
use bracket assemblies made of steel galvanized according to num or aluminum .
num luminaire .
include a lamp of the wattage specified .
locate ballasts integral with the luminaire .
furnish weatherproof ballast housings made from corrosion resistant materials .
num controls .
when specified furnish photoelectric controls when sign lighting is fed by uncontrolled circuits .
when specified furnish and install the timer with enclosure to provide automatic school speed limit sign operation .
num electrical signs .
furnish changeable message signs that conform to the contract documents .
the pay item will specify if the display capabilities are limited message or unlimited message .
the contractor may use line units of these types as inserts in a panel sign singly or grouped to provide a multiline sign .
hardware and software shall be complete to operate and maintain the sign .
furnish internally illuminated signs consisting of the single or double face type .
the sign support is furnished under another pay item .
furnish suspended signs that hang plumb are properly oriented and locked in place .
furnish sign flasher assemblies consisting of a pair of flashing beacons .
the sign support and foundation are furnished under other pay items .
furnish school speed limit sign assemblies that conform to the contract documents .
school speed limit sign assemblies consist of a reflectorized school speed limit num during restricted hours snumhnum sign fitted with a pair of flashing beacons arranged above and below .
num removal .
carefully remove sign lighting equipment such as luminaires disconnect switches or ballasts and electrical signs .
removed items become the property of the contractor .
num inspection and testing .
ensure that the sign lighting systems and electrical signs meet all requirements of the ground cable insulation and performance tests specified in num .
correct lamps ballasts and transformers that failed during the performance test by replacing the faulty component the entire test period will not require restarting .
during the performance test make final adjustments to sign lateral position and aiming angles of luminaires to eliminate excessive brightness and glare and to obtain optimum sign face reflected brightness uniformity of illumination visibility and legibility to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement .
all of the following methods of measurement include all hardware necessary to securely mount the associated item including angles plates tubes and channels .
the department will measure sign service by the number of complete units for each support and will include conduit conduit riser weatherhead fittings cables trenching and backfilling .
the department will measure sign wired and sign wired overpass structure by the number of complete units of wiring for each individual sign and will include junction boxes rigid or flexible conduit condulets clamps wires and connectors .
the department will measure disconnect switch with enclosure by the number of each and will include field drilling and padlocks .
the department will measure switch enclosure mounting bracket assembly by the number of each and will include two brackets and field drilling .
the department will measure ballast and photoelectric control by the number of each separate item .
the department will measure luminaire by the number of each and will include lamps and luminaire attachment hardware .
the department will measure changeable message sign by the number of each and will include cabinet external enclosures conduit electrical electronic and auxiliary components and remote control units to provide a fully functional unit .
the department will measure internally illuminated fixed message sign by the number of each and will include lamps and ballasts .
the department will measure sign flasher assembly by the number of each and will include beacons flasher control unit with enclosure and lamps .
the department will measure school speed limit sign assembly by the number of each and will include sign beacons flasher control unit with enclosure and lamps .
the department will measure timer with enclosure by the number of each and will include field drilling and padlocks .
the department will measure removal of sign lighting equipment or electrical signs by the number of each like items removed .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for grounding systems under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each sign service num each sign wired num each sign wired overpass structure num each disconnect switch with enclosure type ___ num each switch enclosure mounting bracket assembly num each ballast type ___ num each photoelectric control num each luminaire type ___ with ___watt lamp num each changeable message sign limited unlimited message num each internally illuminated fixed message sign type ___ num each sign flasher assembly num each school speed limit sign assembly ___ inches ___ inches ___ mm ___ mm num each timer with enclosure num each removal of luminaire disconnect switch ballast etc .
item num traffic signal equipment num description num contractor personnel requirements num materials and equipment num shop drawings num general num vehicular signal head conventional num vehicular signal head optically programmed num pedestrian signal head num pedestrian pushbutton num loop detector unit num detector loop num foundations num signal support num strain pole num wood pole num down guy assembly num pedestal num conduit riser num cable support assembly num messenger wire num cable and wire num power service num covering of vehicular and pedestrian signal heads num removal of traffic signal installation num reuse of traffic signal equipment num testing num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signal equipment complete and ready for service .
this work also includes necessary excavation and backfill disposal of discarded materials restoration of disturbed facilities and surfaces to a condition equal to that existing before the work started and electrical testing as specified .
pull boxes conduits ground rods and cable splicing kits required for traffic signal equipment installations are specified in item num .
num contractor personnel requirements .
conform to the requirements of supplement num for the installation or testing of traffic signal equipment .
num materials and equipment .
furnish new materials and equipment of first quality of current design and free from defects .
use electrical parts wire switches and other elements of the installations capable of carrying the required current without excessive heating or drop of potential .
ensure that major items or assemblies of equipment bear a nameplate indelible marking or brand that identifies the type model catalog number and manufacturer .
furnish materials and equipment conforming to concrete class qc misc or qc num num num steel poles supports arms appurtenances and anchor bases num num num num num num num num pedestals num backplates num hardware num stainless steel hardware num other items conduit rigid num num num ground rod num pull boxes num num num num identifying tags or bands num signal heads num num num num lamps num pushbuttons num detectors num num wood poles num down guys num conduit risers num cable supports num messenger wire num cable and wire num power service num disconnect switch with enclosure num backplates num tether wire num acceptance of materials and products is based on certified test data furnished in triplicate or on test results of samples according num as required by the laboratory .
num shop drawings .
furnish shop drawings according to num .
num general .
ensure that major items of traffic signal control equipment used in combination are compatible interchangeable and whenever feasible provided by the same manufacturer or supplier .
perform work in compliance with applicable local laws and codes the national electrical code the national electrical safety code the standard for electrical safety in the workplace and osha .
ensure that the traffic control equipment installed in controller cabinets are shop prewired according to a wiring diagram that conforms to plan and specification requirements of the specific project and intersection and show all wire harness and field connections required with abbreviations according to table num .
furnish a neat and legibly drawn wiring diagram reproduced on durable paper and place two copies in a plastic envelope fastened to the inside of the controller cabinet .
identify cable and wire by tags or bands at pull boxes and controller cabinets with size material and method of marking that conform to num except ensure that the identification on the tags or bands conforms to the wiring diagram with abbreviations according to table num .
the contractor may identify field wiring using an indelible pen on a plastic tag instead of embossed letters .
tags shall be a minimum of numinch diameter if round and numinch by inch if rectangular .
letters shall be clearly legible .
use spade terminals for wiring connected at signal heads and the wiring connected at terminal blocks within controller cabinets .
however for incoming power wiring use either spade terminals or bared conductor wire connected to terminal points utilizing screw or spring applied clamping surfaces compatible with both cooper and aluminum wire and providing a positive grip .
neatly lash and fasten completed wiring to interiors with clamps andor ties .
table num table and wire identification cable tag ground gnd power num wirenum num volt ac ac or acn power num wire num num volt neutral wire ac num ac num ac or acn phase a phase num phase num northbound left turn lanes a num num nblt phase a pedestrian signal a pd overlap phase a c overlap phase num num a c num num detector leadin phase a detector leadin phase num detector leadin phase num northbound left turn lanes det a det num det num nblt detector leadin phase a call type detector leadin phase num call type northbound thru lanes det a call det num call nbthru detector harnessnum det a interconnect ic preemption fire pe fire preemption railroad pe rr num place the tag next to the ms plug at the detector amplifier .
when constructing the traffic control system cooperate with the agency supplying the electric service .
supply num volt singlephase threewire grounded neutral power to the disconnect switch .
after completion of the numday performance test in compliance with num and until acceptance the contractor is responsible for the care and maintenance of traffic control equipment installed or reused as part of the contract .
upon acceptance of the project transfer to the department all manufacturers guarantees or warranties covering installed electrical or mechanical equipment .
furnish two copies of wiring diagrams service manuals and instructions on installation and maintenance for each different type model or system of equipment used on the project .
num vehicular signal head conventional .
furnish heads in arrangements such that from one to a maximum of five sections assembled with the specified lens size color and circular or arrow configuration form a specific signal face .
mount signal faces alone as a oneway head when backplates are used .
install signals in a plumb condition using a balance adjuster only if approved by the engineer .
fit heads mounted on mast arms except those intended to be rigidly mounted with a universal hanger allowing the head to swing in both longitudinal and transverse directions .
use drop pipesextenders of suitable length only when necessary to bring the bottom of the signal heads to a proper roadway clearance .
drop pipesextenders shall be kept as short as necessary on backplated signals .
use of drop pipesextenders greater than num feet in length must be approved by the engineer .
use disconnect hangers for suspended heads only when specified .
orient each signal face to its traffic approach and lock faces in place by the serrated or other type device incorporated in signal housing and support hardware .
before closing serrations apply a bead of roomtemperature vulcanizing rtv silicone to all serrated surfaces and then tighten .
rtv silicone shall be white to facilitate visual inspection .
on heads with dual concentric serrated rings completely fill the space between the rings with rtv silicone .
install led lamps in each section .
furnish backplates unless specified otherwise .
num vehicular signal head optically programmed .
furnish heads of this type consisting totally of optically programmed sections unless an intermix of optically programmed and conventional sections is specified .
install approved led light sources or lamps in each optically programmed section .
program each signal section according to the plan requirements .
upon completion of the project deliver all programming tools and devices to the maintaining agency .
furnish backplates unless specified otherwise .
num pedestrian signal head .
furnish heads with the type of light source and symbol height specified .
orient each signal head to its crosswalk and lock heads in place by the serrated or other type device incorporated in signal housing and support hardware .
close openings unused for mounting purposes with weatherproof caps .
num pedestrian pushbutton .
properly orient and install pushbuttons on poles or pedestals .
service pushbuttons mounted on steel poles by wiring inside the poles .
furnish numinch num mm diameter holes through the back of the housing and the pole wall install a rubber grommet and route wiring through until no external wiring is visible .
plug any unused conduit attachment holes .
attach the housing by machine or selftapping screws in the housing back wall .
service pushbutton mounted on wooden poles through conduit .
furnish flat sheet pedestrian pushbutton signs in accordance with num .
num loop detector unit .
install and tune detector units to their loops with the sensitivity set for optimum operation and any interference or cross talk eliminated between other detector units in the cabinet .
perform a field check to ensure that no extraneous detections are occurring by observing each detector units operation to determine that a signal occurs only when a vehicle enters its associated loop .
if actuations are observed when there is no vehicle in the loop eliminate the extraneous detections .
for any project using state or federal funds all stop line detection zones shall reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles and all dilemma zone detectors shall reliably detect motorcycles .
num detector loop .
saw slots in the pavement for installation of vehicle detector loop wire in the configuration dimensions and combinations required .
cut an extension from the loop to the pavement edge to allow wire routing to an adjacent pull box .
furnish slots num to numinch num to num mm wider than the outside diameter of the loop wire or tubing .
ensure that the slot depth provides a covering of not less than numinch num mm above the uppermost detector wire tubing after the loop installation is completed .
before installing loop detector wire brush and blow all slots clean of loose material and completely dry .
install loop detector wire according to num .
conform to all applicable state and local nuisance dust regulations and oac num while saw cutting .
fill the slots completely with a flexible embedding sealant listed on the odot qpl .
do not disturb slots until sealant has cured .
cured sealant shall be level with or higher than the pavement surface .
for loop detector wire installations in new asphalt the contractor may saw slots and embed sealant in a subsurface course with subsequent covering by the surface course subject to the engineers approval .
num foundations .
locate support foundations and stake with the proper elevation .
if underground or overhead obstacles are encountered during stakeout or to correct slope and subsurface difficulties change foundation location and orientation with the approval of the engineer .
ensure that the approved location provides a safe clearance from overhead power lines for construction operations in compliance with applicable codes .
the contractor is responsible for the correct location elevation and orientation for all poles and pedestals installed on the foundations .
excavate for foundations using an earth auger to specified dimensions according to num .
exercise caution when excavating in areas of underground installations to avoid their disturbance or damage .
when a cavein occurs excavate using casing sleeving or other methods with the engineers approval .
if subsurface obstructions are encountered remove the obstructions or replace the excavated material and relocate the foundation with the engineers approval .
if bedrock is encountered the contractor may reduce that portion of the specified foundation depth within the bedrock up to num percent .
perform all necessary dewatering of the excavation .
perform foundation concrete work according to item num except that the loading restrictions in num are modified by this subsection .
place the concrete against undisturbed soil or compacted embankment .
form the top of the foundations to a nominal depth of num inches num mm below the groundline .
place the concrete foundation including formed top in one continuous concrete pour .
for foundations for anchor base type supports provide the required reinforcing rods and have anchor bolts and conduit ells accurately held by a template .
remove forms and templates once the concrete has hardened sufficiently so as not to be susceptible to damage .
after num days erect and load supports on anchor base foundations .
the contractor may erect and load supports after num days if the tests of two beam specimens of concrete yield an average modulus of rupture of not less than num pounds per square inch num mpa .
num signal support .
furnish supports with mast arms with the required pole and arm length anchor bolt circle diameter and anchor bolt size .
ensure that the combination signal supports with light pole extension provide for the attachment of a luminaire bracket arm .
adjust anchor base type supports with an initial rake so that when loaded the support poles assume an essentially vertical position .
for support designs not specifically shown on the plans demonstrate to the directors satisfaction that supports are structurally equivalent to the specified design .
do not use concrete grouting in the space between the foundation surface and support base .
conform to the requirements of aashto ltsnum specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals numsection c.num .
do not erect signal supports unless at least one signal sign or damping device approved by the engineer is installed within num hours .
num strain pole .
furnish strain poles for the attachment of messenger wire with the required pole length .
use anchor base type strain poles .
adjust anchor base type poles with the initial rake so that when loaded the poles assume an essentially vertical position .
ensure that the combination strain poles with light pole extension provide for the attachment of a luminaire bracket arm .
conform to the requirements of num for threaded fasteners anchor bolts anchor bolt nuts and anaerobic adhesive .
num wood pole .
set wood poles in holes excavated by an earth auger to a minimum depth of num feet num m. use an auger with a diameter approximately num inches num mm greater than the pole butt .
hold poles with initial rake up to a maximum of num inches num m while tamping backfill into place so that under messenger wire tensioning conforming to num the poles assume an essentially vertical position .
furnish backfill material no greater than num inch num mm in size and thoroughly tamp material in lifts not exceeding num inches num mm to the satisfaction of the engineer .
if concrete embedment is specified brace the poles until the concrete has set .
liberally coat field holes bored for the attachment of messenger or guy wire with approved creosote base paint and fitted with numinch num mm thimbleeye throughbolts and numinch num mm washers .
securely attach and protect ground wire furnished as part of another work item with a wood or plastic molding for a minimum distance of num feet num m above groundline .
num down guy assembly .
install and tension guy assemblies before erecting signals such that they will resist the major portion of the horizontal loading caused by loading of the messenger wire .
num pedestal .
furnish pedestals for the support of traffic control equipment with a cast or plate steel base unless a transformer type base is specified .
num conduit riser .
attach risers to poles to provide a wiring raceway and include a weatherhead conduit necessary fittings and pole attached clamps .
attach risers to poles by clamps spaced at intervals not exceeding num feet num m. paint conduit risers mounted on painted poles to match the poles .
num cable support assembly .
use cable support assemblies to eliminate strain on cables or groups of cables up to a maximum of four entering the interior of poles through a weatherhead or mast arm .
if required include a length of messenger wire forming a sling with ends formed of lapped wire thimbles and clamps as part of the assembly .
num messenger wire .
arrange messenger wire with accessories between two or more poles to provide support and attachment for traffic control equipment .
accessories used with messenger wire include bullrings thimbles preformed guy grip dead ends and three bolt clamps .
furnish bullrings at messenger wire network corners .
use thimbles to attach messenger wire to the shackles of strain pole clamps and bullrings .
adjust the length of the messenger wire under the load of traffic control equipment so the sag at the lowest point is not greater than num percent or less than num percent of the span .
attach signal cable to messenger wire with lengths of preformed helical lashing rod that are of a proper internal diameter to tightly secure the cable to the messenger wire .
attach interconnect cable with preformed lashing rod or spinning wire .
num tether wire .
arrange tether wire with accessories to stabilize signal heads and prevent excessive swinging and twisting .
install shim washers on hanger pin adjacent to wire entry to prevent any twisting of the head on the hanger .
accessories included with tether wire shall be those shown in the appropriate plan insert sheet or standard construction drawing and include pole clamps anchor shackles shooks yielding element thimbles turnbuckles guy grips wire rope clips backup ties lock wire safety tie wires and signal head tether anchors and extenders .
adjust the tether span to be horizontal on simple spans .
on all spans install tether horizontally and tighten with turnbuckles .
bull rings will be used at all internal corners of the tether span .
safety ties shall be installed at all yielding shook locations to prevent the span end from dropping into the roadway if the shook opens .
no electrical or communication cables of any kind shall be attached to the tether wire .
no signs or other devices shall be suspended from or attached to the tether wire .
turnbuckles shall be tightened by hand to achieve the tether wire tension shown in appropriate plan insert sheet or standard construction drawing .
measure tether tension with loos co. inc. model ptnum or approved equal .
record tension test results and present written copy to the engineer .
num cable and wire .
fashion cable at traffic signal equipment weatherhead entrance fittings into a drip loop that extends at least num inches num mm below the entrance .
do not allow the cable to chafe on the equipment .
support cables installed in strain poles and signal supports with cable support assemblies according to num .
do not use splices in any cable or wire except at the following locations a .
at the junction of detector wire and leadin cable .
b .
at the junction of power cable and the power supply source or service cable .
c. on long lengths of interconnect or service cable .
for splices allowed in aerial installations accomplish splicing in weather tight splice enclosures .
for splices allowed in underground installations accomplish splicing in pull boxes or poles where the splice is encapsulated with poured waterproof epoxy insulation according to num .
install signal cable between signal heads and controller cabinets .
signal cables shall not be stripped beyond a length necessary to attach individual conductors within the signal head .
the jacket shall extend into the signal head enclosure .
install interconnect cable between controller cabinets of different intersections .
route signal and interconnect cable by aerial installation supported by messenger wire or within underground conduit .
if specified use aerial selfsupporting integral messenger type interconnect cable with a figure num crosssection and include pole clamps and splice enclosures .
ground the supporting messenger wire of interconnect cable .
provide loop detector wire consisting of detector wire inserted into flexible plastic tubing .
use of factory manufactured preformed loops is permitted .
ensure that the tubing encases the wire continuously from the splice at the leadin cable through the entire loop turns and back to the splice .
install loop detector wire in sawn roadway slots forming loops according to num .
furnish the required number of turns of wire installed for each loop and push the wire carefully into the slots with a blunt tool to avoid damaging the tubing .
run the wire continuously around the loop perimeter and through a slot leading to the pavement edge and by underground conduit to a roadside pull box or pole with num feet num m at each end for slack and splice .
uniformly twist wires and tubing installed in the conduit to the splice with leadin cable at num to num turns per foot num to num turns per meter .
splice the loop ends to leadin cable which is connected to the controller cabinet .
join the wires by a mutually twisted inline splice rosin core soldered and wrapped in vinyl or equivalent electrical tape and encapsulate wires with an approved poured waterproof epoxy insulated splice according to num .
extend and seal the tubing ends into the poured epoxy splice .
also solder crimped terminals to the conductors and the shield for connections inside the cabinet .
install power cable from the power supply source to the controller cabinet .
if multiconductor power cable is specified the contractor may substitute multiple single conductors .
install service cable aerially from a remote power source to the vicinity of the controller cabinet with the support cable functioning as the electrical neutral .
furnish connections used with aluminum power or service cable of an approved type for aluminum to aluminum or aluminum to copper connections and insulate connections with an approved vinyl mastic pad .
num power service .
furnish and install all equipment necessary to provide complete electrical service to each signal installation as shown on the plans .
make all necessary arrangements with the local electrical power company for connections to establish electrical service .
charges made by the power company for establishing of the account extension of company facilities connection of customer equipment to the power company facilities and energy will be borne by the maintaining agency .
power service consists of equipment to provide a pole attached wiring raceway and disconnect switch for use with power cable routed from the service entrance to the controller cabinet .
the power service installation includes a weatherhead conduit and fittings a disconnect switch with enclosure meter base and attachment clamps .
it also includes the intersection lighting disconnect and associated equipment when intersection lighting is present .
bend the conduit away from the pole at the top and bottom of the riser to allow the conduit to enter straight into the enclosure or meter base hub and to provide space for the weatherhead when the riser is pulled tight against the pole .
furnish watertight conduit connections between the meter base and enclosure by using conduit hubs listed on the enclosure ul label .
furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock .
use padlocks with a bronze or brass lock body and a corrosion protected steel shackle .
obtain the appropriate master key number from the maintaining agency .
paint conduit risers mounted on painted poles to match the poles .
num covering of vehicular and pedestrian signal heads .
cover vehicular signal heads if erected at intersections where traffic is maintained before energizing the signals .
cover pedestrian signal heads when specified in the plans .
use a sturdy opaque covering material specifically made for use with traffic signals and ensure that the color of the cover is different than the signal head tan or beige so that it is clear to drivers and pedestrians the heads are covered not dark use a method of covering and cover attachment and materials as approved by the engineer .
covers are to be free of text pictures or any type of advertising . .
maintain covers and remove them when directed by the engineer .
completely cover the entire signal head including backplates with reflective borders in such a manner that the reflective borders are not visible .
num removal of traffic signal installation .
remove signal heads cable messenger wire strain poles cabinet controller or other incidental items required by the engineer .
remove support foundations to at least num foot num m below subgrade or finished groundline .
backfill restore surfaces and dispose of surplus material according to num num and num .
store removed items on the project for salvage by the maintaining agency or reuse removed items as part of a new installation on the project under another item of work .
dispose of all items not designated for salvage or reuse .
as specified in num do not remove signals until a new signal system or a temporary traffic control method approved by the engineer is in operation .
suitably protect stored equipment .
num reuse of traffic signal equipment .
reinstall or reerect specified traffic equipment removed from existing signal installations within the project .
clean and restore reused equipment to an operating condition .
furnish all additional hardware and incidentals necessary to allow reuse of the equipment .
num testing .
a .
general .
furnish all personnel and equipment required to successfully perform the following tests and furnish to the engineer six certified copies of complete test records test reporting forms supplied by the engineer or alternate certification approved by the engineer .
b .
ground test .
measure each ground rod for earth resistance according to num except that measurements are not necessary immediately after installation .
c. shortcircuit test .
before performing any cable insulation tests or performance test perform a shortcircuit test with a voltohmmeter or other approved instrument .
conduct shortcircuit tests with electrical loads power sources equipment grounds and earth grounds disconnected .
test signal cable routed to signal heads with connections made to lamp sockets without lamps installed .
measure each conductor against every other conductor and ground to ensure that no shortcircuits crosscircuits or other improper connections exist .
ensure that continuity does not exist between any conductor and another conductor including ground .
d. circuit continuity test .
temporarily jumper each circuit branch at its termination and the temporarily looped circuit measured for continuity to ensure that no open circuits exist that the circuit branch is according to plan that no high resistance connections exist and that each circuit is properly identified .
test the leadin cable for loop detector wire before and after splicing the cable to the loop wire .
as an alternative perform the circuit continuity testing of signal head cable by applying num volts to each outgoing circuit and observing that only the proper lamps are lighted .
e. cable insulation test .
ensure that the insulation resistance measured to ground is not less than num megohms for each conductor of cable or wire terminating at the controller cabinet .
perform insulation testing with all conductors disconnected from their points on the terminal blocks .
measure insulation resistance for the wire of roadway loops after the embedding of the wire with sealant in slots .
include a list of the resistance readings for each conductor in the test results .
after completing the cable insulation test connect all cabinet wiring according to the wiring diagram .
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that all circuits are continuous and operating correctly with freedom from shorts crosses and unintentional grounds .
f. functional test .
before the numday performance test begins make the following checks and demonstrate to the engineer that the system is ready for the performance test .
ensure that the incoming ac voltage is a nominal num volts .
if the supplied voltage under load is less than num or more than num vac contact the power company to arrange correction .
ensure that the cabinet ventilating fan fan thermostat and convenience outlet with lamp is operational .
verify correct timing settings on the controller as shown on the plans .
check all cabinet switches including the power onoff switch and flash switch .
check all controller functions to verify correct operation .
check the detector units to determine which pavement loop is associated with which detector unit .
check the visual call strength indication of detector units to determine that each vehicle class truck car motorcycle and bicycle entering sensor areas is detected on the associated detector unit and that no extraneous calls occur when the sensor area is vacant .
occasional extraneous calls may be permitted by the engineer if necessary to assure detection of small vehicle targets bicycles and motorcycles .
check the flash switch to verify transfer of signal operation to flash and return to stopandgo .
check the conflict monitor to verify that it is not activated by normal signal operations or by the manipulation of cabinet switches .
if the monitor is activated determine the cause of the problem and make appropriate changes and adjustments before beginning the performance test .
test the conflict monitor by artificially causing a number of different conflicting indications and verify that at each test the monitor causes the signals to begin flashing and places the controller in a stop timing mode .
obtain artificial causation either by touching a jumper wire between two conflicting load switch outputs or by other methods approved by the engineer .
ensure that the signal flashes when the monitor is disconnected .
g. performance test .
at least num days before the performance test begins notify the engineer of the starting date .
the engineer will notify the maintaining agency .
before acceptance operate the traffic control system continuously for num consecutive days without major malfunction or failure .
immediately replace or repair minor failures such as lamps a single detector unit or an individual signal head etc .
that do not cause restart of the test .
major malfunctions or failures such as a master or local controller interconnect equipment etc .
will cause termination of the test and after replacement or repair the beginning of a new numday test .
monitor items that have been repaired or that are replacements for a numday period to provide assurance of their reliability .
record for inclusion in the test result the method and date of correction of each fault and the beginning and end of the test .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure vehicular signal head and pedestrian signal head by the number of complete units and will include all support or mounting hardware disconnect hangers closure caps dimmers and lamps as required .
optically programmed heads shall include programming .
for programming purposes numinch num mm programmed heads shall include one extender tool per project .
the department will measure pedestrian pushbutton by the number of individual units and will include pedestrian pushbutton signs .
the department will measure loop detector unit by the number of individual units adjusted and tuned and will include a wiring harness .
if multichannel detector units are used the department will consider each channel as an individual detector unit up to the number of units specified .
the department will measure tether wire by the number of feet meters in place and will include all necessary accessories such as pole clamps safety tie clamps anchor shackles shooks yielding element thimbles turnbuckles guy grips wire rope clips lock wire safety tie wire lead sheet and signal head tether anchors and extenders in accordance with the applicable plan insert sheet or standard construction drawing .
the department will measure from pole center to pole center or pole center to bullring or bullring to bullring .
the department will not measure any length of tether wire for attachment to poles or bullrings by bending lapping or wrapping .
the department will measure detector loop by the number of complete detector loops installed in the pavement and will include pavement cutting loop detector wire with tubing in place application of sealant conduit trenching backfilling and surface restoration from the edge of pavement to the pull box .
the department will measure strain pole foundation signal support foundation and pedestal foundation by the number of complete units and will include excavation dewatering sleeving casing reinforcing steel concrete backfilling disposal of surplus excavation and installation only of anchor bolts and conduit ells .
the department will measure signal support combination signal support strain pole combination strain pole wood pole and pedestal by the number of complete units of each and will include pole arms weatherheads and blind half couplings anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for foundations .
the department will measure the luminaire bracket arm for each bracket arm for combination signal supports and combination strain poles .
for combination strain poles the luminaire bracket arm will be a separate item .
for combination signal supports the luminaire bracket arm will be a separate item .
the department will measure down guy by the number of individual units and will include messenger wire pole clamp or thrubolt washer clamps guy grips insulator guy guard and anchor .
the department will measure conduit riser by the number of complete units and will include weatherhead conduit fittings clamps and hardware .
the department will measure messenger wire by the number of feet meters in place and will include all necessary accessories such as grips thimbles clamps bullrings and lashing rod .
the department will measure from pole center to pole center or pole center to bullring or bullring to bullring .
the department will not measure any length of messenger wire for attachment to poles or bullrings by bending lapping or wrapping .
the department will measure signal cable interconnect cable loop detector leadin cable power cable and service cable by the number of feet meters in place .
cable inside of poles shall include cable support assemblies .
aerial cable shall include pole attachment hardware splices splice enclosures and ground connection .
leadin cable shall include poured epoxy insulated splices .
the department will measure num horizontally from centerto center of pull boxes poles cabinets power sources and signal heads with an additional allowance of num feet num m at each pull box and terminating points for slack and connections and num vertically between pole or conduit outlets .
if singleconductor power cable is substituted for multiconductor cable the department will measure required length of multiconductor cable .
the department will measure power service by the number of complete units and will include weatherhead conduit fittings clamps and other necessary hardware installation of meter base ground wire connection and disconnect switches with enclosure and padlock .
the department will measure covering of vehicular signal head and covering of pedestrian signal head by the number of individual signal heads covered and will include materials and labor to erect maintain and remove the covering .
the department will measure removal of traffic signal installation by the number of installations removed and will include storage when required .
the department will measure removal of item and storage or reerection by the number of specific traffic signal installation parts such as a signal head controller unit or pole removed and will include storage when required .
the department will measure reuse of item by the number of traffic signal equipment items reused and will include cleaning restoring and relamping .
num basis of payment .
the costs to arrange service by the supply agency are included under power cable .
the costs of personnel materials equipment electrical energy and incidentals required to conduct performance tests are included under the contract unit price for the respective items tested .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each vehicular signal head yellow or black aluminum or polycarbonate ___ section ___ inch ___ mm lens with backplate num each vehicular signal head optically programmed yellow or black aluminum or polycarbonate ___section ___ inch ___ mm lens with backplate num each pedestrian signal head aluminum or polycarbonate countdown type ___ num each pedestrian pushbutton num each loop detector unit num each detector loop num each strain pole foundation num each signal support foundation num each pedestal foundation num each signal support type tc___ design ___ num each combination signal support type tc___ design ___ num each strain pole type tc___ design ___ num each combination strain pole type tc___ design ___ num each wood pole class ___length___ feet ___ m num each down guy num each pedestal length ___ feet ___ m num each pedestal length ___ feet___mtransformer base num each conduit riser ___ inch ___ mm dia .
num foot meter messenger wire no .
strand ___ inch ___ mm dia .
with accessories num foot meter signal cable ___ conductor ___ awg num foot meter interconnect cable ___ conductor ___ awg num foot meter interconnect cable integral messenger wire type ___ conductor ___ awg num foot meter loop detector leadin cable num foot meter power cable ___ conductor ___ awg num foot meter service cable ___ conductor ___ awg num each power service num each covering of vehicular signal head num each covering of pedestrian signal head num each removal of traffic signal installation num each removal of item and storage or reerection num each reuse of item num foot meter tether wire with accessories item num traffic signal controllers num description num contractor personnel requirements num materials and equipment num shop drawings num general num testing and prequalification num controllers num cabinets num foundations num controller work pad num flasher controller num controller master traffic responsive num centrally controlled arterial traffic signal system num communications num training num uninterruptible power supply num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signal control equipment including controllers cabinets auxiliary equipment and specified accessories completely wired at the locations shown on the plans and ready for service .
num contractor personnel requirements .
conform to the requirements of supplement num for the installation or testing of traffic signal equipment .
num materials and equipment. . furnish new materials and equipment of first quality of current design and free from defects .
for warranted items new items shall have a manufacturing date determined by serial number within one num year of the date of shipment to the project as determined by the required warranty decal .
use electrical parts wire switches and other elements of the installation capable of carrying the required current without excessive heating or drop of potential .
ensure that each item of equipment bears a nameplate indelible marking or brand that identifies the type model catalog number and manufacturer .
use equipment conforming to the types models and systems specified .
furnish material and equipment conforming to concrete cabinet foundations and work pads qc misc or qc num num num conduit num num num controller unit num cabinet and auxiliary equipment num cabinet riser num flasher controller num controller master traffic responsive num remote monitoring station num uninterruptible power supply num num shop drawings .
furnish shop drawings according to num .
num general .
ensure that major items of traffic signal control equipment used in combination are compatible interchangeable and whenever feasible provided by the same manufacturer or supplier .
ensure that controller cabinets are shop prewired according to num .
before starting installation furnish to the engineer two copies of each cabinet wiring diagram service manuals and installation and maintenance instructions for each installation including all components and interconnections .
supply one additional copy of the cabinet wiring diagrams in a clear plastic pouch fastened to the inside of the controller door .
before beginning the numday performance test replace or modify these documents as necessary to reflect current conditions .
upon completion of the work and before its acceptance replace or modify the documents as necessary .
transfer manufacturers guarantees or warranties on all installed traffic signal control equipment to the maintaining agency upon completion and acceptance of the project .
if required by the plans to install equipment furnished by others store and care of the equipment upon receipt .
num testing and prequalification .
for all traffic control equipment perform functional tests and a num day performance test according to num .
do not clear conflict monitor logs during the numday test .
ensure that logs note powerup to start the test and all events until the test is complete .
restart the test upon correcting a noted event .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning the numday performance test .
the engineer will notify the maintaining agency of the beginning of the test .
ensure that the following testing and prequalification requirements are met a .
for traffic control equipment required by this specification to meet nema standards publication tsnum or ts num conform to the following num .
furnish a certified test report indicating compliance to all requirements of nema standards publication tsnum or tsnum as applicable .
num .
furnish the name and location of the laboratory testing facility as well as the identification of the principal personnel who conducted the equipment testing and a summary of their qualifications .
num .
ensure that the laboratory provides department representatives access to those parts of the laboratory where the testing was done .
num .
upon request furnish a copy of the actual test data results for review and analysis .
b .
for traffic control equipment required by this specification to meet caltrans specifications use a product or manufacturer as stated in this specification that is listed on the caltrans qualified products list or applicable odot qualified product list .
c. for type num controllers use conflict monitors listed on the departments prequalified list as specified in supplement num .
num controllers .
install controller units consisting of the timing unit software and signal timing into the specified type of prewired cabinet .
program controller units as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
if the plan timing data or the supplemental timing data supplied by the engineer does not exactly fulfill the timing requirements of the installed equipment notify in writing the engineer of the problem and identify the discrepancies .
the engineer will consult with the maintaining agency and notify the contractor within num weeks .
after programming briefly operate controllers with the signals turned off by means of the signal shutdown switch to ensure that operation is reasonable and conforms to the plans .
if the plans show two or more intersection controllers operated in a progressive signal system coordinate signals by relating the various controller cycle start times to a zero time base or other cycle start time at an adjacent signalized intersection .
ensure that the controller unit software provides coordination capability to allow associated controllers to be operated within the progressive traffic system .
coordination equipment shall supervise the operation of its associated controller by causing the end of certain phases and the beginning of the following phases to occur at set points .
program coordination timing according to the coordination timing data shown on the plans or provided by the engineer .
num cabinets .
mount cabinets by attaching to pedestal or pole or by installing on a concrete foundation .
arrange foundation mounted cabinets so that control equipment terminal blocks or shelves are no closer than num inches num mm to the top of the foundation .
attach pole or pedestal mounted controller cabinets at a height that allows convenient access to all controller components by service personnel .
make field connections for the conductors of signal cable power cable interconnect cable and detector leadin cable .
neatly arrange and route all field wiring to the appropriate terminal blocks .
identify field wiring according to num except mark with either indelible pen or embossed letters .
except for power wiring fit field wiring entering the cabinet with spade terminals to ensure a good connection .
for incoming power wiring either use spade terminals or connect the bare conductor wire to terminal points utilizing screw or spring applied clamping surfaces compatible with either copper or aluminum wire and providing a positive grip .
after completing field wiring seal the conduit entering the cabinet in an approved manner with a removable sealing compound no foam sealants or a molded plastic or rubber device that is compatible with the cable jacket the insulation and the conduit material .
for foundation mounted cabinets seal the joint between the controller cabinet and the foundation with a quality clear silicone caulk .
when future phasing configurations are shown on the plans furnish the cabinet and hardware to accommodate the future operation through only the future addition of load switches and detector units .
provide a riser with each ground mounted cabinet unless it is a nema size num cabinet .
cabinet risers provide an extension of the cabinet between the ground mounted cabinet and the foundation .
bolt the riser to the foundation and bolt the cabinet to the riser .
use a type size and shape of cabinet riser compatible with the type of controller cabinets specified for the project .
seal the joints between the controller cabinet and cabinet riser and between the cabinet riser and foundation with a quality clear silicone caulk .
num foundations .
construct foundations for controller cabinets according to num except that excavation by earth auger is not required and the foundation may be mass concrete that does not require reinforcing steel .
hold anchor bolts conduit ells and similar appurtenances in the proper position until the concrete has set .
pour foundations separately from controller work pad .
num controller work pad .
construct controller work pad according to num except that transverse joints are not required .
provide the top of the pad nominally num inch num mm above ground line .
if the controller cabinet has both front and back doors the work pad shall encompass three sides of the cabinet foundation to include the nonhinged cabinet door side of the foundation .
pour controller work pad separately from foundations .
num flasher controller .
furnish and install a flasher controller with cabinet and mounting hardware when indicated .
the flasher controller is for the operation of flashing beacons .
num controller master traffic responsive .
the traffic responsive master controller supervises and controls the operation of an interconnected system of local controllers .
ensure that the master controller is able to communicate with a remote monitoring station .
locate this master controller in a local intersection controller cabinet unless otherwise shown on plans .
if the local controller cabinet size is not sufficient to accommodate the master controller and its associated wiring furnish the proper size cabinet for the local intersection controller to house the local controller master controller modem and all auxiliary devices .
num centrally controlled arterial traffic signal system .
install this construction item on signal systems with a minimum of fifty num networked signalized intersections in jurisdictions who employ dedicated engineering andor traffic signal operations staff .
install test and operate the station consisting of computer equipment communications equipment and central control software in one or more locations in the maintaining agencys facilities as shown in the plans .
the maintaining agency shall furnish communications at these stations .
num communications .
furnish a broadband cellular modem from the departments traffic authorized product list .
the maintaining agency will arrange for the cellular service and device activation .
furnish all necessary cabling to interface with the traffic signal controller .
furnish an antenna that provides rssi received signal strength indication or no less than num dbm .
provide all necessary cabling and surge suppression to connect the antenna to the modem .
num training .
furnish training for the traffic signal control equipment installed as part of the contract .
furnish all handouts manuals and product information .
for the training use the same models of equipment furnished for the project .
the maintaining agency shall furnish the facilities in which the training will take place .
furnish all media and test equipment needed to present the training .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the minimum training requirements are as follows a. sixteen hours on how to operate the system analyze system performance and revise critical operating parameters .
b .
eight hours of field troubleshooting and maintenance procedures .
c. eight hours of followup training after the maintaining agency has operated the system for a minimum period of num days .
d. four hours for preemption device training if emergency vehicle preemption is shown on the plans .
num uninterruptible power supply ups .
furnish and install a battery backup ups system to provide uninterruptible reliable emergency power to a traffic signal intersection in the event of a power failure or interruption .
the transfer from utility power to battery power shall not interfere with the normal operations of the traffic controller conflict monitor or any other peripheral devices within the traffic control system .
the system shall be selfcontained including all ups hardware the required number of batteries and its own separate ventilated enclosure .
a ground rod shall be provided for freestanding ups cabinets .
provide a riser with each cabinet .
cabinet risers provide an extension of the cabinet between the ground mounted cabinet and the foundation .
bolt the riser to the foundation and bolt the cabinet to the riser .
use a type size and shape of cabinet riser compatible with the type of controller cabinets specified for the project .
seal the joints between the controller cabinet and cabinet riser and between the cabinet riser and foundation with a quality clear silicone caulk .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure controller unit type ___ with cabinet type ___ by the number of each complete unit and will include controller unit with software all required auxiliary equipment loop detector units and a prewired cabinet with all items completely wired and tested .
ground mounted cabinets will include anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation .
pole mounted cabinets will include pole mounting hardware .
the department will measure controller unit type ___ by the number of each controller timing unit with software and will include any signal timing programming or installation .
the department will measure controller unit type ___ furnish only by the number of each controller timing unit with software and will exclude any signal timing programming or installation .
the department will measure cabinet type ___ by the number of each complete prewired cabinet installed and will include all required auxiliary equipment and loop detector units excluding controller unit with all items completely wired and tested .
ground mounted cabinets will include anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation .
pole mounted cabinets will include pole mounting hardware .
the department will measure cabinet type ___ furnish only by the number of each complete prewired cabinet and will include pole mounting hardware riser and anchor bolts but will exclude installation controller unit and detector units .
the department will measure cabinet foundation and controller work pad by the number of each complete unit in place complete and accepted and will include excavation concrete backfilling and disposal of surplus excavation .
cabinet foundation will include preformed joint filler between the foundation and adjacent paved areas .
one complete controller work pad unit may encompass several sides of a controller cabinet installation .
the department will measure flasher controller by the number of each complete flasher assembly with cabinet installed and tested .
the department will measure controller master traffic responsive by the number of each unit and will include installation signal system software programming and any increase in cabinet size to house the master controller in the local intersection cabinet .
the department will measure controller master traffic responsive furnish only by the number of each unit and will include software but exclude any programming or installation .
the department will measure centrally controlled arterial traffic signal system by the number of each location shown on the plans and will include all equipment testing and software .
the department will measure communication service by the number of each location shown on the plans for furnishing communication service to an intersection controller and will include the modem conduit trenching and wiring .
the department will measure training on a lump sum basis and will include providing the instruction materials instructor travel expenses and test or media equipment for presenting the training material .
the department will measure uninterruptible power supply by the number of each and will include all equipment testing and certifications .
num basis of payment .
the costs to obtain and maintain telephone service of cellular by the supply agency are included under communications .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows item unit description num each controller unit type ___ with cabinet type ___ num each controller unit type ___ num each controller unit type ___ furnish only num each cabinet type ___ num each cabinet type ___ furnish only num each cabinet foundation num each controller work pad num each flasher controller num each controller master traffic responsive num each controller master traffic responsive furnish only num each centrally controlled arterial traffic signal system num each communications num lump sum training num each uninterruptible power supply item num water mains and service branches num description num materials num notification num excavation num pipe bedding num pipe laying num pipe joints num backfilling num hydrostatic tests num disinfection of completed water work num steel pipe encasement num polyethylene encasement num valves and equipment num fire hydrant num fire hydrant adjusted num service branches num meter and chamber removed and reset num valve box and service box adjusted to grade num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of constructing water mains and service branches including fire hydrants water meters corporation stops service boxes service stops valves fittings and valve boxes and includes a. excavation for items and preparation of the foundations necessary for placing water mains and service branches including fire hydrants water meters corporation stops service boxes service stops valves fittings and valve boxes .
b .
furnishing and placing bedding and backfill .
c. constructing and subsequently removing all necessary cofferdams bracing cribs and sheeting .
d. pumping and dewatering .
e. providing all joints as shown in the contract documents .
f. furnishing and installing all necessary bends and branches .
g. furnishing and installing all necessary tracer tape .
h. joining to existing and proposed appurtenances as required in the project plans .
i .
performing all necessary test leakage test disinfections hydrostatic .
j .
restoration of disturbed underground facilities .
k. constructing all required blocking and wedging andor thrust blocking .
l. furnishing and installing all necessary restraining of joints and fittings .
m. cutting and plugging as required existing water mains to be abandoned .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
provide a written installation plan per num b. for all new installations .
the installation plan may be eliminated when utility owner installation details are included in the contract documents .
the performance inspection num and conduit evaluation num are not required .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to pipe joints and fittings .
ductile iron pipe joints and fittings num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe joints and fittings num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe joints and fittings num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe and fittings num copper service branches and fittings num steel pipe encasement num polyethylene encasement num valves and equipment .
gate valve and valve box num inserting valve and valve box num cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box num tapping sleeve valve and valve box num tapping saddle and corporation stop num service stop and service box num meter setting stop and chamber num fire hydrant num miscellaneous .
granular material num disinfectant awwa pipe bedding num h concrete class qcmisc num and num soil and granular embankment num structural backfill num mortar num the engineer will allow structural backfill type num conforming to num to be used as bedding below the pipe only when pumping operations do not control severe ground water problems .
place at least num inches num mm of structural backfill type num on top of the structural backfill type num to prevent piping .
the metric equivalent pipe size may vary with material type for the same english size pipe .
num notification .
notify the engineer and maintaining agency of the following a .
the dates scheduled for testing and for disinfections of mains and branches .
b .
any clearances less than num foot num m between new mains and existing pipes sewers and structures .
num excavation .
excavate according to item num with the following additions a. excavate the trench a suitable distance in advance of pipe laying to ensure proper clearance between the waterline and any utility crossing or underground structure .
suitably brace and support utilities and structures .
b. excavate the trench walls vertically up to the top of the pipe .
ensure that the clearance on either side of a pipe is a minimum of num inches num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm .
in paved areas neatly line cut the pavement at the surface a distance of at least num inches num mm beyond the trench side and remove paving material .
c. furnish cover over pipes of num feet num m unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
d. pile excavated material in a manner that will not endanger the work or obstruct sidewalks and driveways .
keep gutters clear or make other satisfactory provisions for drainage .
do not obstruct natural watercourses .
e. furnish holes for pipe bells at each joint but make them no longer than necessary for joint assembly and assurance that the pipe barrel will be flat on the trench bottom .
f. furnish place and maintain such sheeting and bracing as may be required .
immediately backfill and compact voids appearing outside of sheeting .
notify the maintaining agency of sheeting and bracing left in place .
do not remove sheeting and bracing until sufficient backfill has been placed to provide ample support to the sides of the excavation .
when sheeting is left in place cut it off at least num feet num m below the proposed finished surface or subgrade in paved areas .
the department will pay for sheeting and bracing it orders to be left in place as a separate item of the work .
num pipe bedding .
where specified provide num inches num mm thick structural backfill for bedding according to item num .
num pipe laying .
a .
inspection .
inspect water mains and auxiliary equipment upon delivery in the field to ensure proper working order before installation .
b. trench dewatering .
where water is encountered in the trench remove it during pipelaying operations and maintain the trench water free until the ends of the pipe are sealed and provisions are made to prevent floating of the pipe .
do not allow trench water or other deleterious materials to enter the pipe at any time .
c. existing systems .
do not operate any valve or other control on the existing system .
the maintaining agency will operate all valves hydrants air valves and service stops .
d. pipe handling .
handle pipe in a manner that will prevent damage to the pipe pipe lining or coating .
load unload and place pipe and fittings using hoists and slings in a manner that will avoid shock or damage .
do not drop skid or roll pipe or fittings against other pipe .
e. pipe cutting .
whenever it becomes necessary to cut a length of pipe make the pipe ends square with the longitudinal axis of the pipe and otherwise smooth so that good connections can be made .
cut pipe using cutters recommended by the manufacturer .
do not cut ductile iron pipe with an oxyacetylene torch .
file or grind fieldcut pipe lengths to obtain a chamfer on the outside of the pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
remove rough or sharp edges from the cut end .
f. pipe laying .
ensure that pipe and fittings are clean when laid .
take precautions to prevent floating .
place the pipe on the trench bottom or bedding .
after the pipe has been aligned and jointed and thrust blocking has been placed secure the pipe in place with approved backfill material .
at times when pipe laying is not in progress close the open ends of the pipe with a watertight plug .
g. pipe laying on curves .
if the pipe is shown curved in the contract documents construct the curves by special fittings or by deflecting the joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not make joint deflections at valves .
when rubbergasketed pipe is laid on a curve joint the pipe in a straight alignment and then deflect it to the curved alignment .
make trenches wider on curves for this purpose .
h. pipe laying where earth grading is necessary .
where a pipe is to be placed within an embankment or the top of the pipe is above the existing ground construct the embankment to at least num inches num mm above the top of the pipe before trenching for the pipe .
excavate the trench to the minimum width necessary for the proper placing and backfilling of the pipe .
i. tracer tape .
install tracer tape over copper and nonmetallic water lines including service lines .
place the tracer tape approximately num foot num m above the top of the line and extend the tape for the lines full length .
use tracer tape that is a detectable type and is marked water .
j .
blocking and wedging .
lay fire hydrants valves and fittings on hardwood blocks and hold them in position by hardwood wedges .
bed blocks firmly in the bottom of the trench with uniform bearing and with the long dimension of the block perpendicular to the pipe barrel .
ensure that the blocks are level across the trench and that the proper number of blocks are placed one upon the other to bring the fittings to the required grade for jointing .
k. thrust blocking .
furnish plugs caps tees hydrants and elbows or bends having a deflection of num num degrees or greater with concrete thrust blocking unless suitably restrained joints are provided .
construct the thrust blocking by placing concrete class qc misc between firm original undisturbed earth and the fitting to be anchored .
place and shape the thrust blocking in a manner satisfactory to the engineer with the thrust force contained by the blocking .
place the hardwood blocks between the plugs caps and hydrants and the thrust blocking .
place the thrust blocking so that it allows for pipe and joint accessibility or repair .
l. restrained joints and fittings .
where conditions at an elbow tee or bulkhead are not conducive to the use of thrust blocking restrain pushon or mechanical joints and fittings by bent or straight tierods straps clamps or other devices with required hardware .
protect the devices against corrosion by the application of an asphalt coating .
restrain mechanical joints by a wedge action type joint restraint with twistoff nuts .
if polyethylene encasement is specified ensure that the encasement covers the entire assembly .
the contractor may use restraining devices instead of thrust blocking when approved by the engineer .
num pipe joints .
furnish ductile iron pipe and cast iron or ductile iron fittings with pushon joints mechanical joints boltlessrestrained joints or ballandsocket joints .
furnish joints with all accessories and install them according to the manufacturers recommendations .
during any construction where the outside temperature is below num f num c keep rubber gaskets and lubricants in a heated area to at least num f num c until used .
maintain gaskets in a flexible condition until placed in the bell or on the spigot of the pipe .
num backfilling .
complete backfill from the pipe grade to the finished grade or to the subgrade surface in paved areas .
furnish and compact backfill material for water mains and appurtenances per num as described in the installation plan or installation details .
if hydrostatic testing is performed before the backfilling operation is completed complete the portion of the backfill from pipe grade to the centerline of the pipe fittings or appurtenances and place sufficient backfill material over the pipe barrel between joints to prevent movement .
place sand cushions at least num inches num m thick between the pipe and existing pipelines or other conduits when encountered during construction and as directed by the engineer .
num hydrostatic tests .
apply a hydrostatic test to the whole system or to all individual valvedoff sections of the mains where work has been performed .
perform the hydrostatic tests according to of awwa except make the test pressure greater than num pounds per square inch num kpa .
ensure that the quantity of water lost from the main does not exceed the number of gallons liters per hour as determined by in awwa or by the following formula num l nd p num nd p l where l allowable leakage in gallons l per hour n number of joints in the length of pipe tested .
d nominal diameter of the pipe in inches mm p average test pressure during the leakage test in pounds per square inch kpa num disinfection of completed water work .
after passing the hydrostatic testing disinfect the completed water work according to awwa .
make all necessary taps and furnish all equipment and labor required for the disinfections .
obtain the engineers approval of the time and the section of line to be disinfected .
num steel pipe encasement .
furnish and install a steel casing of the diameter and wall thickness shown in the plans .
make any necessary excavation to install the steel casing .
obtain the engineers approval for the method of any boring or jacking operation .
if placing the steel casing in an open cut trench place it according to num and num .
join the casing pipe together with a fullcircumference weld conforming to num .
ensure that the inside diameter of the casing allows the water main to be removed without disturbing the casing or roadbed .
ensure that the inside diameter of the casing is at least num inches num mm greater than the largest outside diameter of the water main joints or couplings for carrier pipe that is less than num inches num mm .
ensure that the inside diameter is at least num inches num mm greater than the largest outside diameter for carrier pipe num inches num mm in diameter and over .
install the main in the casing on hardwood blocking or stainless steel chocks designed to remain fixed in position .
the contractor may install polyvinyl chloride water main using casing insulators .
close both ends of the casing with mortared numinch num mm bricks or a concrete bulkhead .
num polyethylene encasement .
lay ductile iron pipe with a polyethylene encasement as shown in the contract documents .
install pipe and polyethylene encasement according to ansiawwa .
any increased girth of wrapping over valves tees and any other irregular shaped items are included in this item without any additional payment .
num valves and equipment .
upon delivery at the work site open valves to prevent the collection of water in the valve .
clean the interiors of valves of all foreign matter and inspect them in both the open and closed position before installation .
set valves plumb and joint them to the pipe according to num and the ansiawwa standards for the joint type used .
install valve boxes on all buried valves .
center the valve box and set it in a vertical position directly over the valve nut in such a manner that the box does not transmit shock or stress to the valve .
set the base of the valve box first and support it with a minimum backfill hardwood blocks or a styrofoam collar at least num inches num mm in thickness .
do not allow the base to rest directly on the valve or main .
use valve boxes that are two or three piece boxes with covers .
when necessary furnish extension sections .
carefully tamp backfill around the valve box to a distance of num feet num m on all sides or to the undisturbed face of the trench if closer .
set the valve box cover flush with the ground line or finished paved surface .
installation methods for valves and equipment include the following .
a .
gate valve and valve box .
install gate valves directly in new mains or by means of a cuttingin sleeve in existing mains where maintenance of a continuous supply of water is not mandatory .
where it is mandatory not to interrupt the water supply the contractor may provide a branch to an existing main with a gate valve installed by means of a tapping sleeve .
b. inserting valve and valve box .
install inserting valves in existing water mains where it is mandatory not to interrupt the water supply .
assemble the sleeve around the existing main through which water is flowing under pressure .
bolt the equipment to the sleeve drill a hole through the existing main walls and insert the valve according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c. cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box .
use cuttingin sleeves to install a gate valve in an existing main without breaking pipe joints where it is permissible to interrupt the flow for a short period of time .
install the valve by cutting an exact length of pipe from the existing main according to the manufacturers recommendation .
assemble the cuttingin sleeve its glands and gaskets and the cuttingin valve over the cut ends of the existing pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
d. tapping sleeve valve and valve box .
where it is mandatory not to interrupt the water supply in an existing main and the branch is numinch num mm or larger provide tapping sleeves .
bolt the tapping sleeve around the existing main assemble the tapping valve and drill a hole through the main wall according to the manufacturers recommendations .
e. tapping saddle and corporation stop .
use corporation stops to provide individual service connections to mains .
ensure that the stops permit a shutoff of the service flow .
either assemble the stops directly to mains by means of a tap tool providing a tapped hole or use a tapping saddle .
fasten the saddle around the main and drill a hole into the main by an attached drilling machine then remove the machine and screw the stop into the saddle .
do not use corporation stops larger than num inches num mm in size and locate them approximately num degrees from the top of the main .
f. service stop and service box .
install service stops in service lines to allow the shuttingoff of individual services .
locate the stop beyond the pavement and provide it with a service box centered vertically over the stop operating nut such that the box provides maximum protection for the stop .
when numinch num mm service stops are used provide service boxes with an enlarged base .
when necessary provide extension sections for the service box to bring the box cover to finished grade .
g. meter setting stop and chamber .
this pay item is for meters that are to be installed in frostproof chambers .
set the chamber on hardwood blocks .
the maintaining agency shall furnish meters unless otherwise indicated by the plans .
do not transmit shock or stress to the meter body .
num fire hydrant .
the item includes excavation and furnishing and installing a new fire hydrant complete with proper jointing blocking and backfilling as outlined below and all other incidental work necessary to complete this item of work .
the department will pay for all hydrant branches gate valves and valve boxes required to perform the work separately .
a. excavation and drainage pits .
excavate according to num .
excavate a drainage pit num feet num m in diameter and num feet num m deep below the hydrant and fill it with granular material .
b .
setting fire hydrants .
provide a numfoot num m minimum radius unobstructed area around all hydrants .
set the sidewalk flange num inches num mm above finished grade .
set hydrants on hardwood blocks according to num.k .
provide thrust blocking according to num.l .
cover any hydrant not in service with a burlap or sturdy opaque plastic bag .
c. fire hydrant connections .
construct hydrant branches using a section of ductile iron pipe from the main to the hydrant and include a gate valve and valve box set vertically and placed in the line as indicated .
locate the valve a minimum of num feet num m from the hydrant streamer connection .
d. gate valve and valve box .
provide gate valve and valve boxes for hydrant branches conforming to num .
num fire hydrant adjusted .
this item includes installing fire hydrants as described below complete with proper jointing blocking backfilling as outlined and all other incidental work necessary to complete this item of work .
the department will pay for all hydrant branches gate valves and valve boxes required to perform the work separately .
a .
fire hydrant extended or adjusted to grade .
where existing hydrants are to be adjusted to conform to new street alignment and grade relocate the hydrant without disturbing the location of the hydrant lateral tee at the main .
before excavating close valves on hydrant branches to be cut .
where the distance of the center of the existing hydrant to the center of the gate valve on the hydrant branch is less than num feet num m extend the trench to the hydrant branch valve to permit removal of the pipe .
adequately support the hydrant before being disconnected .
extend the hydrant branch with new pipe of the same size as the existing pipe .
thoroughly clean the removed hydrant of dirt reset it and connect it to the extended branch .
provide drainage pits and thrust blocking according to num.a and num.l .
after hydrants have been reset open branch and hydrant valves until water flow expels all air and dirt .
b .
fire hydrant removed and reset .
where existing hydrants are indicated for removal provide adequate support for the hydrant before disconnecting it and resetting it in the new location .
cap the existing branch line and install adequate thrust blocking to brace the cap according to num.l unless the line is to be abandoned .
construct a new main tee a new pipe branch a new gate valve with valve box with thrust blocking and a drainage pit for the reset hydrant items .
adjust the valve box to the finished surface at the new location by raising or lowering the top portion and furnishing an extension section if needed .
c. fire hydrant and gate valve removed and reset .
conform to num.b except remove and reinstall the gate valve and valve box .
furnish a new tee and new pipe branch using the existing valve and box .
d. fire hydrant removed and disposed of .
remove and dispose of fire hydrants designated for removal .
cap the existing line and place thrust blocking according to num.l unless the line is to be abandoned .
num service branches .
furnish and install service branches either pipe or tubing and fittings as necessary or as shown in the contract documents including the removal of the existing service branches or service boxes as required according to the following situations .
tapping saddles corporation stops service stops and service boxes if required are separate from this item a .
where a service branch is disturbed for lowering raising or relocation between the water main at the corporation stop and the service stop replace it with new materials within these limits unless the connections can be made outside the limits of the proposed pavement paved shoulder or curb .
b .
where a service branch is disturbed for lowering raising extending or shortening on the property side of the service stop replace it with new materials from the existing service stop to the proposed service stop .
however if the existing service branch encountered is found to be lead or galvanized pipe replace it from the corporation stop to the service stop with new material .
num meter and chamber removed and reset .
remove and reset existing water meters and chambers as specified in num.g .
remove existing chambers .
disconnect existing meters and replace them with suitable connections if necessary .
reconnect the meters at new locations .
num valve box and service box adjusted to grade .
raise or lower existing valve boxes and service boxes to grade or the reuse of existing service boxes .
the contractor may reuse existing service boxes if they are in good condition as determined by the engineer then payment is per service box adjusted to grade .
excavate around the valve box or service box to permit the raising or lowering of the valve box or service box .
the contractor may adjust any screwtype boxes without the use of extensions provided that ample thread remains on the box to provide adequate rigidity to the box .
provide extension sections for boxes that are not of the screw type and boxes not having ample thread for rigidity to adjust the top to grade .
the engineer will allow inserts or adapters .
adequately secure new sections of box stem to the existing stems .
backfill the hole after the box has been adjusted to grade .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure water main ductile iron pipe and water main polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings by the number of feet meters of each constructed .
the department will measure copper service branch polyethylene service branch and polybutylene service branch by the number of feet meters of each constructed .
the department will measure polyethylene encasement by the number of feet meters of covered pipe .
the department will measure steel pipe encasement by the number of feet meters constructed including the open cut or boring or jacking operation encasement pipe bedding and backfill blocking to support the internal main and end bulkheads .
the department will measure gate valve and valve box inserting valve and valve box cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box tapping sleeve valve and valve box and meter setting stop and chamber separately as a complete item by the number of each .
the department will measure fire hydrant fire hydrant extended and adjusted to grade fire hydrant adjusted to grade fire hydrant removed and reset fire hydrant and gate valve removed and reset and fire hydrant removed and disposed of separately by the number of each .
the department will measure valve box adjusted to grade and service box adjusted to grade separately by the number of each including any extension sections of valve or service boxes required .
the department will measure meter and chamber removed and reset by the number of each .
the department will measure sheeting and bracing ordered left in place in thousands of board feet mbf cubic meters .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows item unit description num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm water main ductile iron pipe ansi class___ pushon mechanical boltless restrained ballandsocket joints and fittings num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm water main polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings astm sar ___ or awwa class ___ num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm copper service branch num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm polyethylene service branch num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm polybutylene service branch num foot meter polyethylene encasement num foot meter ___ inch ___ mm steel pipe encasement open cut bored or jacked num each ___ inch ___ mm gate valve and valve box num each ___ inch mm inserting valve and valve box num each ___ inch mm cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box num each ___ inch __ inch _ mm _ mm tapping sleeve valve and valve box num each meter setting stop and chamber num each ___ inch ___ mm fire hydrant num each fire hydrant extended and adjusted to grade num each fire hydrant adjusted to grade num each fire hydrant removed and reset num each fire hydrant and gate valve removed and reset num each fire hydrant removed and disposed of num each valve box adjusted to grade num each service box adjusted to grade num each meter and chamber removed and reset num mbf cubic meter sheeting and bracing ordered left in place num pavement marking item num pavement markinggeneral num description num materials num general num equipment num pavement preparation num layout and premarking num line placement tolerance num marking types num twoway radio communications num removal of pavement markings num deduction for deficiency num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this specification gives general requirements for various kinds of retroreflective pavement markings .
deviations from these general requirements are covered in the specific requirements for each marking type .
place all pavement markings according to the omutcd .
num materials .
use marking materials that are a formulation identified by a manufacturers code number prequalified by the laboratory and that have the same composition as the prequalified marking material .
any materials delivered without a tenum when applicable and applied without laboratory preapproval shall be removed .
laboratory tested materials not meeting specifications shall be removed from the project site .
furnish a material safety data sheet sds for each material including resin catalyst primer adhesive activator glass beads and cleaning solvent to be used on the project to the engineer before material delivery .
inform workers of the location of all sds and allow workers an opportunity to review them .
furnish the engineer prior to application the paint manufacturers printed application equipment requirements and application instructions .
num general .
apply lines as solid broken or dotted lines either singly or in combination as shown on the plans .
apply broken lines in a numfoot num m cycle consisting of a numfoot num m dash and a numfoot num m gap between broken lines unless otherwise shown on the plans .
use an accurate striping mechanism that is capable of being easily adjusted to retrace existing broken markings or to apply new materials at the correct spacing .
begin broken lines that are to be applied over plainly visible existing broken lines within num inches num mm of the beginning of the existing broken line unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
apply dotted lines in an numfoot num m cycle consisting of a numfoot num m dot and a numfoot num m gap between dots for line extensions and in a numfoot num m cycle consisting of a numfoot num m line segment and a numfoot num m gap for lane dropadd markings .
fill gaps that were not marked as a result of template use for sprayapplied auxiliary markings with marking material after the template is removed .
if applying extruded thermoplastic the contractor may leave small gaps in arrows or letters resulting from template use unfilled .
ensure that pavement markings are free of uneven edges overspray or other readily visible defects that detract from the appearance or function of the pavement markings .
ensure that lines are sharp well defined and uniformly retroreflective .
apply the lines to the width specified num inch num mm .
fuzzy lines excessive overspray or nonuniform application are unacceptable .
the engineer will inspect lines at night to verify proper retroreflectivity .
correct pavement markings that are improperly applied located or reflectorized .
reapply lines applied with insufficient material quantities according to num num or num .
remove improperly located lines according to num and apply new lines in the correct locations .
reapply any lines applied with nonspecification materials .
obtain the engineers approval for methods and equipment used for pavement preparation marking and marking removal .
keep glass beads dry during storage and before use .
furnish to the engineer at least num days in advance of installation current copies of the manufacturers instructions and recommendations for application of any marking material including primer activator catalyst and adhesive shown on the plans .
schedule and perform other construction work such as shoulder paving seeding and mulching in a manner to avoid damage to applied pavement markings .
do not apply pavement marking materials to the reflector of a plowable raised pavement marker .
interrupt the application of the pavement marking line at each raised pavement marker where marking material would otherwise be applied to the markers prismatic reflector .
provide a maximum gap in the marked line of num inches num m at each marker .
remove pavement marking material applied to a prismatic reflector surface or replace the reflector that same workday .
if material must be removed from the reflector restore the reflectors brightness to its prior condition .
num equipment .
equip long line pavement marking equipment for traffic paint polyester epoxy and work zone marking item num with a computerized data logging system dls including a cab mounted display which shows the actual material application rate and film thickness .
for center line lane line and edge line markings when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent document the following with the dls measure and record application vehicle speed to nearest num mph num kmh measure and record weight andor volume amount of material used by color measure and record weight of glass beads measure and record pavement surface temperature measure and record air temperature measure and record dew point measure and record humidity calculate and record average material application rate and film thickness over the section painted .
record as a separate dls report line entry the above information for each route section painted when the length of center line lane line and edge line marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
a route section is defined as one direction of a contiguous section of highway without breaks with the same route number designation .
dls documentation is not required for center line lane line and edge line markings of num miles num km or less and for channelizing lines of any length .
if the dls equipment fails finish that days work only and resume when the dls equipment is working .
the department will provide a standard dls short form and long form which prescribes the correct dls report format and content prior to beginning of work .
on the first working day following application of markings requiring documentation with the dls or upon demand furnish the engineer a copy of the dls report in odot dls short report format .
the dls report can be provided in one of the following methods which should be agreed upon at the preconstruction meeting hand delivery of paper report fax delivery of paper report email of excel spreadsheet file disk or flash drive transfer of excel spreadsheet file .
within two weeks of the date of application of markings requiring documentation with the dls furnish the engineer the excel spreadsheet file of the dls report in odot dls long report format by email at the email address provided at the preconstruction meeting .
at the end of the project furnish the engineer all excel spreadsheet files in odot dls long report format .
each dls shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function and output confirmed by the dls manufacturer or their designated representative .
evidence of the annual calibration shall be carried by a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the drivers door of each striper .
num pavement preparation .
clean all visible loose or foreign material from the surface to be marked .
equip the pavement marking equipment with an air jet to remove all debris from the pavement in advance of the applicator gun .
operate the air jet when marking material is being applied and synchronize it with marking material application .
powerbroom clean all surfaces where gore markings or edge lines are to be applied .
if required by the engineer also powerbroom clean other surfaces .
do not apply marking to portland cement concrete until the concrete in the areas to be marked is clean of membrane curing material and is dry .
num layout and premarking .
lay out the locations of all lines words and other symbols to ensure their proper placement .
do not start marking operations until the engineer or the engineers representative has approved the layout and premarking lines if applying longitudinal or transverse lines use existing lines construction joints or premarking to guide this marking equipment .
on projects where resurfacing or other operations will result in obliteration of the existing pavement markings establish reference points to ensure proper placement of restored markings .
if existing markings are to be retraced verify any adjustment in the location with the engineer .
establish t marking of nopassing zones according to the plans or a nopassing zone log provided by the engineer .
locate premarking from survey data or reference points and offset it so as to parallel the theoretical edge of the marking lines at a maximum distance of num inch num mm .
use templates for the layout of arrows words and other symbols .
place premarking for longitudinal lines at numfoot num m intervals and do not exceed num inches num mm in width or num inches num mm in length .
locate premarking for auxiliary markings from the plans or schematic forms provided by the engineer .
num line placement tolerance .
ensure that pavement marking lines are straight or smoothly curved true to the alignment of the pavement and do not deviate laterally from the proper location at a rate of more than num inches in num feet num mm in num m. the engineer will not allow any deviation greater than num inches num mm .
remove improperly located lines according to num and apply new lines in the correct locations .
num marking types .
apply marking materials at the rate or thickness specified in num num num num num num or num and except for parking lot stall markings ensure that they are uniformly retroreflective .
ensure that portions of parking stalls that are adjacent to street traffic are retroreflective .
pavement markings consist of the following types a .
edge lines .
place edge lines as continuous stripes using the width specified .
locate the center of the stripe num inches num mm from the edge of the pavement .
ensure that the right edge line is applied to the left of the right edge of pavement .
ensure that the left edge line is applied to the right of the left edge of pavement .
b .
lane lines .
place lane lines using the width specified as white stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement carrying traffic in the same direction .
place them as broken lines unless specified solid .
offset lane lines to the left of the longitudinal joint if present or the theoretical line lying between contiguous lanes if a joint is not present .
ensure that the nearer edge of the stripe is num inches num mm to the left of the joint or line .
do not place lane lines through intersections .
c. center lines .
place center lines as single or double yellow stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement carrying traffic in opposite directions .
center line marking includes twoway leftturn lane striping and the outline of leftturn islands .
make each stripe num inches num mm wide solid or broken as specified .
d. channelizing lines .
place channelizing lines as continuous white stripes using the width specified .
e. stop and crosswalk lines .
place stop lines as solid numinch num mm wide white stripes .
place crosswalk lines as solid numinch num mm wide white stripes .
f. transversediagonal lines .
place transversediagonal lines as solid numinch num mm wide stripes of the color specified and at an angle to the direction of travel .
g. curb and island marking .
prepare exposed surfaces and curbs and paved islands according to num .
in addition remove and dispose of all visible loose or foreign material including vegetation on and immediately contiguous to surfaces to be marked .
h. symbol markings .
place all railroad school bicycle and handicap symbol markings using white markings .
a railroad marking includes the numinch num mm crossbuck two numinch num m rs two numinch num mm transverse lines and a stop line .
a school marking includes the word school and two numinch num mm transverse lines .
a shared lane marking includes the bicycle symbol and two sharrows .
i .
parking lot stall marking .
place parking lot stall marking lines as continuous numinch num mm wide white stripes .
j .
lane arrows .
place lane arrows using white markings .
k. words on pavement .
place words on pavement using white markings .
l. dotted lines .
place dotted lines using the width and color specified .
m. yield lines .
place yield lines as solid white numinch num mm isosceles triangles pointing toward approaching traffic .
the term long lines when used in sections num through num includes edge lines lane lines center lines and channelizing lines over num feet num m long .
the term auxiliary markings when used in items num through num includes channelizing lines num feet num m or shorter stop lines yield lines crosswalk lines transverse lines diagonal lines curb markings island markings symbol markings parking lot stall markings lane arrows and dotted lines .
num twoway radio communications .
if twoway radio equipment is required furnish and maintain radio equipment necessary for the voice communication between the striper and the inspectors vehicle at all times during the pavement marking operation .
use equipment capable of transmitting and receiving normal voice communications to at least num miles num km .
num removal of pavement markings .
if specified as a pay item remove pavement markings as described in num.g .
take care during marking removal not to scar discolor or otherwise damage the pavement surface .
do not overpaint or use other methods of covering markings instead of removal .
num deduction for deficiency .
for traffic paint polyester and epoxy the engineer will compute each day the amount of marking material including all components and glass beads applied for each route section on the dls report for determining unsatisfactory sections .
the department will reduce the contract price for each route section in direct proportion to the percent of deficiency of marking material or glass beads as specified in num num and num up to num percent for each material deficiency .
the department will only use the greater deficiency of marking material or glass beads to compute the deduction .
if the deficiency of marking material or glass beads is num percent or more the department will consider the work unsatisfactory .
in addition the engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied outside the temperature or application requirements in items num num and num without written approval of the engineer .
replace pavement markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory by retracing over the unsatisfactory markings at the full thickness specified in items num num and num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure pavement markings complete in place in the units designated .
the department will measure line quantities as the length of completed marking including the gaps intersections and other sections of pavement not normally marked .
the department will measure the removal of pavement markings using the same method of measurement as completed markings in the units designated .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities of work performed under items num num num num num num and num .
the department will not pay for costs associated with correcting improperly located lines replacing reflectors coated with pavement marking material or replacing unsatisfactory pavement markings .
the department will not pay for lines placed using nonspecification materials .
the department will not pay for nonspecification lines determined through field measurement .
the department will pay for twoway radio equipment at the lump sum bid price .
item num traffic paint num description num materials num equipment num application num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying fast dry waterbased traffic paint or fast dry waterbased traffic paint for cold weather applications according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to traffic paint num glass beads type a num the engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment .
furnish the manufacturers identification information for the sampled liquid materials .
the department will test the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturers production ranges .
samples not meeting the manufacturers production ranges will require the contactor to reapply at his expense any markings using that sample .
all other untested batches will become not approved and will either require testing or reapplication .
do not apply paints that have exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
do not use glass beads that are wet .
num equipment .
use equipment capable of applying the traffic paint as recommended by the manufacturer and applying glass beads at the time of line placement .
furnish a calibrated measuring device acceptable to the engineer to measure the traffic paint in the striper tanks .
equip all striping equipment for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized data logging system dls conforming to num when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
furnish written documentation to the engineer for the equipments operational capabilities from the equipment manufacturer .
num application .
apply pavement markings only when the surface is clean and dry in accordance with the paint manufacturers written application instructions .
if application is required when air and pavement temperatures are between num f num c and num f num c obtain approval from the engineer and apply only prequalified type numa cold weather traffic paint materials .
apply traffic paint according to the manufacturers recommendations and protect line from tracking .
keep the paint thoroughly mixed during application .
apply num mil num mm thick traffic paint type num at the following rates num mil thickness line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num gallon per num square feet num mm thickness line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num lm apply num mil num mm thick traffic paint type numa at the following rates num mil thickness line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num gallon per num square feet num mm thickness line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num lm do not dilute the paint .
however the contractor may add spent traffic paint solvents generated during performance of this work to virgin traffic paint .
if adding spent solvents add them in a maximum ratio of num of spent solvents to virgin paint .
ensure that the maximum concentration of spent solvents in the striping equipment tanks is maximum num percent .
add spent solvents during the loading of the striping equipment .
apply glass beads to the wet paint so that the beads are embedded and retained in the paint and provide uniform retroreflectivity in the paint surface .
apply glass beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum for type num traffic paint .
apply glass beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum for type numa traffic paint .
ensure temperature of the paint at the discharge point is within the range recommended by paint manufacturer .
replace unsatisfactory markings according to num .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports according to num .
perform traffic control operations for all num pavement markings according to num and mtnumm but provide for center line edge line lane line and channelizing line traffic control equipment according to mtnumm equipment requirements for center line longer than num minute dry .
payment for this work shall be included in the num price per mile for center line edge line and lane line and the num price per foot for channelizing line .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num mile kilometer center line type ___ num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot meter stop line type ___ num foot meter yield line type___ num foot meter crosswalk line type ___ num foot meter transversediagonal line type ___ num foot meter curb marking type ___ num square foot island marking type ___ square meter num each handicap symbol marking type ___ num each railroad symbol marking type ___ num each school symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num each bicycle lane symbol marking type___ num each shared lane marking type____ num foot meter parking lot stall marking type ___ num each lane arrow type ___ num each word on pavement ___ inch___ mm type ___ num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___mm type ___ num foot or square foot removal of pavement marking meter or square meter or each num lump sum twoway radio equipment item num polyester pavement marking num description num materials num equipment num application num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying polyester pavement markings according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to polyester pavement marking num glass beads type b num the engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment .
furnish the manufacturers identification information for the sampled liquid materials .
the department will test the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturers production ranges .
samples not meeting the manufacturers production ranges will require the contractor to reapply at his expense any markings using that sample .
all other untested batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or reapplication .
do not apply material that have exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
do not use glass beads that are wet .
num equipment .
use application equipment capable of mixing the polyester components in proportions recommended by the manufacturer and applying glass beads at the time of marking placement .
use equipment striper capable of applying polyester longlines at the thickness specified for solid and broken lines while moving on the highway at a speed of not less than num miles per hour num kmh .
furnish a calibrated measuring device acceptable to the engineer to measure the polyester resin in the striper tanks .
equip all striping equipment for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized data logging system dls conforming to num when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
the dls shall measure the polyester resin material component and glass beads only .
catalyst will be calculated as num percent of the resin used .
furnish written documentation to the engineer for the equipments operational capabilities from the equipment manufacturer .
num application .
apply polyester only when the pavement surface is clean and dry and the pavement and air temperature are above num f num c. if project safety requirements require marking application below numf numc obtain approval from the engineer and apply cold weather traffic paint type numa according to item num instead of the polyester .
after sampling of resin is completed transfer the entire contents of each material container to the striper tanks .
ensure that the polyester is thoroughly mixed at all times during application .
apply polyester catalyst plus resin uniformly to the pavement at the following rates num mil thickness line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num gallon per num square feet num mm thickness line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num lm do not dilute the material .
apply glass beads to the uncured polyester in sufficient quantity so that the beads completely fill the polyester film from the filmpavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the surface of the uncured line .
apply glass beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum of polyester applied in a manner that provides uniformly retroreflective lines .
if the applied polyester becomes tacky and causes marking discoloration and darkening cease marking application until the engineer agrees that the problem is corrected .
if any marking is in a tracking condition num minutes after application cease marking application until the engineer agrees that the problem is corrected .
do not apply polyester pavement markings to new asphalt concrete until at least num weeks after the pavement is placed .
assure curing compound is removed from portland cement concrete pavements .
replace unsatisfactory markings according to num .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports according to num .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer center line num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter stop line num foot meter yield line num foot meter crosswalk line num foot meter transversediagonal line num foot meter curb marking num square foot island marking square meter num each handicap symbol marking num each railroad symbol marking num each school symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm num each bicycle lane symbol marking num each shared lane marking num foot meter parking lot stall marking num each lane arrow num each word on pavement ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___ mm num foot or square foot removal of pavement marking meter or square meter or each num lump sum twoway radio equipment item num thermoplastic pavement marking num description num materials num equipment num application num layout and premarking num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying screed extruded thermoplastic pavement markings according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to thermoplastic pavement marking num glass beads type c num the engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment .
furnish the manufacturers identification information for the sampled liquid materials .
the department will test the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturers production ranges .
samples not meeting the manufacturers production ranges will require the contractor to reapply at his expense any markings using that sample .
all other untested batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or reapplication .
do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
do not use glass beads that are wet .
num equipment .
equip all thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized data logging system dls including a cab mounted display which shows the actual bead application rate .
a dls is not required for markings applied with hand carts .
for center line lane line and edge line markings applied with truckmounted equipment when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent document the following with the dls measure and record application vehicle speed to the nearest num mph num kmh .
measure and record pavement surface temperature .
measure and record air temperature .
measure and record thermoplastic temperature in the kettle and at the point of application .
record as a separate dls report line entry the above information for each route section painted when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
a route section is defined as one direction of a contiguous section of highway without breaks with the same route number designation .
if the dls equipment fails finish that days work only and resume when the dls equipment is working .
the department will provide a standard dls spreadsheet which prescribes the correct dls report format and content prior to beginning of work .
each dls shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function and output confirmed by the dls manufacturer or their designated representative .
evidence of the annual calibration shall be carried by a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the drivers door of each striper .
use application equipment that includes a kettle for melting the thermoplastic and maintaining it at the proper temperature .
equip the kettle with a thermostat to control the temperature of the melted thermoplastic and to prevent overheating .
use equipment that continuously mixes and agitates the molten thermoplastic .
ensure that the parts of the equipment that convey the thermoplastic from the kettle to the application point maintains it at the required temperature .
attach an automatic bead dispenser to the equipment so that the beads are immediately and uniformly dispensed over the marking surface .
equip the bead dispenser with an automatic cutoff control synchronized with the cut off of the thermoplastic material .
ensure that the applicator portion of the equipment has a shoe that rides on the pavement and extrudes the thermoplastic .
ensure that the application equipment applies lines with a square end and can apply broken lines .
furnish application equipment for applying extruded markings that consists of dies of varying widths to produce different widths of lines .
do not use pans aprons or similar devices that the die overruns .
use equipment that ensures uniformity in the thickness and width of lines .
use equipment that forms lines num inches num mm wide or less by one application pass and lines wider than num inches num mm by no more than two passes .
do not allow individual passes to overlap or to be separated by a gap greater than num inch num mm .
num application .
if applying thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than num f num c and rising .
however if applying thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than num f num c and rising .
ensure that the temperature of thermoplastic at the point of application is at least num f num c and not more than num f num c. apply thermoplastic at a thickness of num mils num mm .
thermoplastic for small quantities or auxiliary markings up to num feet num m in length can be exchanged as equal in function and price with num mil num mm thick heatfused preformed thermoplastic item num .
apply thermoplastic at the following rates num mil thickness line width inch num num num num num pounds per mile of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num pounds per num square feet num mm thickness line width mm num num num num num kilograms per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num kgm mechanically apply glass beads to the wet thermoplastic surface so that the beads are embedded and retained and provide uniform retroreflectivity in the surface .
do not place beads by hand except to symbols and words and to complete the ends of lines .
apply beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num m of thermoplastic surface area .
the contractor may leave small gaps unfilled in symbols and letters resulting from template use .
if required furnish primer and apply it according to the manufacturers recommendations .
use primer except on new asphalt pavement .
for each route section on the dls report the engineer will compute the amount of thermoplastic marking material and glass beads applied .
the department will reduce the contract price in direct proportion to the percent of deficiency of thermoplastic marking material or glass beads as specified in num up to num percent for each material deficiency .
the department will only use the greater deficiency of marking material or glass beads to compute the deduction .
if the deficiency of thermoplastic marking material or glass beads is num percent or more the department will consider the work unsatisfactory .
in addition the engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied outside the temperature or application requirements in num without written approval of the engineer .
replace thermoplastic markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory by entirely removing the unsatisfactory thermoplastic material by grinding as per num and then reapplying at the full thickness specified in num .
do not apply a layer of sprayed thermoplastic to sections determined to be unsatisfactory to achieve the required thickness .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports conforming to num and additional reports indicating material type and quantities in pounds kilograms of thermoplastic materials used according to num .
num layout and premarking .
in addition to the requirements specified in num only place auxiliary markings on new pavement .
the contractor may place initial thermoplastic markings over work zone traffic paint markings .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for any thermoplastic lines that do not meet the required thickness .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer center line num mile kilometer channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter stop line num foot meter yield line num foot meter crosswalk line num foot meter transversediagonal line num each handicap symbol marking num each railroad symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm num each school symbol marking __ inch ___ mm num each bicycle lane marking sym_bol num each shared lane marking num foot meter parking lot stall marking num each lane arrow num each word on pavement ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___ mm num foot or square foot removal of pavement marking meter or square meter or each num lump sum twoway radio equipment item num preformed pavement marking num description num materials num application num layout and premarking num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying preformed pavement marking material according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to the following type a permanent markings type anum anum or anum num type b work zone markings type ii nonremovable num type c work zone markings type i removable num do not apply materials that has exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
num application .
only apply on clean dry pavement surfaces .
if there is oil salt or dust power wash the pavement and allow the pavement to dry .
furnish the engineer with the manufacturers application instructions .
record the surface temperature and date of application .
furnish documentation to the engineer .
apply preformed markings to the pavement by means of a precoated adhesive on the back or by an adhesive or activator furnished with the markings and used according to the manufacturers recommendations .
form lines num inches num mm wide or less by one piece form lines wider than num inches num mm by no more than two pieces .
do not overlap individual pieces .
do not allow a gap greater than num inch num mm between pieces .
do not use preformed markings that are subject to premature adhesion or contamination before placement .
apply preformed markings according to the appropriate type of application as follows a .
type a marking application .
apply the preformed markings while the pavement surface temperature is at the manufacturers application recommendations .
before any application test and record the pavement surface temperature air temperature and dew point .
retest and record every num hours of operation .
demonstrate to the engineer the testing devices are accurate and operational .
initially position the marking under light pressure or use a hand operated light roller or mechanical applicator .
once correctly located hold the marking in position without delay by rolling .
if type a preformed markings are specified to be inlaid on newly placed asphalt concrete press the markings into the warm surface using a mechanical roller .
proper application of inlaid markings requires that the asphalt concrete pavement surface have a temperature below the maximum temperature recommended for the preformed material or its adhesive backing .
b .
type b and type c marking application .
apply the preformed markings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num layout and premarking .
in addition to the requirements specified in num place preformed auxiliary markings only on new pavement .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for under thickness lines or nonspecification materials .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num mile kilometer center line type ___ num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot meter stop line type ___ num foot meter yield line type____ num foot meter crosswalk line type ___ num foot meter transversediagonal line type ___ num each handicap symbol marking type ___ num each railroad symbol marking type ___ num each school symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num each bicycle lane symbol marking type___ num each shared lane marking num foot meter parking lot stall marking type ___ num each lane arrow type ___ num each word on pavement ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot square foot removal of pavement marking meter square meter or each num lump sum twoway radio equipment item num epoxy pavement marking num description num materials num equipment num cleaning and surface preparation num application num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying epoxy pavement markings according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
store and handle epoxy material according to all the applicable epa and local environmental regulations and the manufacturers recommendations .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to epoxy pavement markings num glass beads type d num the engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment .
furnish the manufacturers identification information for the sampled liquid materials .
the department will test the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturers production ranges .
samples not meeting the manufacturers production ranges will require the contractor to reapply at his expense any markings using that sample .
all other untested batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or re application .
do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
do not use glass beads that are wet .
num equipment .
a .
general .
equip all striping equipment for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized data logging system dls conforming to num when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
furnish written documentation to the engineer for the equipments operational capabilities from the equipment manufacturer .
use equipment to apply epoxy pavement markings that has the following capabilities and features num .
capable of mixing the epoxy components in proportions recommended by the manufacturer and applying glass beads simultaneously with line placement .
num .
capable of applying epoxy at the specified thickness width and pattern .
num .
individual material reservoirs or space for the storage of part a and part b of the epoxy .
num .
heating equipment of sufficient capacity to maintain the epoxy components at the manufacturers recommended temperature and to produce the required amount of heat at the mixing head and gun tip and maintain those temperatures with the tolerances recommended by the epoxy manufacturer for the spray application .
num .
adequate individual tanks for the storage and dispensing of size i and size ii glass beads .
num .
individual dispensers for the simultaneous application of size i and size ii glass beads at specified rates .
num .
individual metering devices on the proportioning pumps one indicator per pump and stroke counters to monitor gallon liter usage .
ensure that these devices are clearly visible .
num .
all the necessary spray equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances to allow for the placement of reflectorized pavement marking systems in a simultaneous sequence of operations .
num .
a minimum numinch num mm long static mixer unit or an equivalent system that produces properly mixed material .
num .
a completely enclosed flush and purge system to clean the lines and the guns without expelling any of the solution into the environment .
b .
long line equipment .
furnish a striper to apply long line epoxy markings that is num .
truckmounted and selfcontained .
num .
designed to spray the epoxy and glass beads in continuous and skip line .
num .
maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
c. auxiliary marking equipment .
furnish application equipment for auxiliary markings by either of the following two methods num .
equip the striper with accessories for applying auxiliary markings .
num .
use a portable applicator approved by the engineer .
d. documentation requirements furnish the engineer documentation from the manufacturer that the equipment meets all requirements of num .
demonstrate the equipment has the capability to obtain the manufacturers required temperature for the mixed components and the required temperature at the lines and gun .
num cleaning and surface preparation .
a .
general .
before applying epoxy clean and prepare the pavement surface in the following sequence num .
remove all debris oil and any other contaminants that may hinder the adhesion of the epoxy to the pavement .
num .
use a powerbroom to clean the pavement .
num .
remove residue and debris with blasts of compressed air .
num .
follow any additional manufacturers recommendations for surface preparation .
perform operations in such a manner that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or unnecessarily scarred or left in a pattern that will mislead or misdirect the motorist and that minimizes airborne dust .
avoid damage to transverse and longitudinal joint sealers .
b. asphalt concrete pavements .
in addition to the requirements of num.a the following apply .
wait num hours after the placement of polymer modified asphaltconcrete pavement before preparing it for epoxy pavement markings .
for any other type of modified asphalt or for open graded friction course asphalts contact the manufacturer for surface preparation recommendations .
furnish the engineer copies of the manufacturers recommendations .
lightly abrade any new asphalt concrete pavement containing sbs sbr latex or sma latex polymer modifiers without scarring the area between the broken lines to the manufacturers recommendations to remove polymer surface film to assure proper bonding .
in no case shall the removal of the polymer surface film be less than that required for the epoxy to properly bond and adhere .
c. portland cement concrete pavements .
on new portland cement concrete pavements do not begin cleaning operations until a minimum of num days after the placement of concrete unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
in addition to the requirements of num.a the following apply .
remove all curing compound and laitance on the concrete surface and in any textured pavement valleys .
round the profiles of the peaks of textured pavement and remove sharp edges and irregularities .
acceptable removal methods are num .
sand blasting with containment .
num .
lightly abrading the surface without scarring the surrounding surface .
this must be demonstrated before the application and approved by the engineer .
num .
blast track cleaning .
num .
highpressure water blasting greater than num psi num num kpa with or without abrasives and with sufficient time to allow the pavement to dry before applying epoxy markings .
num .
other methods approved by the engineer .
contain and dispose of all the removal debris .
d. removal of existing markings .
when placing epoxy markings in the same place as existing pavement markings remove at least num percent of the existing pavement markings .
use a removal method that results in little or no color and texture changes in the surrounding pavement .
e. preparation area .
num .
lines .
prepare an area that is the width of the new pavement marking or existing line plus numinch num mm on each side and the length of broken lines plus num inches num mm on each end .
num .
arrows letters and symbols .
when cleaning for letters and symbols prepare an area that is sufficiently large to accommodate the new marking or to remove the existing marking .
num application .
apply epoxy only when the surface is clean and dry and when the pavement and air temperature are above num f num c .
transfer the entire contents of each material container to the striper tanks .
keep the epoxy thoroughly mixed at all times during application .
before any application test and record the pavement surface temperature air temperature .
retest and record every num hours of operation .
demonstrate to the engineer the testing devices including dls are accurate and operational .
apply epoxy uniformly to the surface to be marked at a rate specified below .
to achieve the rate ensure that the thickness of the applied epoxy is num mils num mm .
num mil thickness line width inch num num num num num gallon per mile of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num gallon per num square feet num mm thickness line width mm num num num num num liter per kilometer of line solid line num num num num num broken line num num num num num dotted line num num num num num areas symbols words num lm do not dilute the epoxy .
apply enough glass beads to the uncured epoxy so that the beads completely fill the epoxy film from the film pavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the surface of the uncured line .
apply glass beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum of epoxy to achieve uniform retroreflectivity .
drop glass beads onto the epoxy in a doubledrop system with the large gradation size i first and the regular gradation size ii second in the same pass of the equipment .
apply the beads in equal amounts by weight .
cease operations when any of the following conditions are observed a .
the marking does not consistently dry to a notrack condition .
b .
the marking has cyclical soft spots .
resume marking operations when the inspector is satisfied the problem is corrected .
replace unsatisfactory markings according to num .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports according to num .
num basis of payment .
the cost of cleaning and surface preparation according to num is included in the unit bid cost for the various pavement markings .
the department will make payment for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer center line num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter stop line num foot meter yield line num foot meter crosswalk line num foot meter transversediagonal line num foot meter curb marking num square foot island marking square meter num each handicap symbol marking num each railroad symbol marking num each school symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm num each bicycle lane symbol marking num each shared lane marking num foot meter parking lot stall marking num each lane arrow num each word on pavement ___ inch ___ mm num foot dotted line ___ inch ___ mm num each foot meter removal of pavement marking square foot square meter num lump sum twoway radio equipment item num heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking num description num materials num equipment num application num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying heatfused preformed thermoplastic for use as auxiliary pavement markings according to item num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to heat fused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material num num equipment .
use manufacturer recommended equipment to apply the heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material according to the appropriate type as follows a .
type anum or type anum material .
num .
propane torch to heat the pavement and material according to num.b .
num .
infrared thermometer to assure that both the pavement and the material are properly heated and do not exceed the manufacturers specified application temperature .
b .
type bnum or type bnum material .
num .
propane torch for ensuring no moisture is present on the pavement and heating the material according to num.c .
num .
a thermometer is not required .
num application .
a .
general .
apply the heatfused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material to clean dry pavement surfaces according to the appropriate type unless otherwise directed by the manufacturers recommendation .
apply primer sealer on portland cement concrete pavements for proper adhesion only if the manufacturer requires its use .
form lines num inches num mm wide or less by one piece form lines wider than num inches num mm by no more than two pieces .
do not overlap individual pieces .
do not allow a gap greater than numinch num mm between pieces .
b .
type anum and type anum material application on asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pavements .
uniformly preheat the pavement to num f num c with a propane torch .
place the material on the warm surface as soon as practical then uniformly postheat to num f num c. begin the postheating process of material application as quickly as possible .
the contractor may have to extend postheating on concrete having a high moisture content .
allow the material to cool naturally and solidify before exposing it to traffic .
type anum and anum materials shall contain intermix beads throughout .
dropon glass beads are not required unless using a nonsurface beaded marking i.e .
for turn or combination arrows .
c. type bnum and type bnum material application on asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pavements .
heat the pavement only to ensure no moisture is present .
place the material on the dry surface and then uniformly heat the material until it bubbles and changes color to offwhite .
material must be able to be applied with no preheating of the pavement to a specified temperature and without the use of a thermometer .
allow the material to cool naturally and solidify before exposing it to traffic .
type bnum and bnum material shall contain intermix glass beads throughout .
dropon glass beads are not required unless using a nonsurface beaded marking i.e .
for turn or combination arrows .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot meter stop line type ___ num foot meter yield line type____ num foot meter crosswalk line type ___ num foot meter transversediagonal line type ____ num each handicap symbol marking type ___ num each railroad symbol marking type ___ num each school symbol marking ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num each bicycle lane symbol marking type____ num each shared lane marking num foot meter parking lot stall marking type ___ num each lane arrow type ___ num each word on a pavement ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___ mm type ___ num each foot removal of pavement marking square foot meter square meter item num spray thermoplastic pavement marking num description num materials num equipment num surface preparation num application num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying spray thermoplastic pavement markings according to item num num num num and the additional requirements specified below .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to spray thermoplastic pavement marking num glass beads type c num the engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment .
furnish the manufacturers identification information for the sampled materials .
the department will test the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturers production ranges .
samples not meeting the manufacturers production ranges will require the contractor to reapply at his expense any markings using that sample .
all other untested batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or reapplication .
do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturers shelf life .
do not use glass beads that are wet .
num equipment .
equip all spray thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line lane line and edge line markings with a computerized data logging system dls including a cab mounted display which shows the actual bead application rate .
for center line lane line and edge line markings applied with truckmounted equipment when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent document the following with the dls measure and record application vehicle speed to the nearest num mph num kmh .
measure and record pavement surface temperature .
measure and record air temperature .
measure and record spray thermoplastic temperature in the kettle and at the point of application .
record as a separate dls report line entry the above information for each route section painted when the length of marking exceeds num miles num km of continuous line equivalent .
a route section is defined as one direction of a contiguous section of highway without breaks with the same route number designation .
if the dls equipment fails finish that days work only and resume when the dls equipment is working .
the department will provide a standard dls spreadsheet which prescribes the correct dls report format and content prior to beginning of work .
each dls shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function and output confirmed by the dls manufacturer or their designated representative .
evidence of the annual calibration is shown by carrying a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the drivers door of each striper .
use application equipment that includes a kettle for melting the spray thermoplastic and maintaining it at the proper temperature .
equip the kettle with a thermostat to control the temperature of the melted spray thermoplastic and to prevent overheating .
use equipment that continuously mixes and agitates the molten spray thermoplastic .
ensure that the parts of the equipment that convey the spray thermoplastic from the kettle to the application point maintain it at the required temperature .
attach an automatic bead dispenser to the equipment so that the beads are immediately and uniformly dispensed over the marking surface .
equip the bead dispenser with an automatic cutoff control synchronized with the cut off of the spray thermoplastic material .
ensure that the application equipment applies lines with a square end and can apply broken lines .
furnish application equipment for applying spray thermoplastic markings that produces different widths of lines .
use equipment that ensures uniformity in the thickness and width of lines .
use equipment that forms lines num inches num mm wide or less by one application pass .
num surface preparation .
before applying spray thermoplastic the pavement surfaces must be clean dust free and completely dry .
test for moisture using the following test procedures if needed as directed by the engineer moisture test tape a num inch num mm square sheet of thin plastic to the road surface sealing all edges .
after num minutes examine the side of the sheet facing the road surface .
if more than a sparse amount of moisture is present do not apply spray thermoplastic .
apply spray thermoplastic to new pavement over existing thermoplastic or over one application of paint .
do not apply spray thermoplastic over epoxy polyester or preformed markings .
remove poorly adhering flaking and loose markings and curing compounds .
use an air blast or manual or mechanical broom to prepare surfaces .
when more effort is needed to obtain a surface free from adhering flaking and loose markings and curing compounds use water blasting or mechanical removal .
num application .
if applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than num f num c and rising .
however if applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months ensure that both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than num f num c and rising .
ensure that the temperature of spray thermoplastic at the point of application is at least num f num c and not more than num f num c. apply spray thermoplastic at a thickness of num mil num mm at the following rates num mil thickness line width inch num num num num pounds per mile of line solid line num num num num broken or dotted line num num num num num mm thickness line width mm num num num num kilogram per kilometer of line solid line num num num num broken or dotted line num num num num mechanically apply glass beads to the wet spray thermoplastic surface so that the beads are embedded and retained and provide uniform retroreflectivity in the surface .
apply beads at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet num kg per num m of spray thermoplastic surface area .
use primer when required by the manufacturer .
apply primer according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for each route section on the dls report the engineer will compute the amount of spray thermoplastic marking material and glass beads applied .
the department will reduce the contract price in direct proportion to the percent of deficiency of spray thermoplastic marking material or glass beads as specified in num up to num percent for each material deficiency .
the department will only use the greater deficiency of marking material or glass beads to compute the deduction .
if the deficiency of spray thermoplastic marking material or glass beads is num percent or more the department will consider the work unsatisfactory .
in addition the engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied outside the temperature or application requirements in num without written approval of the engineer .
replace or reapply spray thermoplastic markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory as determined by the engineer .
furnish the engineer daily biweekly and final dls reports conforming to num and additional reports indicating material type and quantities in pounds kilograms of spray thermoplastic materials used as per num .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for any spray thermoplastic lines that do not meet the required thickness .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices or prices adjusted according to num measured according to num with the provisions specified in num and as follows item unit description num mile kilometer edge line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer lane line ___ inch ___ mm num mile kilometer center line num foot meter channelizing line ___ inch ___ mm num foot meter dotted line ___ inch ___ mm num foot or square foot removal of pavement marking meter or square meter or each num lump sum twoway radio equipment num roadsides item num topsoil stockpiled num description num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of stripping topsoil from areas shown on the plans or from within the rightofway limits transporting and stockpiling topsoil at locations shown on the plans or at locations selected by the contractor with project approval .
num construction requirements .
remove all heavy grass weeds or other vegetation over the areas before stripping .
keep the topsoil separate from other excavated materials .
remove topsoil before beginning the regular excavation or embankment work in the area .
strip the topsoil to the depth shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure topsoil stockpiled by the number of cubic yards cubic meters completed and accepted measured from the removal areas .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for any removal of topsoil beyond the directed depth .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard topsoil stockpiled cubic meter item num placing stockpiled topsoil num description num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of hauling and spreading topsoil from stockpiles and preparing the surface .
num construction requirements .
prepare the surface according to num .
place and spread the topsoil according to num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure placing stockpiled topsoil by the number of cubic yards cubic meters completed and accepted in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard placing stockpiled topsoil cubic meter item num topsoil furnished and placed num description num materials num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and spreading topsoil and preparing the subgrade .
num materials .
furnish topsoil consisting of loose friable loamy material without admixture of subsoil or refuse .
for topsoil to be considered loamy ensure that the fraction passing the no .
num num mm sieve does not contain more than num percent clay .
furnish topsoil consisting of not less than num percent and not more than num percent organic matter as determined by loss on ignition of samples oven dried to constant weight at num f num c. test topsoil according to aashto t num .
furnish topsoil that is free of grass brush and roots .
num construction requirements .
before placing any topsoil prepare all areas to be covered with topsoil according to num .
place the topsoil according to num .
when seeding is specified open the topsoil up to receive the seed .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure compacted topsoil furnished and placed by the number of cubic yards cubic meters accepted in place .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard topsoil furnished and placed cubic meter item num renovating existing soil num description num materials num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of preparing a suitable seedbed by grading and renovating existing soil and furnishing and placing commercial fertilizer if specified .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
use commercial fertilizer conforming to num .
num construction requirements .
prepare the surface area for seed according to num .
if the contract documents require commercial fertilizer place it according to num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure renovating existing soil by the number of m square feet square meters completed and accepted .
the department will measure commercial fertilizer by the number of tons kilograms completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num m square feet renovating existing soil square meter num ton kilogram commercial fertilizer item num roadside cleanup num description num intensity of cleanup num cleaning num pruning num disposal of refuse num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of cleaning up outside the excavated and filled areas and disposing of undesirable plants and other vegetative growth prunings rubbish stumps conspicuous stones all down timber dead brush logs and timbers felling and destroying of all snags and such dangerous trees and pruning trees native shrubs and similar vegetation but does not include work to be performed under item num .
num intensity of cleanup .
control the intensity of cleanup to effect a natural transition in cleanup treatment from the edge of the pavement outward to the limits of the rightofway to avoid sharp demarcation between the artificial and the natural .
num cleaning .
after removal of large objects clean the designated areas with grubbing rakes or wide spaced tooth rakes .
do not disturb or injure desirable grass vines or wild flowers .
num pruning .
prune trees num inches num mm or less in diameter and native shrubs and similar vegetation according to item num .
consider the diameter of existing trees to be the diameter measured at num inches num m above the ground .
num disposal of refuse .
use removed materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure roadside cleanup by the number of m square feet square meters cleaned up and accepted .
the department will determine the boundaries of the area to be cleaned up and the number of units .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num m square feet roadside cleanup square meter item num riprap for tree protection num description num materials num tree wells in fill num walls in cut num handlaid stone riprap num earthwork num pipe drains num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing riprap for protecting selected trees or shrubs by tree wells and retaining walls .
num materials .
furnish stone consisting of sandstone limestone or other natural rock with a maximum num percent single slab loss and a maximum num percent cumulative loss after testing to astm d num .
use an num inch slab test sample .
the department may waive testing when the stone source has a known durability history .
furnish embankment according to item num .
unless otherwise specified use numinch num mm pipe conforming to num type e conduits .
num tree wells in fill .
where a fill around a tree or shrub not marked for removal will be num inches num m or more in depth over the feeding root area or ground surface lying within the periphery of the tree construct a dry handlaid stone riprap tree well .
construct a wall of the same height as the fill circling the tree or shrub and num num feet num m from the tree trunk or as specified .
construct the wall so that the top of the wall follows the contour on the finished grade in a neat line .
construct tree wells before placing the fill over the root area .
however the contractor may bring up the fill with the wall after required aggregate for root aeration is in place according to item num .
num walls in cut .
where the top of the slope in cut is within num feet num m of the trunk of a tree not marked for removal construct a dry handlaid stone riprap wall .
toe the bottom of the wall into the ground num inches num mm unless otherwise shown on the plans and make the top of the wall even with the original ground line at the base of the tree .
extend the length of the wall far enough from the tree to amply cover the roots or according to the shape and size as shown on the plans .
flare the ends of the wall back and taper or fade them out into the finished grade of the slope in a neat line .
num handlaid stone riprap .
construct the earth bed on which riprap is to be placed to a slope of num foot num mm vertical to num inches num mm horizontal .
dress the earth bed to a true plane .
where riprap is to rest against a fill tamp the embankment against the back of the stone .
construct riprap for walls or wells according to the arrangements and dimensions shown on the plans .
lay each course with the long dimensions of each stone perpendicular to the slope or batter .
use individual stones that are roughly rectangular in crosssection and are a minimum of num inches num mm in the vertical depth with a horizontal dimension of not less than num inches num m. place the individual stones by hand one upon the other so that they break joints with the stone in the course below .
where it is necessary to use more than one stone to provide the specified thickness or depth of the wall thereby resulting in joints parallel to the face of the wall place such stones to break joints with the adjacent stones .
fill the space between the larger stones with spalls rammed into place .
ensure that the surface of the finished riprap does not vary more than num inches num mm from that shown on the plans and that it presents an even tight surface pleasing in appearance .
num earthwork .
perform excavation and embankment as necessary according to item num .
num pipe drains .
drain tree wells with pipe starting on the original ground surface and lay to drain beyond the toe of the fill .
install pipe for drains according to item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure riprap for tree protection by the number of square yards square meters in place completed and accepted .
the department will measure parallel to the face of the wells or walls .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for embankment and excavation under item num and the pipe for drains under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price for as follows item unit description num square yard riprap for tree protection square meter item num tree root aeration num description num materials num preparation num aeration for trees not welled num aeration with tree wells num earth embankment num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing the necessary aggregate and tile for the protection and aeration of the roots of trees and shrubs .
use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications if not then recycle or dispose of the material according to num and num .
num materials .
furnish aggregate for tree root aeration and protection consisting of no .
num or num limestone or gravel with a maximum sodium soundness loss of num percent .
furnish numinch num mm pipe conforming to num type e conduit .
furnish embankment conforming to item num .
num preparation .
the feeding root area to be protected and aerated is the ground surface area lying within the periphery of the tree or shrub not marked for removal .
prepare these areas by excavating all vegetation wood brush and debris .
num aeration for trees not welled .
where the earth fill is less than num inches num mm and more than num inches num mm over the feeding root area loosely spread an aggregate aeration course of onehalf the height of fill but not less than num inches num mm over this area .
at the tree trunk increase the thickness to the height of the fill and extend it outward from the tree trunk in collar form for a distance of num inches num m. place a numinch num mm layer of straw or hay over the aggregate .
num aeration with tree wells .
place an aeration course of aggregate while constructing the tree wells and before any other filling .
do not place any aggregate inside the tree well between the wall and the tree trunk .
place the aggregate over the entire feeding root area outside of the tree wells to a total depth of num inches num mm for each num inches num mm of earth fill or proportion thereof but place a minimum depth of num inches num mm regardless of depth of overlying fill .
place a numinch num mm layer of straw or hay over the aeration layer .
num earth embankment .
perform excavation and embankment as necessary according to item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure tree root aeration by the number of cubic yards cubic meters measured in the carrier or truck according to num of the aggregate furnished placed completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for embankment and excavation under item num and the pipe under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num cubic yard tree root aeration cubic meter item num seeding and mulching num description num testing of soil or topsoil num lime num commercial fertilizer num topsoil num compost num seeds num legumes num native grasses and wildflowers num site preparation num placing topsoil num seeding methods num mulching operation num straw mulch num wood fiber mulch num compost mulch num watering num maintenance num mowing num repair seeding and mulching num interseeding num fertilization numnd application num performances num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of placing topsoil preparing the seed bed and placing and incorporating seed agricultural lime commercial fertilizer and placing mulching material used to achieve npdes final stabilization .
perform this work in areas shown on the plans for seeding and mulching .
perform seeding and mulching after completing all work in the area and within num days of obtaining final grade .
if it is anticipated that future work may disturb an area place temporary npdes compliant best management practices as needed until final stabilization measures under this item can be installed .
if the contractor disturbs a final area then the contractor shall restore this area .
with the engineers approval the contractor may apply permanent seed between october num and march num on projects started and completed within the same calendar year .
use all excavation material in the work .
alternatively legally use recycle or dispose of all excavated materials according to num and num .
num testing of soil or topsoil .
when a soil analysis test of the soil or topsoil is required in the plans use the following sampling frequency to determine the lime required a .
when an area is near final grade perform standard soil analysis test to measure the soil acidity or alkalinity ph if no topsoil is to be placed .
this testing will determine the soil requirements for lime .
if the soil requirements are different than the standard lime mixture ratio application rates then the standard application rate shall be adjusted up or down such that the soil requirements are met .
if liquid lime is used then use the following application table to achieve a ph of num or greater .
calculate the difference between the soil ph and num ph .
ph difference num num num num application rate in galsac lha num num num num num num num num example soil analysis test phnum required phnum difference num required application rate is num galsac numlha only use liquid lime on the qpl list .
provide the engineer with the liquid lime manufacturers written application rate .
the engineer will only accept printed application rates .
there will be no change in the mixture ratio .
the sampling frequency is one sample every num acres num ha per project side or one sample per project side whichever is greater .
a sample consist of num soil cores in a random pattern spaced at a minimum of num feet num m apart .
sample any change in soil .
soil changes can be seen as color andor texture changes .
b .
if placing topsoil perform the standard soil analysis test from topsoil stockpiles to measure the topsoil acidity or alkalinity ph .
this testing will determine the soil requirements for lime .
if the topsoil requirements are different than the standard lime mixture ratio application rates then the standard application rate shall be adjusted up or down such that the topsoil requirements are met .
if liquid lime is used then use the following application table to achieve a ph of num or greater .
calculate the difference between the soil ph and num ph .
ph difference num num num num application rate in galsac lha num num num num num num num num example soil analysis test phnum required phnum difference num required application rate is num galsac numlha only use liquid lime on the qpl list .
provide the engineer with the liquid lime manufacturers written application rate .
the engineer will only accept printed application rates .
there will be no change in the mixture ratio .
the sampling frequency is one sample every num cubic yards num mnum of a topsoil stockpile or at least two samples per stock pile whichever is greater .
test each stockpile .
a sample consisting of num soil cores in a random pattern spaced evenly throughout the stockpile .
mix the num cores from each sample and then remove num pint num l for testing .
the ohio county extension offices can provide the contractor with a soil sample kit and testing laboratory locations .
the department will review the sample test results and approve application rates for the standard mixture ratios provided by the contractor .
if a soil analysis test of the soil is not required by the plans use the standard application rates for lime and commercial fertilizer .
num lime .
obtain granular or liquid lime from a agricultural lime dealer or manufacturer whose brands are grades registered or licensed by the state of ohio department of agriculture .
the granular or liquid lime standard grade is agground num .
agground num is defined as agricultural ground limestone having a total neutralizing power tnp of num percent or more at least num percent passing a no .
num num m sieve and num percent passing a no .
num num mm sieve .
test granular or liquid lime according to supplement num .
apply the granular or liquid lime standard grade agground num at the standard application rate of num pounds per num square feet num tons per acre num kgmnum num metric tonsha .
the contractor may provide other lime grade materials .
the lime grade materials provided will meet table num equivalent amounts of liming materials found in bulletin num ohio agronomy guide published by the cooperative extension service the ohio state university .
based on the type of lime grade material provided determine the increase or decrease in the standard application rate from table num equivalent amounts of liming materials found in bulletin num ohio agronomy guide published by the cooperative extension service the ohio state university .
if using liquid lime apply liquid lime at a rate of num galsacre num lha unless otherwise required per the soil or topsoil soil analysis test .
provide the engineer with the liquid lime manufacturers written application rate .
the engineer will only accept printed application rates .
only use liquid lime on the qpl list .
if testing of the soil or topsoil was performed the lime required will be such that a growing environment of slightly acidic ph num can be reached .
the application rate of the standard grade lime agground num will be adjusted up or down to achieve this condition and reported to the department for approval .
no lime is required for the soil or topsoil if the test shows a slightly acidic condition .
num commercial fertilizer .
obtain commercial fertilizer from a dealer or manufacturer whose brands are grades registered or licensed by the state of ohio department of agriculture .
commercial fertilizer may be dry or liquid .
apply standard commercial fertilizer num evenly over the surface at a standard dry application rate of num pounds per num square feet num kgmnum .
furnish liquid application rates for approval by the department .
the contractor may provide other commercial fertilizer mixture ratios however ensure that the ratio meets or exceeds the standard commercial fertilizer ratio of num by providing an application rate specific for that ratio .
the department will approve this application rate that is specific to that ratio provided by the contractor .
for areas of interseeding apply commercial fertilizer num over the affected area at the above rate .
for commercial fertilizer second application the method mixture and rate is broadcast num evenly over the surface without incorporation into the soil at a rate of num pounds per num square feet num kgmnum .
num topsoil .
if placing topsoil as specified in the plan then stockpile off project site topsoil for testing andor stockpile stripped topsoil from the project for testing .
perform the soil analysis test from these stockpiles to determine the percent of organic matter present .
the topsoil shall contain between num percent and num percent organic matter as determined by loss on ignition of samples oven dried to constant weight at num f num c and consist of fertile loose friable and loamy material that contains humus material .
for topsoil to be considered loamy ensure that the fraction passing the no .
num num sieve does not contain more than num percent clay .
test topsoil according to aashto t num .
the department will review the sample test results and approve the stockpiles for use .
stockpiles outside the above limits will not be used .
stripped topsoil from the rw limits will be from the upper most layers of the excavation areas .
remove all heavy grass weeds and other vegetation before stripping topsoil from the excavation areas .
a mixture of num part compost and num parts topsoil will be treated as topsoil .
num compost .
acceptable compost shall include ohio epa rated class iv compost eqs biosolids compost or a department approved equal .
furnish compost with a nitrogen content of num percent or above .
obtain compost from an ohio epa approved facility .
before delivering compost provide the engineer with the facility name and location .
num seeds .
furnish grass seed from a grass seed dealer or grower whose brands are grades registered or licensed by the state of ohio department of agriculture or from the approved list of grass seed dealers or growers on file with department .
furnish the kind and type of grass seed required that meets current specifications on file with the department as to percentage purity percentage weed seed and percentage germination .
turf grass germination rates specifications are shown below in table num to provide an understanding of the specifications on file with the department along with information to understand what is required .
table num germination rates species minimum percent high quality percent kentucky bluegrass num num fine fescue num num perennial ryegrass num num annual ryegrass num num tall fescue num num creeping red fescue num num if high quality is not shown on the plans then the minimum germination rate is required .
mark the test date on seed bags .
furnish seeds as separate species and cultivars packaged together or bagged separately and labeled tagged or marked according to orc num .
sow seeds within num months of the testing date .
the department reserves the right to test reject or approve all seed after delivery .
num legumes .
inoculate or treat all leguminous seeds crown vetch with the proper amount of pure nitrogenfixing bacteria and mix with sufficient water to thoroughly wet the seed .
the bacteria selected will be for maximum vitality and shall not be more than oneyear old .
all culture records will be provided with the leguminous seeds .
if sown hydraulically use num times the inoculant rate specified by the inoculant manufacturer .
if preinoculated seed is used then use num times the inoculant rate specified by the inoculant manufacturer .
immediately before seeding add inoculant and sticking agent directly into the slurry and thoroughly mix the slurry .
sow seed as soon as possible after inoculation .
if left standing for more than num hours reinoculate seed before sowing .
mix all seed on the project .
sixty days before seeding provide a written description for the class numc mixture showing the percentage by weight mass of each kind of seed for the engineers approval .
include the following with the description a .
name and location of the seed supplier .
b .
origin and date of harvest of each kind of seed .
c. a statement of the purity and germination of each seed .
d. testing date for each seed .
e. how and when seeds were mixed .
num native grasses and wildflowers .
table num lists the seed quantities by weight per area .
use classes num num and num in the amounts of pure live seed pls for each species listed .
if seed tests show that the seed has an actual pure live seed pls yield less than the intended yield adjust the specified quantity to provide the intended pls yields .
for class num num and num mixtures provide seed specifically grown for the ohio climate .
use cool season turf classes num num numa and numb as listed in table num composed of no less than two and no more than four cultivars of the same species .
sixty days before seeding provide a written description for the class num num and numa mixtures showing the percentage by weight mass of each kind of seed for the engineers approval .
mix all seed on the project .
sixty days before seeding provide a written description for the classes num num numa numb num num and num mixtures showing the percentage by weight mass of each kind of seed for the engineers approval .
include the following with the description a .
name and location of the seed supplier .
b .
origin and date of harvest of each kind of seed .
c. a statement of the purity and germination of each seed .
d. testing date for each seed .
e. how and when seeds were mixed .
table num grass and wildflower seed mixes class mix type seeds weight per area lb kg num ftnum num mnum num lawn mixture use for areas in front of residences commercial properties etc .
between curb and sidewalk with slopes num or flatter .
kentucky bluegrass poa pratensis num num creeping red fescue festuca rubra num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num class mix type seeds weight per area lb kg num ftnum num mnum perennial ryegrass turf type lolium perenne num num num roadside mixture kentucky bluegrass poa pratensis num num kentucky num fescue festuca arundinacea var .
ky num num num perennial ryegrass lolium perenne num num numa slope mixtures use for slopes flatter than or equal to num .
use class num numb numc or numb mixtures numb low growing slope mixture use for slopes steeper than num when low growing species are required hard fescue festuca longifolia num num creeping red fescue festuca rubra num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num numc crown vetch mixture use for slopes steeper than num and shale or rock slopes .
crown vetch coronilla varia num num perennial ryegrass lolium perenne num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num numa native grass mixture use for slopes flatter than num and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation .
big bluestem andropogon gerardii num num indiangrass sorghastrum nutans num num switchgrass panicum virgatum num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum spring fall num num num num numb low growing native grass mixture use for slopes flatter than num and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation when low growing species are required .
little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num num sideoats grama bouteloua curtipendula num num prairie dropseed sporobolus heterolepis num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum spring fall num num num num numa annual and perennial wildflower mixture use for slopes flatter than num and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation .
annual mixture do not exceed num by weight of any one of the following species num num corn poppy papaver rhoeas cosmos cosmos bipinnatus yellow cosmos cosmos sulphureus cornflower centaurea cyanus rocket larkspur delphinium ajacis indian blanket gaillardia pulchella perennial wildflower mixture do not exceed num by weight pls of any one of the following species num num class mix type seeds weight per area lb kg num ftnum num mnum blackeyed susan rudbekia hirta purple coneflower echinacea purpurea lanceleaved coreopsis coreopsis lanceolata numb native wildflower and grass mixture use for slopes flatter than num and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation .
native wildflower mixture do not exceed num by weight pls of any one of the following species num num butterflyweed asclepias tuberosa new england aster aster novaeangliae partridge pea cassia fasciculata purple coneflower echinacea purpurea rattlesnake master eryngium yuccifolium oxeye sunflower heliopsis helianthoides wild bergamot monarda fistulosa greyhead coneflower ratibida pinnata orange coneflower rudbekia fulgida prairie dock silphium terebinthinaceum whorled rosinweed silphium trifoliatum stiff goldenrod solidago rigida grass mixture big bluestem andropogon gerardii num num little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num num indiangrass sorghastrum nutans num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num wildlife mixture use for slopes flatter than num and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation .
big bluestem andropogon gerardii num num little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num num indiangrass sorghastrum nutans num num oxeye sunflower heliopsis helianthoides num num prairie dock silphium terebinthinaceum num num purple coneflower echinacea purpurea num num whorled rosinweed silphium trifoliatum num num downy sunflower helianthus mollis num num new england aster aster novaeangliae num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum spring fall num num num num num temporary erosion control mixture annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num site preparation .
before placing topsoil or seed remove rock or other foreign material of num inches num mm or greater in any dimension from all areas except as listed below .
a .
remove stones numinch num mm or greater in any dimension from all seed areas from in front of residences commercial properties etc .
between curb and sidewalks or as shown on the plans .
b .
remove nothing in shale cuts but allow the shale to deteriorate to a soil type surface before seeding or placing topsoil .
finish the area in such a manner that seeding place sod planting or placing topsoil can proceed without additional soil preparation .
apply commercial fertilizer lime or other soil amendments including compost to the soil or topsoil surface in separate operations .
incorporate the commercial fertilizer granular lime or other soil amendments including compost either separately or together into the soil or topsoil to a depth of num to num inches num to num mm .
do not mix liquid lime into the soil or topsoil .
only apply liquid lime to the top of the soil or topsoil .
furnish a smooth surface for the seed or topsoil by tracking with a dozer or by other methods .
if the site is inaccessible to a dozer and other methods do not provide results equivalent to hand raking hand rake these areas .
ensure that the surface is uniform free of gullies rivulets crusting and caking .
finely grade the surface for seed or topsoil for slopes num or flatter and grade all other slopes .
rake or open the surface with a dozer cleats or otherwise loosen the surface of these areas to a depth of num inch num mm immediately before covering with topsoil .
remove raked up material from the area .
num placing topsoil .
if shown on the plans place topsoil in loose lifts that construct a numinch num mm compacted depth .
the surface of the topsoil shall be such that the final grade as shown on the crosssections is met .
use the following methods or combination of any of the methods to produce the required space to place the topsoil .
a .
the num items can be cut or placed to the final grade which will match the plan quantities for items num and then remove a numinch num mm thickness for the topsoil .
b .
the num items can be cut or placed to a numinch num mm height below the final grade .
there will be no change from the plan quantities in the num items for this method .
track the area with a dozer to compact and provide good contact between the topsoil and the surface .
the contractor may place topsoil by using pneumatic or hydraulic methods .
if using pneumatic or hydraulic methods to place the topsoil the contractor may place the top numinch num mm with a mix of seed commercial fertilizer lime and other soils amendments .
this mixture will be num part compost and num parts topsoil .
do not apply mulch to this surface .
the compost is the mulch .
num seeding methods .
apply seed to prepared areas .
if the prepared areas to be seeded become compacted before seeding loosen the surface using disks rakes or other methods .
thoroughly mix all seed and evenly sow the seed over the prepared areas at the required rates .
do not sow seed during high winds .
for slopes subject to windy conditions seed using hydraulic methods only .
operate equipment in a manner to ensure complete coverage of the entire area to be seeded .
if broadcast seeding seed classes num num numa and numb between august num to october num .
if necessary to seed classes num num numa or numb before august num but after march num increase the seeding rates by num percent .
between march num and october num the contractor may use hydro seeding which applies the mulch seed water and commercial fertilizer in the same operation for classes num num numa numb numc and num .
between october num and march num apply temporary seed according to supplemental specification num .
with the engineers approval the contractor may apply permanent seed between october num and march num on projects started and completed within the same calendar year .
seed before or concurrently with all required erosion control items .
do not apply crown vetch seed from september num to october num .
wildflower classes num and num seed from september numto october num unless the engineer allows seeding from march num to may num .
seed class num wildflowers from march num to may num .
seed native grasses and wildflowers in classes num num and num with a rangeland type slit seeder or native seed grass drill .
seed native grasses with no less than two passes in different directions and by equally splitting the seed application rate to each pass .
use broadcast seeding along with cultipacking or rolling only with the engineers approval .
if broadcast seeding perform the following immediately after sowing to provide good seedsoil contact a .
for flat surfaces lightly rake the area then roll .
b .
for slopes track the area with a dozer .
num mulching operation .
mulch materials consist of straw compost or wood fiber for num or flatter slopes .
the contractor may specify which mulch to use if it is not shown on the plans .
use mulch that is reasonably free of weed seed foreign materials or other materials that would prohibit seed germination .
do not mulch during high winds .
for slopes subject to windy conditions mulch using hydraulic methods only .
within num hours after seeding an area evenly place mulch .
immediately replace mulch that becomes displaced .
num straw mulch .
straw mulch consists of straw .
evenly place straw mulch over all seeded areas at the following rates seeding period rate from march num to october num num tons per acre num metric tonnum mnum from october num to march num num tons per acre num metric tonnum mnum keep straw mulching materials in place by applying an asphalt emulsion at a minimum rate of num gallons per ton num lmetric ton of straw mulch or by applying tackifiers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
apply an additional application at a rate of num gallons per ton num lmetric ton of straw mulch to shoulder areas starting at the berm edge and extending out for a distance of num feet num m. use an emulsion that is nontoxic to plants and prepared in a manner that will not change during transportation or storage .
num wood fiber mulch .
wood fiber mulch consists of pure wood fibers manufactured expressly from clean wood chips .
ensure that the chips do not contain lead paint varnish printing ink and petroleum based compounds .
do not use wood fiber mulch manufactured from recycled materials of unknown origin such as sawdust paper cardboard or residue from chlorinebleached pulp and paper mills .
ensure that the wood fiber mulch maintains uniform suspension in water under agitation and blends with grass seed commercial fertilizer and other additives to form a homogeneous slurry .
use manufacturerapproved tackifiers .
using standard hydraulic mulching equipment evenly apply the slurry over the soil surface in a onestep operation .
apply slurry from march num to october num at the following rates surface rate slopes num or flatter num pounds per num square feet num kgnum mnum num compost mulch .
the contractor may provide compost applied to a minimum depth of numinch num mm over the prepared seed areas .
the contractor may also mix the grass seed with the compost and using pneumatic equipment place this mixture to a minimum depth of numinch num mm over the prepared seed areas .
if using compost no tackifiers or asphalt emulsion are required .
num watering .
thoroughly water all permanent seeded areas classes num to num after the seed has germinated .
apply a total rate of num gallons per num square feet num mnum mnum in at least num applications spread over num days .
apply the water using a hydroseeder or a water tank under pressure with a nozzle that produces a spray that will not dislodge the mulch material .
perform a secondary water application between num and num days after the primary applications .
if numinch num mm or greater of rainfall has occurred within the first numday period the contractor may delay or omit the secondary application depending on weather conditions .
num maintenance .
maintain all seeded and mulched areas until final inspection .
repair damaged areas to the original condition and grade .
num mowing .
the engineer may require mowing before permanent seeding and during the growing season following permanent seeding .
the engineer will notify the contractor of when to begin each mowing .
use suitable mowing equipment of the rotary flail disk or sickle type .
use handheld equipment where inacessible by larger equipment .
do not bunch or windrow mowed vegetation .
mow to a final cutting height of no less than num inches num mm .
if necessary to achieve the cutting height make more than one pass with the mower .
num repair seeding and mulching .
repair all damage or erosion of the seeded and mulched areas before the completion of the project .
rework or reshape slopes and bring in additional material as necessary using whatever equipment is necessary to restore slopes to grade .
seed and mulch repaired areas according to this specification .
as an alternative the contractor may apply compost to repair areas as specified in item num .
num interseeding .
interseeding is seeding existing thin and spotty growing turf using a slit or drill type seeder .
perform interseeding only from march num to may num and from september num to october num .
if necessary to achieve good seedsoil contact mow before seeding according to item num .
for seeding steep slopes or inaccessible areas the contractor may use broadcast or hydraulic seeding methods .
broadcast commercial fertilizer over affected areas as specified in item num .
water affected areas at the rate specified in num to aid in seedsoil contact .
num fertilization numnd application .
once all repair seeding and mulching and interseeding is complete and no earlier than num months after seeding perform a soil analysis test if shown on the plans to determine the need for a second application of commercial fertilizer .
do not apply the second application of commercial fertilizer unless the grass has germinated .
broadcast commercial fertilizer of num evenly over the surface without incorporation at a rate of num pounds per num square feet num kgmnum .
num performance .
the department will inspect all seeded areas no earlier than num months and no later than num months after final seeding .
for any area identified without a uniform density of at least num percent grass cover repair seeding and mulching as specified in num or perform interseeding as specified in num and fertilize as specified in this subsection .
also repair seeding and mulching or perform interseeding and fertilize seeded areas damaged by traffic or erosion due to no fault or negligence of the contractor .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure soil analysis test by the number of tests submitted to the engineer .
the department will measure the compacted topsoil by the number of cubic yards cubic meters .
the department will measure commercial fertilizer by the number of tons kilograms of each quantity of furnished spread and incorporated into the soil or topsoil .
this measure will be converted to the standard application rate for the standard mixture ratio .
the department will measure lime or liquid lime by the number of acres ha furnished spread and incorporated into the soil or topsoil .
the measure will be converted to the standard application rate for the standard mixture ratio .
the department will measure seeding and mulching by the number of square yards square meters .
the department will measure repair seeding and mulching by the number of square yards square meters of damaged or eroded areas reshaped seeded and mulched .
if compost is substituted for mulch to repair areas the department will include such work under repair seeding and mulching .
the department will measure water by the number of m gallons or num gallon units cubic meters applied .
the department will measure water in tanks tank wagons or trucks of predetermined capacity or by means of meters of a type satisfactory to the engineer and furnished and installed by the contractor at expense to the department or determined by weight conversion .
the department will measure interseeding by the number of square yards square meters of the seeded area .
the department will measure mowing by the number of m square feet square meters satisfactorily mowed .
if seeded areas are damaged by traffic or erosion due to no fault or negligence of the contractor the department will measure for such work and mobilization by supplemental agreement .
the department will not measure for repairs to seeding and mulching if damage or erosion of the areas occurs as a result of fault or negligence of the contractor .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay the plan quantity for compacted topsoil .
the department will not adjust topsoil quantities when the volume between two consecutive crosssections differs by less than num percent from the plan quantity unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan quantity is greater than num cubic yards num m .
for quantity differences greater than num percent or greater than num cubic yards num m submit supporting documentation to the engineer .
the department will pay the plan quantity for seeding and mulching .
the department will not adjust seeding and mulching quantities when the area between two consecutive crosssections differs by less than num percent from the plan quantity unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan quantity is greater than num square yards num m for all seeding and mulching pay items combined .
for quantity differences greater than num percent or greater than num square yards num m submit supporting documentation to the engineer .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows mnum item unit description num each soil analysis test num cubic yard topsoil cubic meter num ton kilogram commercial fertilizer num acres ha lime num square yard seeding and mulching square meter num square yard seeding and mulching for wildlife square meter num square yard seeding and mulching class ___ square meter num square yard repair seeding and mulching square meter num m gallons water cubic meters num square yard interseeding square meter num m square feet mowing square meter item num sodding num description num materials num lifting sod num preparation of areas to be sodded num placing sod on slopes num to num or flatter num placing sod on slopes steeper than num to num but flatter than num to num num placing sod in ditches num placing reinforced sod on slopes num to num or steeper num watering num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing hauling excavating for and preparing the bed and placing sod .
num materials .
furnish sod consisting of wellrooted kentucky blue grass poa pratensis or canadian blue grass poa compressa containing a growth of not more than num percent of other grasses and clovers and free from all noxious weeds such as wild mustard thistles quack grass and johnson grass and reasonably free from dandelions and crab grass .
ensure that all sod is certified by the sod supplier that it complies with this item .
ensure that the sod was recently mowed to a height of not more than num inches num mm .
furnish a certificate with each shipment and furnish the following additional information from the sod supplier a .
the name of the producer .
b .
the amount of sod shipped in square yards square meters .
c. the location of sod field .
d. the location of job site .
e. the date sod was cut .
f. the thickness the sod was cut .
furnish wood stakes that are at least num num num inches num num num mm .
furnish tpins that are numinch num mm in length and  inch num mm in diameter and have a numinch num mm tee .
furnish round pins that are numinch num mm in length and  inch num mm in diameter and have a numinch num mm washer .
furnish galvanized poultry netting num inches num mm wide with numinch num mm mesh and no .
num gage minimum wire .
furnish fertilizer and lime according to item num .
furnish sod materials according to the departments qualified product list qpl .
num lifting sod .
furnish sod strips that are not less than num feet num m and not over num feet num m in length with a uniform width of not over num inches num m. furnish sod strips that lay flat on skids .
the contractor may elect to deliver sod rolls of up to num feet num m in length .
furnish sod rolls that are prerolled on skids .
furnish sod cut to a depth equal to the growth of the fibrous roots but in no case less than num inch num mm .
deliver sod to the job within num hours after being cut and install it within num hours after being cut .
during wet weather allow the sod to dry sufficiently to prevent tearing during handling and placing .
during dry weather water the sod before lifting to ensure its vitality and to prevent the dropping off of the soil in handling .
num preparation of areas to be sodded .
before placing the sod excavate the sod bed to a depth that when the sod is in place the top of the sod is flush with the surrounding grade and conforms to the typical cross section .
if specified place the topsoil according to item num .
if specified under item num apply commercial fertilizer and agricultural liming material .
incorporate these materials in the areas to be sodded at the rate specified in num and num to a depth of not less than num inch num mm .
incorporate these materials within num hours prior to placing the sod .
immediately before placing the sod rake the area or otherwise bring it to an even surface forming a proper sod bed .
if the area is dry thoroughly water the sod bed .
num placing sod on slopes num to num or flatter .
do not place any sod when the temperature is below num f num c. do not place any frozen sod and do not place any sod upon frozen soil .
when placing sod between june num and october num cover it immediately with straw mulch num inch num mm thick loose measurement .
lift sod from trucks or storage piles and place it by hand with close joints and no overlapping .
plug all gaps between sections of sod and openings at angles with sod .
after laying thoroughly water the sod and tamp the sod with approved sod tampers sufficiently to bring the sod into close contact with the sodbed and to ensure tight joints between the sections or strips .
upon placing the sod ensure that the surface of the sodded areas coincides with the finished grade .
num placing sod on slopes steeper than num to num but flatter than num to num .
place sod on slopes steeper than num to num but flatter than num to num according to num with the following modifications .
lay sod with the long edges of the strip parallel to the contour starting at the bottom of the slope .
neatly match successive strips and stagger all joints by at least num inches nummm .
for sod placed num feet num m or greater in height measured along the slope stake each strip or roll securely along all sides with stakes not more than num feet num m apart with the flat side against the slope or with pins not more than num feet num m apart .
drive the wooden stakes so that the last num inch num mm remains above the top of the sod .
drive pins num inch num mm below the top of the grass .
after laying thoroughly water the sod and tamp the sod with approved tampers sufficiently to bring the sod into close contact with the sodbed and to ensure tight joints between the sections or strips .
num placing sod in ditches .
place sod in ditches according to num with the following modifications .
place sod in ditches with joints staggered at least num inches num mm .
stake each strip or roll securely along all sides with wooden stakes not more than num feet num m apart with the flat side against the slope .
drive the wooden stakes so that the last num inch num mm remains above the top of the sod .
num placing reinforced sod on slopes num to num or steeper .
place reinforced sod on slopes num to num or steeper or as specified in the plans according to num with the following modifications .
before placing the sod place the galvanized poultry netting or equivalent .
stake the galvanized poultry netting or equivalent securely to the subgrade by using pins or wood stakes .
place the pins or wooden stakes at num foot numm intervals .
fasten the netting to the wooden stakes with staples .
where the sod width is from num to num feet num to num m wide the engineer will allow two strands of netting for a total width of num feet num m. for sod stake each strip or roll securely along all sides with wooden stakes not more than num feet num m apart with the flat side against the slope or with pins not more than num feet num m apart .
drive the wooden stakes so that the last num inch num mm remains above the top of the sod .
drive pins num inch nummm below the top of the grass .
num watering .
keep all sodded areas thoroughly moist for num days after sodding .
repair any areas damaged following installation .
ensure that sod is in place for at least num days before final acceptance .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure sodding unstaked sodding staked and sodding reinforced by the actual number of square yards square meters of area sodded completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
if required the department will pay for topsoil liming and fertilizing under item num .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard sodding unstaked square meter num square yard sodding staked square meter num square yard sodding reinforced square meter item num planting trees shrubs perennials and vines num description num plant materials num location and source of supply num transportation storage and handling num labeling num acceptance num scheduling num layout of plant materials num backfill mix num planting num mulch num wrapping num bracing num period of establishment num final acceptance num removal of stakes and wrapping num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing planting and maintaining trees shrubs perennials and vines described in the plans .
additionally provide landscape watering according to item num .
num plant materials .
plant materials include all trees shrubs perennial and vines and plants required as part of the work .
provide plant materials that are healthy specimens typical of their species or variety and that exhibit a normal habit of growth as set forth in the most current edition of the american standard for nursery stock ansi znum .
num location and source of supply .
supply the engineer with complete and detailed information concerning the source of supply for each item of required plant material within num days after receiving the notice of award of the contract .
ensure that all plant materials have been grown in the same hardiness zone or num zone colder than the project .
num transportation storage and handling .
transport all plants from nursery sources to the project site with the entire load completely covered for protection from drying winds .
thoroughly water all plants that can not be immediately planted so as to keep the roots in a continually moist and protected condition .
the engineer may reject plants that are not adequately protected during transportation and storage .
immediately remove all rejected plant materials from the project site .
handle all plant materials by the root ball or container .
num labeling .
attach legible labels to all specimens or boxes bundles and other containers indicating detailed information including but not limited to the botanical genus and the species name the common name the size or age of each species or variety and the quantity contained in the individual bundles or boxes .
remove all labels no more than two weeks prior to the completion of the establishment period .
notify the engineer prior to removing the plant material labels .
num acceptance .
prior to acceptance by the engineer notify the engineer when plant materials are delivered to the project site .
ensure that the plant species delivered are as described in the plans and are healthy vigorous and free from harmful plant diseases and insect pests .
species substitutions must have written approval from the project engineer prior to delivery to the project .
do not install any plant materials until the engineer provides the contractor with notification that the plant materials have been accepted .
num scheduling .
install all plant materials after march num and before june num or after september num and before november num .
do not install plant materials in frozen or saturated soil conditions .
ensure a sufficient water supply is available to satisfy the requirements of the plant materials and item num .
num layout of plant materials .
before installation use suitable staking to lay out the locations of all planting holes and beds .
provide the engineer with a scaled drawing that indicates the location species and size of plant materials required in the plan .
obtain the engineers approval of these locations before installation .
num backfill mix .
for all plantings use backfill mix consisting of the following a .
one part soil .
b .
one part sphagnum peat moss shredded pine bark or epa rated class iv compost .
c. one part sand .
do not use backfill mix that is frozen or muddy .
num planting .
a .
planting holes dig planting holes that have sloping side walls and are bowl shaped .
slope the side walls to approximately num degrees .
dig the planting hole so that the diameter at the top is at least two times the diameter of the root ball .
dig the planting hole to the same depth as the root ball structure .
dig planting holes for vines and perennials to a minimum depth and diameter of num inches num mm .
make planting holes for rooted cuttings and tree seedlings large enough to accommodate the root system .
b .
planting beds one month before cultivation treat all planting beds that are to be developed in areas of existing turf with preemergent and postemergent type herbicides .
use a statelicensed pesticide applicator to apply the herbicide according to the manufacturers instructions .
before planting top dress all planting beds with a minimum of num inches num mm of backfill mix then cultivate it to a depth of num inches num mm using a plow disc or rototiller .
c. planting trees shrubs set each plant in the center of the planting hole plumb and straight at a level such that the top of the root structure i.e .
trunk flare or root collar is num inch num mm above the surrounding soil .
set the root ball on compacted or unexcavated soil to prevent settlement .
prior to backfilling the hole remove all twine bags and roping .
for trees shipped with wire baskets supporting the root structure remove the top two third of the wire basket from root balls .
remove all rotproof burlap .
remove or fold down the top onethird of standard biodegradable burlap .
take care not to separate the soil of the root ball from the plants root system .
cut or remove circling roots before planting .
backfill the planting hole with the backfill mix .
fill the hole gradually and settle the backfill with water to the top of the root structure .
do not place backfill mix in direct contact with the trunks or stems .
add backfill mix around the root structure up to the plants root collar is at the soil surface .
do not plant groundcovers vines or perennials closer than num inches num mm to tree trunks and shrub stems or within num inches num mm of the edge of planting beds .
d. planting seedlings groundcovers vines or perennials for seedlings groundcovers vines or perennials that are not in a planting bed remove all grass and weeds by scalping an area that has a minimum diameter of num inches num mm .
plant seedlings or perennials in the center of the scalped area using a spade or planting bar .
num landscape mulch .
provide landscape mulch that consists of shredded bark and shredded wood .
the length of any individual component can not exceed num inches num mm .
ensure that at least num percent of the mulch can pass a numinch num mm screen .
landscape mulch may contain up to num percent shredded wood .
wood chips are not acceptable .
provide mulch that is free of soil rocks and weeds and that has been aged at least one year before installation .
smooth and shape the backfill mix to form a shallow basin slightly larger than the planting hole .
mulch these areas with a numinch num mm layer of landscape mulch uniform in texture and size .
do not place mulch in direct contact with the trunks of any trees .
rake and smooth all planting beds upon completion of the work .
num wrapping .
wrap all single deciduous tree trunks of numinch num mm caliper and larger .
before wrapping inspect for insect infestation and take corrective measures .
wrap trees within num hours after planting using a doublelayered bituminouscemented waterproof crinkled paper .
start at the ground and wrap the trunk neatly and snugly to the height of the first branches then attach securely .
with each turn of the wrapping overlap the previous turn by half the width of the paper .
num bracing .
use only flexible biodegradable ties when bracing trees .
use bracing only in areas where mower damage vandalism or windy conditions are a concern or as directed by the engineer .
install loose fitting ties that will not girdle the trunk .
ensure that the tie will allow trunk movement and growth .
install all bracing as shown on the standard construction drawing .
num period of establishment .
before final inspection install all plants and care for them for a period of establishment .
the period of establishment begins immediately upon completion of the planting operations and continues until october num .
the minimum period of establishment is one complete growing season beginning june num and ending the following october num .
during the period of establishment follow standard horticultural practices to ensure the vigor and growth of the transplanted material including watering according to item num remulching restaking and cultivating as necessary .
prune branches of deciduous plants to preserve the natural characteristics of the species according to ansi pruning standards ansi anum .
remove broken damaged and dead branches .
do not trim the central leader of trees .
completely remove weeds and grasses from the planted and mulched areas by weeding and mowing around trees shrubs and bed edges at least two times during the growing season .
weed and mow the first time on or about june num and again approximately num weeks later .
num final acceptance .
on or about october num at the end of the establishment period the engineer in coordination with the departments office of environmental services will inspect the plantings and supply the contractor with a list of plant materials that do not comply with the contract requirements .
install all replacement plantings in accordance with the contract requirements .
replacement plants are subject to a new establishment period .
care for water and maintain the replacement plant materials throughout the new establishment period at no additional cost to the state .
num removal of stakes and wrapping .
after receiving notification from the department of the date of the final inspection remove all stakes and wrapping material from all plants not more than num days before the final inspection with the exception of the replacement plantings that have not been in place for a full growing season .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure the number of healthy plant materials that exhibit typical growth habit for the species and variety .
the department will measure each species and size completed and accepted in place .
the cost associated with wrapping bracing mulching and staking is included in the unit price bid for item num planting trees shrubs perennials and vines .
if the contract does not include an estimated quantity for item num landscape watering the department will not pay for landscape watering separately .
in this case include the cost of landscape watering in the unit price bid for item num planting trees shrubs perennials and vines .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay num percent of the bid price for plant materials delivered and accepted at the project site .
the department will pay num percent of the bid price when the plant materials have been installed .
the department will pay the remaining num percent of the bid price at the end of the establishment period following final acceptance .
if for each pay item less than or equal to num of the installed plants require replacement at the time of project completion the engineer may waive the establishment period for the replacement plantings provided that the replacement plantings are installed in accordance with this specification and in the presence of the engineer or inspector .
if for each pay item more than num of the installed plants require replacement at the time of project completion the contractor is required to install the replacement plantings in accordance with this specification .
the department will pay the remaining percentage of the bid price at the time of project completion .
the replacement plantings are subject to the one year establishment period regardless of the project completion date .
after the replacement plantings complete the one year establishment period the department will inspect the replacement plantings and notify the contractor of the departments findings .
as final remedy under the contract the contractor is required to install replacement plants for all plantings that did not survive the establishment period at no additional cost to the state .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each tree seedling size species num each perennials size species num each groundcover and vines size species num each deciduous shrub size species num each evergreen shrub size species num each deciduous tree size species num each evergreen tree size species item num landscape watering num description num watering num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing delivering applying measuring and scheduling a sufficient amount of water necessary to keep each plant included in item num in a healthy growing condition throughout the period of establishment and the contract .
num watering .
furnish the water used in watering landscape plants .
thoroughly water all plant material at the time of planting regardless of soil moisture content .
continue to water throughout the period of establishment .
saturate the root zone and mulched area of each plant without causing runoff according to table num .
during fall planting continue to water until the ground is frozen and recommence watering after the spring thaw .
furnish a rain gauge approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure landscape watering by the number of gallons liters delivered to plants from approved metered tanks or individually measured containers as follows table num watering table plant description gallons l shrubs num to num inches num to num mm height num num num inches to num feet num mm to num m height num num trees num to num feet num to num m height num num num to num inches num to num mm caliper num num num to num inches num to num mm caliper num num greater than num inches num mm caliper num num num basis of payment .
the department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract price as follows item unit description num gallon liter landscape watering item num pruning existing trees num description num wound dressing num pruning num painting num removal of foreign materials from trees num removal of rubbish num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of pruning trees .
num wound dressing .
use approved material specifically manufactured for tree wound dressing .
num pruning .
prune all trees to make them shapely typical of the species using standard drawings on the plans as a guide .
use approved pruning tools and methods .
remove all dead wood and dead branches num inch num mm or more in diameter .
remove all branches interfering with or hindering the healthy growth of the tree with a good clean cut made flush with the parent trunk .
remove all diseased branches .
for branches that may be partly dead yet have a good healthy lateral branch between the dead part and the base cut off the branch with a good clean slanting cut close to and beyond the healthy lateral branch .
remove low hanging unsound or unsightly branches on trees or shrubs designated to remain .
remove all branches or growth interfering with the free traffic movement on the highway .
trim branches of trees extending over the roadbed to provide a clear height of num feet num m above the roadbed surface .
cut off all stubs or improper cuts resulting from former pruning or limbs that have been broken flush with the trunk or limb of the tree in order to ensure proper healing .
num painting .
paint all cuts or wounds measuring num inch num mm or more in diameter and all exposed wood and scars resulting from previous work or damage with approved tree wound dressing .
num removal of foreign materials from trees .
remove all nails spikes bolts wire or other foreign materials driven into or fastened to the trunk or branches of the tree or if directed by the engineer cut them flush with the bark of cambium layer to ensure complete healing over .
num removal of rubbish .
legally use burn or dispose of all material according to num and num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure pruning existing trees by the number of each size completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num each pruning existing trees num to numinch num to num mm diameter num each pruning existing trees num to numinch num to num mm diameter num each pruning existing trees num to numinch num to num mm diameter num each pruning existing trees num to numinch num to num mm diameter num each pruning existing trees num inches num mm and over item num erosion protection num description num materials num construction num maintenance num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing and maintaining slope ditch and vegetated swale erosion protection as shown on the plans .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to sodding num erosion control mats num for slope erosion protection the contractor may use any of the above materials .
for ditch erosion protection use only item num sodding or item num erosion control mat type b c e or g or as specified in the plans .
for vegetated swale erosion protection use only item num erosion control mat type b or as specified in the plans .
num construction .
install sodding according to item num .
install erosion control mats according to item num .
num maintenance .
maintain sodded areas as specified in item num .
maintain erosion control mats as specified in item num .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure slope erosion protection ditch erosion protection and vegetated swale erosion protection by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted .
the department will determine the area based on the surface area covered by the slope ditch or swale erosion protection .
num basis of payment .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard slope erosion protection square meter num square yard ditch erosion protection square meter num square yard slope erosion protection mat type __ square meter num square yard ditch erosion protection mat type __ square meter item num erosion control mats num description num materials num construction num maintenance num method of measurement num basis of payment num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing and maintaining types a through i erosion control mats .
this work also consists of furnishing placing and maintaining seeding and mulching when the seeding and mulching is to be held in place with erosion control mats .
num materials .
furnish materials conforming to seed and mulch num lime and fertilizer num erosion control mats num if the mat type is not specifically itemized furnish any mat type listed in num .
furnish staples consisting of numinch num m no .
num gage steel wire bent into narrow ushape with the ends of the staples approximately num inch num mm apart producing a num inch staple or furnish pins conforming num inch num mm long num inch num mm in diameter with attached num num inch num mm washer .
drive staples until the staple is flush with the ground surface .
drive pins until the attached washer is flush with the ground surface .
for clay shale and other heavy soils furnish numinch num mm steel staples no .
num gage or thicker with points approximately num inch num mm apart as required by the engineer .
num construction .
before placing any type of temporary erosion control mats prepare the surface apply the fertilizer and lime if specified and seed as specified in item num or as shown on the plans .
place the temporary erosion control mat in the locations shown on the plans .
a .
types a b c e f and i. construct erosion control mat types a b c e f and i as follows num .
within num hours after seeding and before placing the mat evenly place mulch over the specified area at the following rates a .
for straw mulch use num percent of the rate specified in num. b .
for wood fiber mulch use num percent of the rate specified in num. c. for compost use the same rate as specified in num. d. asphalt emulsion tack or tackifier is not required .
num .
immediately after mulching lay the mat strips flat loose parallel to the flow of water and with the mat contacting the ground at all points .
for mats placed in ditches start the construction at the downstream end .
num .
where more than one strip is required to cover the area overlap the strips at least num inches num mm .
overlap the ends at least num inches num mm with the upgrade strip on top .
num .
place upgrade slots at the upgrade end of each strip of mat by placing a tight fold of the mat at least num inches num mm vertically into the soil .
firmly tamp the soil against the end and staple the mat .
if directed by the engineer bury other edges exposed to more than normal flow in a similar manner .
num .
place end slots between the ends of strips by placing a tight fold of the mat at least num inches num mm vertically into the soil .
firmly tamp the soil and staple the mat .
num .
place check slots by placing a tight fold of the mat at least num inches num mm vertically into the soil .
firmly tamp the soil and staple the mat .
space check slots so that one check slot or an end slot occurs within each num feet num m of slope for slopes num to num or steeper .
num .
bury the edges of the mat where the mat abuts catch basins and other structures .
num .
secure the mat in place with staples driven vertically into the soil .
do not stretch or draw the mat taut during the stapling operation .
install three rows of staples for each strip of mat with one row along each edge and one row alternately spaced in the middle .
space staples not more than num feet num m apart in each row .
staple all upgrade slots end slots and check slots across the width with staples spaced not more than num inches num mm apart .
num .
after completing the mat installation seed over top of the mat in areas that the engineer identifies as disturbed .
use a seed mixture conforming to item num at the rate of num pound per num square feet num gmnum or with a mixture or rate shown on the plans .
b .
type g. construct erosion control mat type g according to num.a with the following exceptions .
num .
do not use mulch under the mat .
num .
overlap edges and ends by num num inches num mm .
num .
do not bury the upgrade end or top edge of each strip unless required by the engineer due to special conditions in the field .
num .
the contractor may elect not to provide check slots .
however upgrade slots and end slots will be furnished .
num .
place the mat in contact with the soil .
num maintenance .
maintain the specified areas until all work in the contract has been completed and the engineer issues the final acceptance .
restore damaged areas to the condition and grade existing just before placing the mat .
relime refertilize and reseed restored areas according to item num .
replace all damaged mats .
num method of measurement .
the department will measure erosion control mat type ___ by the number of square yards square meters completed and accepted .
the department will determine the area based on the surface area covered by the erosion control mat .
num basis of payment .
the department will not pay for maintenance as detailed in num that is required due to the contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install erosion controls .
if erosion control items in the contract are properly placed according to the contract documents the department will pay for maintenance detailed in num or according to num .
the department will pay for liming and fertilizing of areas covered by the mats under item num .
the department will not pay for the seeding and mulching performed under or over the mats .
the department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows item unit description num square yard erosion control mat type ___ square meter num square yard erosion control mat square meter num material details num minimum requirements for sampling materials spec no .
material material only inspection or sampling requirements additional instructions num embankment assure num q and r materials conform to the individual material requirements .
sample materials when requested by the engineer .
follow supplement num for acceptance .
soil embankment num lb num kg granular embankment num lb num kg num load transfer retrofit silicone sealant obtain letter of certification stating that the material meets the requirements of item num .
material to be shipped from manufacturer not more than num months prior to use .
patching material verify brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use submit a num quart sample to omm .
num aggregate base perform compaction conforming to supplement num and num products will be supplied by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use submit two num lb bag samples to ommfor testing .
num pc concrete pavement base make two numxnumxnum beams for every num yd num m or fraction thereof daily .
field test beams for required load for the specification .
report results in sm .
core samples taken every num sq .
yds by contractor .
conform to supplement num .
num tack coat if obtaining a sample draw at least num gallon from the sampling valve or tap and discard prior to obtaining a num quart sample .
tag and ship sample to the district lab for omm asphalt section testing .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use submit a num quart sample to omm .
num sawing and sealing asphalt concrete pavement joints inspect material for condition .
document in sm .
follow joint seal material sections for sampling and acceptance requirements .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num num pc concrete pavement make numxnumxnum beams for every num yd num m or fraction thereof daily .
make two beams if testing before num days .
field test beams for required load for the specification .
report results in sm .
core samples taken every num yd by contractor .
conform to supplement num .
num.b dowel bond breaking material check new light form oil by labels on new cans .
no sampling required num various concrete items a sample for concrete strength testing consists of a set of three num num inch cylinders when the maximum nominal aggregate is num inch or less .
for concrete with maximum nominal aggregate sizes greater than num inch a sample consists of a set of two num num inch cylinders .
within num to num hours after sampling ship cylinders to district testing with required documentation .
submit sample to omm .
num water potable water is satisfactory .
if question about water quality obtain num gallon sample .
document in sm .
notify district testing if water appears to contain sewage oil acid or other matter .
num excavation for structures backfill material sample only when requested by the engineer per item num .
soil embankment num lb num kg granular embankment num lb num kg num bearing piles steel pile points only use points from suppliers on the approved list on the omm website .
document bearing piles in sm .
notify district testing if material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
notify the contractor with non compliance issues .
num reinforcing steel plastic support chairs assure plastic supports conform to num .
maximum spacing of supports in slabs beams and girders to be num feet or less to prevent substantial deflection .
num concrete for structures non qcqa specifications make one set of cylinders for spans over num ft each day each num yd .
for spans num ft span and under make one set of cylinders each num yd or less .
document in sm .
field or standard cure according to aciodot specifications .
qcqa specifications follow requirements of num for quality assurance sampling and testing .
document in sm .
within num to num hours after sampling ship cylinders to district testing with required documentation .
within num to num hours after sampling ship quality assurance cylinders to district testing with required documentation .
num prestressed concrete bridge members assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and condition document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num prestressed concrete bridge members corrosion inhibitors verify company and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
for precast beams delivered on tenum verification performed by omm .
num approach slabs make one set of cylinders for each day each num yd .
document in sm .
field or standard cure according to aciodot specifications .
qcqa specifications follow requirements of num for quality assurance sampling and testing .
document in sm .
within num to num hours after sampling ship cylinders to district testing with required documentation .
num curbing concrete medians and traffic islands stone curbs contact district testing and omm to assure stone curb conforms to requirements of num .
num cellular retaining walls num.a cellular products will be supplied by a source on the certified lists for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension condition and compliance with approved drawings .
num.b cellular products accept by certified test data documentation at the project .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num low strength mortar backfill supplier to perform trial batches of num cy to ensure flowable consistency and yield .
refer to item num for alternate mix design .
submit alternate mix designs for approval num days prior to placement .
when using foundry sand obtain written permission from epa ten days before use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num loop detector sealant verify manufacturer is on qpl .
inspect for condition appearance and package markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num topsoil obtain one num pint sample of material from each source andor stockpile of visually different material from same source .
use friction top air tight metal container supplied by the department .
submit to office of geotechnical engineering operations .
samples will include a tenum form or sm print screen .
num riprap for tree protection confirm with omm that the aggregate source has an acceptable performance history .
sources with poor performance require test data conforming to astm dnum .
num tree root aeration aggregate assure source is on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
assure aggregate meets soundness requirements .
for sources with no soundness history obtain a num lb num kg sample .
num liming materials only accept materials from suppliers licensed in ohio .
see omm website for list of ohio department of agriculture licensed suppliers .
document in sm .
num commercial fertilizer only accept materials from suppliers licensed in ohio .
see omm website for list of ohio department of agriculture licensed suppliers .
inspect material for certified analysis and condition .
nonstandard application rate requires approval prior to use .
document in sm .
licensing is required .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing omm .
num num num snum seeds legumes native grasses and wildflowers verify manufacturer is on certified supplier list maintained by omm .
receive with tenum and description bill of lading .
document in sm .
verify district approval of seed mixture .
num num num mulch material should be reasonably free from foreign matter that would inhibit seed germination .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num sodding materials verify company and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
certification required for each shipment .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num planting trees shrubs perennials and vines verify company and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect material for condition .
plant material should be sealed until used .
document in sm .
final acceptance should take place after period of establishment .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
standard materials specifications num num num num num num cement hydraulic astm types i ia ii iii masonry type isnum verify manufacturer on concrete plant batch ticket is on certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify material against bill of lading description .
document in sm .
num microsilica verify manufacturer on concrete plant batch ticket is on certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify material against bill of lading description .
document in sm .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs verify manufacturer on concrete plant batch ticket is on certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify material against bill of lading description .
document in sm .
num fly ash verify manufacturer on concrete plant batch ticket is on certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify material against bill of lading description .
document in sm if high loi fly ash verify manufacturer on concrete plant batch ticket is on list for supplement num .
num asphalt binder certified asphalt pg binder as directed by omm .
plant minimum of one sample per project per season except for inconsequential quantities .
noncertified pg bindersample and approve by omm before use .
certified binder plant submit sample to omm .
noncertified binder submit to omm .
do not allow asphalt production until material is approved .
num num num num num cut back asphalt cut back asphalt emulsions emulsified asphalts asphalt emulsion mws sbr asphalt emulsion certified material at the refinery or source as directed by omm .
project and or plant one sample per each num gallons .
none for less than num gallons .
noncertified material noncertified pg bindersample and approve by omm before use .
num provide certified test data per specification requirements .
certified material submit to omm .
noncertified binder submit to omm .
do not allow asphalt production until material is approved .
num num asphalt primer waterproofing asphalt waterproofing verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm asphalt section .
num polymer emulsified binder type a certified material .
at the refinery or source as directed by omm .
project and or plant sample per num .
noncertified pg bindersample and approve by ommbefore use .
type b certified test data type a certified material submit to omm .
noncertified binder submit to omm .
do not allow asphalt production until material is approved .
num crack sealant material is pretested and approved .
will be shipped with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm asphalt section .
type num type ii provide fibers listed on the qpl .
provide pgnum conforming to num .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
type iii provide fibers listed on the qpl .
provide pgnum conforming to num .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm asphalt section .
type iv provide materials listed on the qpl .
num num num num coarse aggregate coarse aggregate will have current certification for use and be supplied by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
num to num lb .
qa samples are taken by district testing at each prequalified source a minimum of three num times per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num num num num num num fine aggregate fine aggregate will have current certification for use and be supplied by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
num to num lb .
qa samples are taken by district testing at each prequalified source a minimum of three num times per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num num num dense graded aggregate dense graded aggregate will have current certification for use and be supplied by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
num to num lb .
qa samples are taken by district testing at each prequalified source a minimum of three num times per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num materials mineral filler limestone dust will be supplied by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
for portland cement assure source is on certified list for supplement num .
for inert mineral filler sample for gradation .
submit to district testing .
num type num type num type num structural backfill for num bedding and backfill all num type num num num shall be provided by a supplement num pre qualified producersupplier .
verify material certification and prequalified numlb depending on coarse fine or dense grade qa samples are taken by district testing at each prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
source a minimum of one num time per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num coarse aggregate for items num and num all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
num lb qa freeze thawquality samples are taken by district testing once num every num to num years depending on certification and submitted to omm for testing this is additional to standard coarse aggregate testing .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num steel slag aggregate for nonpavement use all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producer supplier .
stockpile and sample each num tons num metric tons .
notify the district laboratory for inspection of sources and to obtain split samples .
test for expansion .
document in sm .
steel slag less than num yrs old requires xray fluorescence for total percent mgo and x ray diffraction for total percent periclase .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num suitable materials for embankment construction all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
multiple aggregate types available .
follow the requirements of the individual material specification .
verify material certification and pre qualified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
document in sm .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num dense graded aggregate for item num all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify the material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
num to num lb .
qa sample taken by district testing at each source a minimum of num time per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num aggregate for items num num and num all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify the material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
num to num lb .
qa sample taken by district testing at each source a minimum of num time per year .
sample at the project on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num.a crushed aggregate slope protection and filter aggregate for dump rock fill all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify the material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
sample andor photograph with a scale for sizing on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num.b dumped rock fill and rock channel protection all materials shall be provided by a supplement num prequalified producersupplier .
verify the material certification and prequalified status by checking sm or by using the cmrs portal and generating a report for that source or district .
sample andor photograph with a scale for sizing on an as needed basis to address material problems or risks associated with quality or gradation .
num num num block brick concrete masonry shale verify type of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defects .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
when material nonperforms or looks defective during use reject material and sample num pieces representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp dowel and deformed bars certified test data from an accredited testing facility will accompany each shipment .
document in sm .
notify district testing upon receipt of shipment .
num joint filler preformed verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send one num numxnum sample representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num joint and crack sealer hot applied material is pretested and approved .
will be shipped with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm asphalt section for sampling requirements .
num burlap cloth materials inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
documenting in sm is not required .
sample only if there is a question that material meets specification .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num sheet curing materials inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
documenting in sm is not required .
sample only if there is a question that material meets specification .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num concrete curing compounds verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and appearance .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send one num quart sample representative of defect to omm cement and concrete section for qa followup .
num air entraining admixtures verify type and brand name of material listed on concrete plant batch ticket is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
storage admixtures should be stored at concrete producer in such a manner to permit easy access for proper identification in weather resistant units .
provide minimum qa sample of one num annually per concrete plant each material each company .
minimum sample size one num quart .
num preformed elastomeric joint sealer verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance dimension and manufacturer trademark .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num chemical admixtures for concrete verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
storage admixtures should be stored at concrete producer in such a manner to permit easy access for proper identification in weather resistant units .
provide minimum qa sample of one num annually per concrete plant each material each company .
minimum sample size one num quart .
num neoprene sheeting verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at time of use .
inspect for condition and appearance .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
num non shrink non metallic materials verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm for sampling requirements .
num quick setting concrete mortar verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm for sampling requirements .
num nonshrink mortar verify manufacturer is on the approved list maintained by omm .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
make three num or more numxnum cylinders from keyway mix .
ship to omm concrete section .
document in sm .
sample will be tested at num num and num days .
do not open structure to traffic until a compressive strength of num psi num mpa is achieved .
num a epoxyurethane sealers verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use obtain num qt num l samples in a sealed container and send to omm .
num b non epoxy sealers verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use obtain num qt num l samples in a sealed container and send to omm .
num soluble reactive silicate verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
num gravity fed resin verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations on the container .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use obtain num qt num l samples in a sealed container and send to omm .
num epoxy injection resin verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
make sure that ports are properly installed and ensure mixing is performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num nonreinforced concrete pipe assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num reinforced concrete circular pipe assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num reinforced concrete pipe epoxy coated assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
received with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num precast reinforced concrete box sections assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
num precast reinforced concrete threesided flat topped culverts assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num precast reinforced concrete arch sections assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num precast reinforced concrete round sections assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num perforated concrete pipe assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num concrete drain tile assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num vitrified clay pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num clay drain tile verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section .
num asphalt pipe joint filler verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
district testing and omm asphalt section .
num resilient and flexible gasket joints verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num resilient and flexible joints verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num precast reinforced concrete manhole riser sections catch basins and inlet tops and temporary barriers assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num flexible plastic gaskets verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition appearance and dimension .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num precast reinforced concrete outlets assure products are supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm cement and concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num metallic coated corrugated steel conduits and underdrains num inch and num depth corrugations products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num metallic coated corrugated steel conduits num inch depth corrugation products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num structural plate corrugated steel structures products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
performs or looks defective during use .
num precoated galvanized steel culverts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and cracks .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and arches with paved invert num inch depth corrugations num inch depth corrugations products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num steel tubing square and rectangular generally a fabricated component received with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num mortar lined corrugated steel pipe any corrugation depth products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated steel spiral rib conduits products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use num num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe num depth corrugations num depth corrugations products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and ommstructural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated steel box culverts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non galvanized smooth steel interior liner check dimension and markings .
document in sm .
performs or looks defective during use .
num aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated aluminum alloy conduits and underdrains num num  inch depth corrugations products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated aluminum alloy conduits products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num aluminum alloy structural plate conduits products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated aluminum spiral rib conduits products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num corrugated aluminum box culverts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimensions and markings .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num num num polyethylene corrugated pipe products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension and markings .
notify district testing and omm asphalt section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
document in sm .
num num polyethylene pipe outside diameter polyethylene profile wall pipe signed letter of certification from supplier notify district testing and omm asphalt section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num smoothwall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num abs and polyvinyl chloride composite pipe furnish certified test data conforming to num to the engineer .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num abs drain waste and vent pipe furnish certified test data conforming to num to the engineer .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
num abs sewer pipe furnish certified test data conforming to num to the engineer .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe furnish a letter of certification documenting the material meets specification requirements .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe furnish a letter of certification documenting the material meets specification requirements .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num polypropylene corrugated tripe wall pipe furnish a letter of certification documenting the material meets specification requirements .
document in sm .
accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num welded and seamless steel pipe verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num reinforced thermosetting resin pipe accept based on inspection of material for type condition dimension receipt and verification of manufacturers certified test data .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num inorganic zinc silicate primer paint products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect material container for markings expiration date and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
obtain a num qt num l sample representative of the defects .
num num.b num.c num.d ozeu structural steel pant organic zinc prime coat epoxy intermediate coat urethane finish coat products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect material container for markings expiration date and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
obtain a num qt num l sample representative of the defects .
num deformed and plain billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num .num m long samples of each rebar size with markings and submit for qa testing by omm .
num rail steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num .num m long samples of each rebar size with markings and submit for qa testing by omm .
num axle steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num .num m long samples of each rebar size with markings and submit for qa testing by omm .
num colddrawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num .num m long samples of each diameter and submit for qa testing by omm .
num fabricated steel bar or rod mats for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft x num ft num m x num m of the mat and submit for qa testing by omm .
num welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft x num ft num m x num m of the mat and submit for qa testing by omm .
num deformed steel wire for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft x num ft num m x num m of the mat and submit for qa testing by omm .
num welded deformed steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft x num ft num m x num m of the mat and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num coated dowel bars products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num dowel bars and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num epoxycoated steel wire and welded wire fabric for reinforcement products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft x num ft num m x num m of the mat and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num plastic supports for reinforcing steel products will be supplied by a source on the approved list maintained by omm .
inspect for dimension and condition .
notify district testing if rejecting material that non performs or looks defective during use .
num galvanizing steel option for bridge spirals products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num .num m long samples of each rebar size with markings and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num.a num b barbed wire products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain a num ft num m length of barbed wire and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num woven steel wire fence type num products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain num ft num m width of fencing and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num chainlink fence including fittings and accessories products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain samples as directed by the laboratory .
num deep beam rail products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain three num num ft num m lengths of guardrail from the same section and submit for qa testing by the laboratory .
num wire rope rail inspect for dimension condition appearance and markings on tag or reel .
submit one num six num ft. sample to omm .
document in sm .
approval required prior to use .
notify district testing and omm .
num fence posts and braces lumber steel products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num and supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num squaresawed and round guardrail posts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num pressure treated guardrail and fence posts braces and blocks products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num and supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and etals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num steel guardrail posts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num guard posts products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num and supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num structural steel material supplied by a fabricator source on the certified list for items num num num num maintained by omm .
structural steel members are received with tenum .
if questions concerning structural steel materials contact omm structural steel section and notify district testing .
num galvanized steel any material supplied with galvanizing will conform to this specification .
randomly inspect galvanizing for appearance and thickness of coating .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num steel for sheet piling certified mill test data required for new material .
verify tensile and chemical properties meet requirements .
inspect all material for dimension and condition .
used material is not acceptable for permanent installations .
document field inspection .
num cold rolled steel contact omm structural steel section for acceptance process .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural steel section section if rejecting material .
num steel castings contact omm structural steel section for acceptance process .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural steel section section if rejecting material .
num arcwelding electrode fluxes verify manufacturer is on approved list maintained by omm .
inspect for dimension condition and markings .
if material is not on approved list certification and test data from supplier will be submitted to omm .
do not use until approval has been received .
num high strength bolts nuts and washers receive with tenum .
inspect material for dimension condition and markings .
reject defective material .
perform field testing of assembly combination per supplement num .
document field inspection testing in sm .
if field test does not meet requirements of supplement num retest bolt nut and washer combination after application of a lubricant .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num machine bolts general specification for many common bolts verify material is component of certified supplier shipment like supplement num for guardrail suppliers or supplement num for fence suppliers .
inspect for condition and coating .
reject defective material .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num num num gray iron castings ductile iron castings gray iron ductile iron castings verify manufacturer is on approved list maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
inspect for condition and defect .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num num num num num sheet copper phosphor bronze plate cast bronze leaded bronze sheet lead material supplied by a fabricator source on the certified list for items num num num num maintained by omm .
structural steel members are received with tenum .
document in sm .
if questions concerning structural steel materials contact omm structural steel section and notify district testing .
num aluminum for railings material supplied by a fabricator source on the certified list for items num num num num maintained by omm .
structural steel members are received with tenum .
document in sm .
if questions concerning structural steel materials contact omm structural steel section and notify district testing .
num preformed bearing pads verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimension conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num buried liner waterproofing membrane verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defects .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
verify dimension conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
num elastomeric bearings only accept elastomeric bearings shipped by tenum.and provided by certified suppliers conforming to supplement num .
notify district testing .
to inspect material to check location and number of internal shims utilizing an ice pick or similar tool .
five num durometer gage readings should be taken and averaged to determine compliance with design plans .
document in sm .
field acceptable for durometer .
reading average range num points of design plan number .
num waterproofing fabric verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimension conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num type num membrane waterproofing verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send one num num ftnum sample representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num structural timber lumber and piling products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
received with tenum and supplier bill of lading .
check dimensions quantity and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num prestressing steel material supplied by a fabricator source on the certified list for items num maintained by omm .
prestressed concrete members are received with tenum .
if questions concerning prestressing strand contact omm structural welding and metals section num cellular polyvinyl chloride sponge verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send one num numxnum sample representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num type num membrane waterproofing verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
membrane primer is num material inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send document in sm .
one num num square ft sample representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num aluminum for steps verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num reinforced propylene plastic manhole steps verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num expansion shield anchors verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain threenum samples representative of defect to omm for qa follow up .
num calcium chloride verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use contact omm .
num sodium chloride inspect material for condition .
submit one num pint sample per each purchase order to omm .
document in sm .
if additional samples required for material quantities exceeding num tons notify district testing .
num a lime masonry sample inspect material for condition within num hrs of receipt .
one num five num lb sample .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num b lime quick for stabilization assure provided material is from suppliers certified under supplement num and listed on the qpl .
inspection for condition and defects document in sm .
if questions on material quality sample one num ten num lb sample of quicklime .
send to geotechnical engineering .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
samples may be taken in triplicate if required .
contact geotechnical engineering .
num c lime kiln dust assure provided material is from suppliers certified under supplement num and documentation for supplement num is complete .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if questions on material quality sample one num ten num lb sample of lime kiln dust .
send to geotechnical engineering .
samples may be taken in triplicate if required .
contact geotechnical engineering .
num preservative treatment for structural timber component material of pressure treated lumber .
no approval required .
approval is for the wood including the preservative treatment .
if questions on pressure treated lumber check the specific material item and follow those instructions .
num geotextile fabrics verify type and brand name of material is on approved list at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use submit one num num x num sample representative of defect to omm .
num prefabricated edge underdrain inspect material for condition and dimension .
manufacturers certified test data required for acceptance .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num temporary erosion control mats material types a through i inspect material for condition and dimension .
manufacturers certified test data required for acceptance .
field acceptance item .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num tied concrete block mat verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num articulating concrete block revetment system verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm concrete section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num detectable warning device verify type and brand name of material is on approved list at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num rectangular reflectors verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition color requirements and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num flexible delineator posts verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimensions conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num raised pavement marker castings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify type conforms to prequalification requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain one num numxnumxnum in .
sample representative of defect to omm for qa followup .
num prismatic retroreflector and adhesive verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify type conforms to prequalification requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
obtain one num sample representative of defective rpm casting to omm for qa followup .
num casting adhesive verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimension conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num wire and cables verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num unit type duct cable systems verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a num ft. sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num rigid ferrous metal electrical conduit and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition of coating and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num polyvinyl chloride conduit and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num polyethylene conduit and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num polymer concrete pull boxes verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use send a sample representative of non compliance or defect to omm for qa followup .
num plastic pull box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num portland concrete pull boxes products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
receive with tenum .
check dimension markings roughness or excessive cracks .
item num installation documented on cap num inspection form .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num junction boxes verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num b lamps for luminaires verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num e conventional luminaires for high intensity verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
discharge lamps including optical system lamp ballast and housing inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num f wall mounted underpass luminaires including optical system lamp ballast and housing verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num g high mastlow mast luminaire including optical system lamp ballast and housing verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num polyethylene fiberglas reinforced pull box with polymer concrete cover and support ring verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b fused pullapart connection verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.c unfused pullapart connection verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.d fused bolted connection verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.e unfused permanent connection verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num ground rods verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use contact omm .
num.h power service components wood pole products will be supplied by a source on the certified list for supplement num maintained by omm .
received with tenum and supplier bill of lading .
check dimension quantity and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural welding and metals section if rejecting material because material non performs or looks defective during use .
num multiple cell polyvinyl chloride conduit and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension markings and conformance to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.a luminaire supports light poles verify pole provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
inspect material for condition and conformance to plan requirements .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b luminaire supports light towers inspect material for condition and conformance to plan requirements .
verify pole provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b.num luminaire support anchor bolts option num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and conformance to plan requirements .
option num verify pole provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num barrier reflectors verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and defect .
verify dimension conform to plan requirements .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm chemical section if rejecting material because material nonperforms or looks defective during use .
num steel tube and pipe this item typically is a component of a sign support .
inspect total component for condition and conformance to shop drawings .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num uchannel posts verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
inspect for conformance to dimension and condition .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num square posts verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimension and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num wooden box beams contact omm structural steel section for acceptance process .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm structural steel section if rejecting material .
num steel anchor bolts and nuts option num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition and conformance to plan requirements .
option num verify pole provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num steel poles and arms component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num base and arm plates component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num handhole covers component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num pole caps component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num arm caps component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num steel hardware component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num stainless steel component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num stainless steel hardware component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum sheet and plate component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum extrusions component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum tube and pipe component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum castings component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum forgings component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num or supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement numor supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num aluminum welding rods normally only applies to shop fabrication .
if performing field aluminum welding contact district testing and ommfor recommendations .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num aluminum hardware component material provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
verify manufacturer is on supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num reflective sheeting type f use if certification provided .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num reflective sheeting type g verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num reflective sheeting type g reboundable verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num reflective sheeting type h verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num reflective sheeting type j verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num nonreflective sheeting verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num silk screen inks no field acceptance requirements .
part of num num num or num items .
num transparent electronic cuttable films no field acceptance requirements .
part of num num num or num items .
no field requirements .
num.c changeable message sign electrical type verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num internally illuminated fixed message sign verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num sign flasher assembly verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num school speed limit sign assembly verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num flexible conduit verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num timer with enclosure verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num vehicular signal heads conventional verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num vehicular signal heads optically programmed num inch num mm lens verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num vehicular signal heads optically programmed num inch num mm lens provide manufacturers certification verify material meets specification requirements inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.c vehicular and pedestrian light emitting diode lamps led verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num pedestrian signal heads type anum type anum type dnum verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num pedestrian pushbuttons verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.a loop detector units nema ts num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b loop detector units nema ts num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num loop detector units delay and extension type verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num signal supports check provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num strain poles check provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num wood poles check provided by certified manufacturer under supplement num .
accept with tenum .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num down guy assemblies verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num pedestals and bases verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num conduit risers see num requirements .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num cable support assemblies verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num messenger and tether wire verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num cable and wire verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num power service see num requirements notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num disconnect switch with enclosure verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.a controller unit type tsnumanum verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b controller unit type tsnumanum verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.c controller unit type nume verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.d controller unit type numl and lc verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.a cabinet type ts num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.b cabinet type ts num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use document in sm .
notify district testing and omm .
num.c cabinet type num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.d cabinet type num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.e cabinet type num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.a cabinet riser for ts num ts num cabinet field inspect for num aluminum thickness and accept .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num.b cabinet riser for types num num or num verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num flasher controller verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num controller master traffic responsive assure the same manufacturer as the supplied controller unit num .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num remote monitoring station compatible with the supplied num and num unit .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num uninterruptible power supply ups verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num.c battery system verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for conformance to dimensions and condition .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use document in sm .
notify district testing and omm .
num traffic paint verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num polyester pavement marking verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num thermoplastic pavement marking verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num preformed pavement marking verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num work zone pavement marking type num removable type num non removable materials accepted by engineer .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district .
num epoxy pavement marking material verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num heatfused preformed plastic pavement marking material verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num.a glass beads for num accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
num.b glass beads for num accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
num.c glass beads for num accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
num.d glass beads for num verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
num spray thermoplastic pavement marking verify material is on approved list maintained by omm .
accepted with tenum .
inspect container for appropriate markings .
inspect material for uniform consistency .
document in sm .
if rejecting for performance provide num qt num l sample and notify district testing .
num ductile iron pipe joints and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe joints and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num polyethylene pe service branches and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num copper service branches and fittings verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num steel pipe encasement basis of acceptance is manufacturers certification containing documentation of domestic origin from manufacturer .
notify district testing if rejecting material num polyethylene encasement verify manufacturer certification conforms to ansiawwa cnumanum inspect condition dimension suitability for intended use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
num gate valve and valve box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num inserting valve and valve box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num tapping sleeve valve and valve box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num tapping saddle and corporation stop verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num service stop and service box verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm .
notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num meter setting stop and chamber inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
acceptance based on manufacturers statement of conformity .
num fire hydrant verify type and brand name of material is on qpl at the time of use .
inspect for condition dimension suitability for intended use .
document in sm notify district testing if rejecting material .
if material nonperforms or looks defective during use notify district testing and omm .
num cementitious materials and carbonate microfines num acceptance .
provide cements meeting num num num num num and num and certified according to supplement num fly ash meeting num and certified according to supplement num ground granulated blast furnace slag meeting num and certified according to supplement num and micro silica meeting num and certified according to supplement num carbonate microfines meeting num and certified according to supplement num without prior sampling testing and approval by the department .
lists for certified cement fly ash ggbfs and micro silica sources are maintained by the laboratory .
num airentraining portland cement .
provide airentraining portland cement according to astm c num type ia .
the gillmore time of set and the air permeability fineness tests will govern .
num portland cement .
provide portland cement according to astm c num type ii .
the gillmore time of set and the air permeability fineness tests will govern .
num portland cement .
provide portland cement according to astm c num type i .
the gillmore time of set and the air permeability fineness tests will govern .
num high early strength portland cement .
provide high early strength portland cement according to astm c num type iii .
the gillmore time of set test shall govern .
num masonry cement .
provide masonry cement according to astm c num .
num slag modified portland cement .
provide slag modified portland cement according to astm c num type is num .
num microsilica .
provide microsilica according to astm c num .
do not use microsilica admixtures in dissolvable bags .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs .
provide ground granulated blast furnace ggbfs according to astm c num grade num minimum .
num fly ash for use in portland cement concrete .
provide fly ash according to astm c num class c or f except ensure a maximum loss on ignition loi of num percent .
fly ash from sources certified according to supplement num and with an loi greater than num percent may be approved for use by the department if the fly ash is treated with a chemical conforming to supplement num .
num carbonate microfines for use in portland cement concrete .
provide carbonate microfines cmf according to astm cnum except modify type c according to the properties shown in table num below table num chemical and physical requirements parameter type c mgconum num sum of caconum mg conum by mass num methylene blue value mgg num particle size distribution minimum passing num m no .
num sieve num num m no .
num sieve num num m no .
num sieve num m no .
num sieve num num m no .
num sieve num num asphalt material acceptance .
asphalt binders num and liquid asphalts num num and num may be acceptable for shipment to and immediate use in construction projects .
acceptance is according to supplement num .
material will meet specification requirements and no tolerances are given for material falling out of specification requirements .
num application temperatures .
apply asphalt materials according to the temperature ranges specified in table num .
table num type and grade of material application temperature range f c spray mix mcnum num to num num to num mcnum num to num num to num mcnum num to num num to num num to num num to num mcnum num to num num to num num to num num to num mcnum num to num num to num num to num num to num all emulsions num to num num to num num to num num to num asphalt primer for waterproofing num to num num to num asphalt for waterproofing num to num num to num cbae num cbae num sp num to num num to num num to num num to num cbae num cbae num sp num to num num to num num to num num to num primer num num to num num to num primer num num to num num to num asphalt binders num num max .
num num max .
asphalt binders polymer modified with sb sbr sbs or elvaloy num num max num num max .
num asphalt binders .
general .
according to aashto m num table num except as follows .
ensure pg numm pg numm pg numm and pg num meet the requirements of table num .
an independent laboratory will not be owned or operated in whole or part by the binder supplier contractor or affiliates of either .
materials and manufacture .
replace the requirements of aashto m num table num section num materials and manufacture section with the following num supply pg binder from the refining of crude petroleum or combination of asphalt binders from the refining of crude petroleum or asphalt binders and suitable liquid from the refining of crude petroleum and possible organic modifiers for performance enhancement .
material from the crude refining stream is considered neat .
liquid from crude refining may be used for adjustments but do not used liquid from crude refining for the purpose of substitution of crude refined asphalt binder in a pg binder .
in the event of a failure investigation where asphalt binders exhibit unusual properties a supplier may be requested by omm to supply information about the makeup of a pg binder .
failure to cooperate will mean removal from supplement num certification .
num a modifier may be any approved material of suitable manufacture that is proven compatible with asphalt binder does not separate appreciably in routine storage and that is dissolved or reacted in asphalt binder to improve its performance .
performance enhancement is defined as a decrease in the temperature susceptibility of the asphalt binder while maintaining or improving desirable properties in a neat asphalt binder such as coat ability adhesiveness and cohesiveness .
unless otherwise noted limit modifiers to no more than num percent by pg binder weight .
num the use of previously used materials in a pg binder must be approved by omm .
since no standard test procedures exist for reprocessed materials and original tests were not developed with the use of such materials in mind appropriate test methods may be chosen by omm for review .
omm approval does not relieve the binder supplier from full responsibility for content and use of any previously used material in a pg binder nor guarantee suitable performance enhancement as defined above .
the detected presence in a pg binder sample of any unapproved previously used material will mean immediate removal from supplement num certification .
limit approved previously used materials to num percent by pg binder weight maximum and provide a written certification to omm stating the exact percent used the source and any brand or trade names .
approved previously used materials are only allowed to be used to produce pg num and pg num and suppliers must get recertified per supplement num for these pg grades .
num ensure the pg binder is homogeneous free from water and deleterious materials and does not foam when heated to num f num c .
prove the asphalt binder before modification or after modification if liquid modifier used is fully compatible with a negative result by means of the spot test per aashto t num using standard naphtha solvent .
if standard naphtha shows a positive result a retest using reagent grade num percent xylene num percent heptane volume may be used .
num ensure the pg binder is at least num percent soluble as determined by aashto tnum or astm dnum .
ensure any insoluble component is free of fibers or discrete particles more than num m .
num ensure flash point is num f num c minimum .
ensure mass change on rtfo of the final pg binder grade is num percent maximum .
num ensure that pg num has a penetration aashto tnum of no more than num .
num direct tension testing is not required unless otherwise required in this specification .
requirements for pg modified binder .
furnish pg modified binder according to the requirements of table num by modifying a nonoxidized nonair blown neat asphalt binder by using a styrene butadiene latex rubber compound sbr polymer a styrene butadiene styrene polymer block copolymer sb sbs polymer an ethylene nbutyl acrylate glycidyl methacrylate copolymer elvaloy as specified or ground tire rubber gtr according to supplemental specification num .
for sb sbs products the polymer supplier will certify to the refiner and contractor that the polymer used meets a minimum num percent by weight butadiene content .
perform sb sbs elvaloy or gtr modification prior to shipment to the asphalt concrete mixing plant preblend .
perform sbr modification at the asphalt concrete mixing plant postblend or prior to shipment to the asphalt concrete mixing plant preblend where allowed by specification .
polyphosphoric acid ppa is allowed in pg binders as follows .
ppa is a polymer of orthophosphoric acid .
when using ppa ensure all the applicable requirements of the required pg binder in table num are met .
ensure ppa does not contain water .
to retain supplement num certification suppliers of ppa modified asphalt will provide a written certification to omm that the amount of ppa used is less than num by weight of neat binder .
suppliers of ppa can have their supplement num certification removed for not following the above ppa requirements .
for each project the pg modified binder supplier will give the contractor a handling guide specifying temperature circulation shelf life and other requirements for assuring the pg modified binder will perform as desired .
give this handling guide to the monitoring team and place a copy in the plant control room and plant laboratory .
if pg modified binder is retained at the asphalt concrete mixing plant for more than two weeks before use or beyond the supplier recommended shelf life whichever is less a top and bottom sample test material property difference between samples taken from the top and bottom of the storage tank will be performed by omm on samples retrieved by the contractor at the laboratorys direction .
do not use material on hand until approved .
table num material requirements for pg modified binder test requirement sbr polymer pre blended binder note final pg binder grade numm a b num b num a numm ak numm ak numm alm c actual pass temperatures report i rtfo mass change percent max num d phase angle max num num num d elastic recovery min num num num e d toughness in .
lb num num f d tenacity in lb .
num num f d elongation in .
min num num f d ductility in .
min num num j d separation f max num g d homogeneity none visible h d a. preblended binder .
use a base neat asphalt binder that is a num grade for numm and numm .
use a base neat asphalt binder that is a num grade for num .
num can be neat ppa modified or modified with sb sbs or elvaloy .
num ppa only modified does not have to meet the phase angle or elastic recovery requirements .
ensure sb sbs or elvaloy modified num meets all requirements listed .
b. postblended binder made from neat supplement num certified or preapproved standard pg binder grade and sbr solids amount equal to or above num percent by weight of total binder to achieve the pg binder grade .
ensure all listed properties are met .
c. without direct tension graded with actual pass temperatures d. pg modified binder e. aashto tnum numcm num f num c hold num min .
before cutting on rtfo material for sb sbs and elvaloy .
note elongation after one hour to the nearest num cm and report elastic recovery to nearest num. f. astm d num numcmmin num f num c g. condition samples according to astm d num conduct softening point difference of top and bottom of tube per aashto tnum .
compatibility of polymer and neat binder is sole responsibility of supplier .
formulate pg modified binder to retain dispersion for num days minimum .
h. heat a minimum num gram sample at num f num c for num hours .
pour entire sample over a hot no .
num num m sieve at num f num c .
look for retained polymer lumps .
i .
actual high and low temperature achieved by pg modified binder beyond required grade but will not grade out to the next standard pg binder grade for low temperature .
j. aashto tnum num f num c num cmmin k. sb sbs elvaloy or supplemental specification num gtr l. sb sbs elvaloy m. the requirements of num pas maximum for the rotational viscosity for numm may be waived at the discretion of the department if the supplier warrants that the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped mixed and compacted at or below the temperature requirements in table num .
do not exceed num pas rotational viscosity using the num spindle at time of shipment .
num cutback asphalt .
provide medium curing cutback asphalt according to aashto m num .
instead of viscosity on the residue the penetration in note num aashto m num will govern .
num cutback asphalt emulsions .
prepare emulsions by compounding a suitable volatile solvent and water with num asphalt to produce emulsions according to table num .
table num cbaenum cbae num special cbaenum cbaenum special primer num primer num kinematic viscosity at num c centistokes num num num num num num water contentnum num num num num num num volatile solventnum num num num num asphalt contentnum num num num num num num adhesion testnum num num num num wet stone coating testnum num num num num stripping testnum num num tests on residue from distillation penetration at num c num num num num num num ductility at num c in .
cm num num num num num num total binder sol .
in csx num num num num num num num perform tests according to supplement num .
num meets num emulsified asphalts .
provide emulsified asphalts according to aashto m num or aashto m num except specification limits will be producible for at least num days from sample date .
use saybolt furol for viscosity .
num asphalt primer for waterproofing .
provide asphalt primer for waterproofing according to astm d num type num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num asphalt for waterproofing .
provide asphalt for waterproofing according to astm d num type iii .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num asphalt emulsion mws .
prepare asphalt emulsion mws from a base material according to num except vary the penetration to meet the float test and penetration specified below .
ensure that the emulsion coats the aggregate readily thoroughly and uniformly .
ensure that the specified characteristics do not change during transportation normal storage and that the emulsion is according to the following when tested according to aashto t num within num days after sample date saybolt furol viscosity at num f num c seconds num num asphalt residue percent num settlement num days percent num sieve test num coating test num oil distillate percent num withstand freezing to num f num c num particle charge negative penetration num f num c num num float test at num f num c seconds num num num solubility num num ash content percent num num num pumpable .
num use aggregates to test the emulsion that are from sources standardized by omm .
use aggregates consisting of num percent passing a num inch num mm sieve and num percent passing a num inch num mm sieve .
wash the standard reference aggregates with distilled water until free of dust and dry them .
weigh num ounces num grams of the dry graded reference aggregate into a suitable container .
weigh num ounces num grams of the emulsion onto the aggregate in the container and vigorously mix the contents for num minutes .
after mixing thoroughly coat the stone .
completely immerse the mixture in tap water and immediately pour off the tap water .
ensure that the aggregate surface area is at least num percent coated .
num when shipped after october num and before april num except if the emulsion is stored and mixed at temperatures of emulsion aggregate and atmosphere above num f num c. num select the penetration within the following ranges of the designation specified num aashto t num except immediately pour residue from distillation into the float collar at num f num c or if the residue has been allowed to cool heat it again to num f num c and pour it into the float collar .
num test on residue from distillation per aashto tnum or astm dnum designation penetration at num f num c mws num num mws num num to num mws num num to num mws num num to num num cold liquidapplied elastomeric waterproofing membrane .
provide cold liquidapplied elastomeric waterproofing membrane as follows hardness type num min .
num astm dnum as modified in section num of astm cnum low temperature crack bridging no cracking astm cnum as modified in section num of astm cnum adhesioninpeel after water imeersion num astm cnum as modified in section num of astm cnum min .
lbf n no optional test allowed extensibility after heat aging min .
in mm num astm cnum hydrostatic resistance min .
psi num astm cnum provide certified test data to the engineer for each shipment of material .
num nontracking asphalt emulsion .
provide certified nontracking asphalt emulsion material per supplement num and supplement num .
emulsion will comply with all specification requirements for at least num days after sample date .
num sbr asphalt emulsion .
provide material consisting of asphalt emulsion ssnum ssnumh cssnum or css numh per num and supplement num blended with sbr emulsion per num to produce a residual mixture of asphalt binder and sbr solids having a composition of num num percent asphalt binder and num num percent sbr solids by weight .
furnish a certification to the engineer and signed by the contractor containing the following a .
the weight of sbr emulsion blended with the asphalt emulsion .
b .
the weight of asphalt emulsion blended with the sbr emulsion .
c. the sbr emulsion manufacturer certification per num .
d. the percent of asphalt binder in the asphalt emulsion residue by distillation .
e. the percent of sbr solids in the sbr emulsion .
f. the percent of sbr solids in the mixture of asphalt binder residue and sbr solids .
g. name of certified asphalt emulsion producer and asphalt emulsion .
determine the weight of the sbr emulsion to be added to a designated weight of asphalt emulsion to provide the percent of sbr solids in the mixture of asphalt residue and sbr solids using the following formula a bw .
x num num where x pounds kilograms of sbr emulsion a percent sbr solids in the sbr emulsion b percent of asphalt residue of the asphalt emulsion w pounds kilograms of the asphalt emulsion for field blending ensure the asphalt emulsion and sbr emulsion are thoroughly mixed as follows before application add to the distributor the asphalt emulsion and the required amount of the sbr emulsion of the appropriate sbr emulsion type i.e .
cationic or anionic .
heat and circulate the distributor contents for at least num minutes to ensure complete blending .
recirculate the distributor contents for num minutes just prior to application .
if the distributor has set for num hours without circulation repeat the heating and circulating of the distributor contents for num minutes prior to application .
draw samples of the mixed sbr and asphalt emulsion after mixing the materials as indicated above .
emulsion will comply with all specification requirements for at least num days after sample date .
num sbr emulsion .
ensure the sbr emulsion is a cold polymerized styrene butadiene synthetic rubber sbr in latex form specifically compounded for use in asphalt binders and asphalt emulsions .
ensure the manufacturer of the sbr emulsion furnishes a written certification of the total sbr solids content of the sbr emulsion and actual test results showing compliance with both of the following requirements a. sbr emulsion type of sbr emulsion anionic cationic sbr solids styrene butadiene ratio num num num num num num num num total sbr solids by weight num num sbr solids residual styrene by weight num max num num max ash of total sbr solids by weight num max num max ph num num viscosity brookfield units model rvf spindle no num num rpm num f num c num max num max b .
combination of num num sbr solids with num num pg num meeting num by weight toughness inchpounds nm minimum num num tenacity inchpounds nm minimum num num num polymer emulsified binder .
material will meet specification requirements of the table below .
table num polymer emulsified binder emulsion aashto t num type a b type b cg saybolt furol viscosity g num num c num num c storage stability num hrs .
difference max a num num demulsibility num ml of num dioctyl sodium sulf .
min num num demulsibility num ml of numn caclnum min num sieve test distilled water max num num distillation to num c residue solids d num num oil distillate max num num distillation residue penetration numg num sec num f numc aashto t num num num softening point  c min aashto t num num solubility min aashto tnum or astm dnum num num elastic recovery num f num c min aashto t num ef num num notes a after standing undisturbed for num hours the surface will show no white milky colored substance but will be a smooth homogeneous color throughout .
b crsnump test within num days of project sampling .
limits for both certified source and project samples .
c crsnump and hfrsnump test within num days of project sampling .
limits for both certified source and project samples .
d see supplement num. e straight molds .
hold at test temperature for num minutes .
place in ductilometer and elongate num cm at num cmmin .
hold for num minutes and cut .
after num hour retract the broken ends to touch and note elongation in cm x to the nearest numcm .
percent recovery numxnum x num .
report elastic recovery to nearest num. f sbr sbs sb g minimum of num sfs for project acceptance num crack sealant a .
type i crack sealant .
conform to num b .
type ii crack sealant .
provide a mixture of pg num certified binder supplement num and polyester fibers recycled fibers not permitted according to the following requirements denier astm d num num to num length num num inch num nummm crimps astm d num none tensile str min .
astm dnum num psi num mpa specific gravity num to num minimum melting temperature num f num c ignition temperature num f num c min .
this data must be obtained prior to cutting the fibers .
the fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the departments qpl .
combine materials so the fibers are a minimum of num percent by total weight of the asphalt binder .
ensure combined materials are according to the following properties strength at break at num f num c num psi num mpa min .
at num f num c num psi num mpa min .
elongation at break at num f num c num percent min .
at num f num c num percent min .
the option for using premixed and prepackaged type ii crack sealant is permitted provided num the fibers and the fiber binder are according to the requirements as shown and num the fiber binder is according to the manufacturers specifications .
furnish certified test data from the fiber binder manufacturer annually to omm and when requested by omm .
furnish a letter of certification with each shipment stating that the material complies with specification requirements .
c. type iii crack sealant .
provide a mixture of pg num certified binder supplement num and polypropylene fibers recycled fibers not permitted according to the following requirements denier astm d num num num length num num inch num num mm crimps astm d num none tensile strength min astm d num num psi num mpa specific gravity num num minimum melting point num f num c this data must be obtained prior to cutting the fibers .
the fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the departments qpl .
combine materials so the fibers are a minimum of num percent by total weight of the asphalt binder .
ensure combined materials are according to the following properties strength at break at num f num c num psi num mpa min .
at num f num c num psi num mpa min .
elongation at break at num f num c num percent min .
at num f num c num percent min .
d. type iv crack sealant .
provide a prepackaged preapproved mixture of modified binder according to the following properties and minimum num percent polyester fibers recycled fibers not permitted according to the following properties .
modified binder cone penetration num f num c num flow num f num c num cm max resilience num f num c num percent ductility num f num c num cm min bond num f num c num percent ext .
pass num cycles impact num f num c pass compression recovery num min recommended pour temperature num f num c safe heating temperature num f num c fiber must meet requirements for type ii polyester fiber .
fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the departments qpl .
safe heating temperature num f num c softening point num f num c viscosity num f num numc num cp min cone penetration num f num c num workability capable of being melted and applied through a pressure feed indirect heated and agitated melter flexibility pass num inch nummm sample at num f num c num degree bend num sec crack sealant and crack sealant manufacturer must be on the departments qpl .
num aggregate num general .
the following abbreviations apply ccs crushed carbonate stone .
acbfs air cooled blast furnace slag gs granulated slag rap recycled asphalt pavement rpcc recycled portland cement concrete oh open hearth slag eaf electric arc furnace slag bof basic oxygen furnace slag pcs petroleum contaminated soil prequalified aggregate supplier program supplement num .
provide aggregate materials to the ohio department of transportation from prequalified suppliers .
a .
soundness .
when the major portion of the unsound material in a coarse aggregate acquires a mudlike condition when tested for soundness ensure that the maximum loss for all uses is num percent .
b .
stockpiles .
use stockpiling and loading methods that permit ready identification of the aggregates and to minimize segregation .
clean the sites for stockpiles before storing materials .
do not remove aggregates from stockpiles within num foot num m of the ground until final cleanup of the work .
do not use material that has become mixed with foreign matter wood or other size or grades of aggregates .
handle aggregates in such a manner that the moisture content is reasonably uniform for each days run .
c. size .
provide aggregate according to the size specified in the material specification the construction item or as shown in aashto m num .
d. method of test .
provide aggregate tested by the following methods amount finer than no .
num num m sieve snum clay lumps snum coal and lignite aashto t num crushed pieces astm d num deleterious materials snum effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar aashto t num liquid limit aashto t num percent of wear los angeles abrasion test aashto t num or astm c num plasticity index aashto t num sieve analysis snum snum sieve analysis of mineral filler aashto t num sodium sulfate soundness test num cycle aashto t num specific gravity and percent absorption for fine and coarse aggregate snum unit weight aashto t num lightweight chert in aggregates aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num uncompacted void content aashto t num flat and elongated astm d num rapid freezing and thawing astm c num procedure b insoluble residue of carbonate aggregates astm d num compaction testing of unbound materials snum in place gradation sampling snum sulfur leachate test snum soundness of aggregate by freezing and thawing aashto t num microdeval aashto t num silicon dioxide astm c num sodium sulfate soundness test rock slabs astm d num e. steel slag aggregate .
provide openhearth oh basic oxygen furnace bof and electric arc furnace eaf steel slag aggregate known as steel slag according to the following requirements when num aggregate for asphalt concrete base or num aggregate for asphalt intermediate course is specified .
do not use oh bof or eaf slag as the fine or coarse aggregate virgin or recycled for asphalt surface courses .
supply all steel slag from sources according to supplement num .
furnish steel slag to a size meeting the specified grading requirements .
provide steel slag aggregate meeting the specified coarse or fine aggregate quality requirements .
ensure that measurements of soft pieces includes soft lime lime oxide or magnesia agglomerations or any foreign materials prone to rapid disintegration under construction processing and weathering conditions .
ensure that additional testing beyond those listed are performed or required any time poor quality steel slag is suspected due to visual inspection testing or field performance problems .
provide a letter of certification to the engineer from the steel slag processor for every shipment of steel slag to the contractor .
in addition the steel slag processor must provide the engineer with the following quality control records created in accordance with supplement num .
documentation of the steel slag production processing and stockpile retrieval failure to follow the processor qc plan or continued problems with performance recognized by the laboratory attributable to steel slag is cause for limiting steel slag use from that processor .
f. restrictions .
when an aggregate source is specially designated with a sr or srh according to guidelines for maintaining adequate pavement friction in surface pavements the aggregate source will be restricted for use in surface pavement according to the methods in the guidelines .
the document guidelines for maintaining adequate pavement friction in surface pavements is available on the omm website under material information by category aggregate or the office of pavement engineerings website .
nominal size num amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings percent by weight size square openings num in .
num num in .
num in .
num num in .
num in .
num num in .
num in .
num in .
num in .
num in .
no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
inch mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m num num num to num num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num to num num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to no .
num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num no .
num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num no .
num to num num num to num num num num to num num to num num numbered sieves are those of the united states standard sieve series .
num screenings .
where standard size of coarse aggregate designated by two or three digit numbers are specified obtain the specified gradation by combining the appropriate single digit standard size aggregates by a suitable proportioning device which has a separate compartment for each coarse aggregate combined .
perform the blending as directed by the laboratory .
table num aashto mnum standard sizes of processed aggregate num aggregate for portland cement concrete .
a .
fine aggregate .
num .
provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone .
num .
sieve analysis .
sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num should the fineness modulus of a job control sample of sand from any source vary by more than num percent from that of the representative sample from that source the sand may be rejected .
num .
physical properties .
maximum loss sodium sulfate soundness test item num num items num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num aggregations of soil silt etc .
by weight num when tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar ensure that the compressive strength at num and num days of mortar made with untreated sand is not less than num percent of the compressive strength of mortar made with treated sand .
provide fine aggregate for items num num num num num and num deck slabs with at least num percent siliceous particles as determined by the acid insoluble residue test astm dnum .
ensure material has been tested and results are on file at the laboratory .
for sources not tested and on file at the laboratory submit certified test data from an amrl accredited independent laboratory verifying the minimum num percent .
b. coarse aggregate .
num .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of washed gravel ccs or crushed acbfs .
num .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or washed gravel num unit weight compacted minimum slag num lbftnum num kgmnum loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum item num num items num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num item num num deleterious substances shall not exceed the following percent by weight material type superstructure all other concrete soft pieces num num coal and lignite num num clay lumps num num pieces having a length greater than num times the average thickness num num shale and shaly material num num limonitic concretions num num alkali num num metallic particles num num chert that disintegrates in num cycles of the soundness test num num additional requirement for acbfs aggregate total sulfur as s maximum astm cnum num num .
amount passing the no .
num num m sieve .
ensure that the percent by weight of material passing the no .
num num m sieve in the aggregate portion of the concrete mix does not exceed the following percent by weight material type superstructure all other concrete ccs and crushed acbfs num num washed gravel num num num fine aggregate for mortar or grout .
a .
provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone or acbfs .
b. sieve analysis .
natural sand manufactured sand sieve size total percent passing no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num c. physical properties .
maximum loss sodium sulfate soundness test num aggregations of soil silt etc .
by weight num when tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar ensure that the compressive strength of mortar made with untreated sand is not less than num percent of the compressive strength of mortar made with treated sand .
num aggregate for asphalt concrete base num and num .
a .
provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in combination with rigid pavement consisting of ccs gravel or crushed acbfs .
provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements consisting of ccs gravel see note num in table below or crushed acbfs .
provide fine aggregate for asphalt concrete base consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone gravel or acbfs .
crushed steel slag oh eaf or bof conforming to num.e and num may be used for coarse and fine aggregate in asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements .
b .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or washed gravel num unit weight compacted minimum slag num lbftnum num kgmnum loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum num percent by weight of fractured pieces one or more faces minimum num microdeval abrasion loss test maximum for coarse aggregate gravel only num num num if the md value is greater than the specification limit conform to supplement num .
deleterious substances shall not exceed the following material type percent by weight soft pieces num coal and lignite num clay lumps num pieces having a length greater than num times the average thickness num shale and shaly material num chert that disintegrates in num cycles of the soundness test num num aggregate for asphalt concrete intermediate and surface courses prime coat num chip seal num and microsurfacing num .
a .
fine aggregate .
num .
provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone gravel acbfs or for intermediate courses only steel slag oh eaf or bof conforming to num.e and num .
num .
sieve analysis .
standard num gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num screenings sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num num .
physical properties .
maximum loss sodium sulfate soundness test num aggregations of soil silt etc .
by weight num b. coarse aggregate .
num .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of ccs crushed acbfs washed gravel or for intermediate courses only steel slag oh eaf or bof conforming to num.e and num .
num .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or washed gravel num unit weight compacted minimum slag asphalt concrete num and num num lbftnum num kgmnum loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum asphalt concrete and num num num num percent by weight of fractured pieces one or more faces minimum num microdeval abrasion loss test maximum for gravel only num num num if the md value is greater than the specification limit conform to supplement num .
deleterious substances shall not exceed the following material type percent by weight soft pieces num coal and lignite num clay lumps num amount finer than no .
num num m sieve num pieces having a length greater than num times the average thickness num shale and shaly material num limonitic concretions num alkali num chert that disintegrates in num cycles of the soundness test num c. general requirements for fine aggregate .
for fine aggregate calculate each individual sieve fraction soundness loss and ensure that the fractional size does not exceed num percent for all surface courses intermediate courses and any asphalt concrete course directly below an open graded friction course .
num sand cover num and num .
a. furnish sand cover consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone or acbfs .
b. sieve analysis .
sieve size total percent passing no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num mineral filler .
a. furnish mineral filler consisting of limestone dust portland cement or other inert mineral matter .
ensure the mineral filler is thoroughly dry and free from lumps .
b. sieve analysis .
sieve size total percent passing no .
num num m num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num granulated slag .
a. furnish granulated slag gs consisting of glassy granular materials formed when molten blast furnace slag or electricfurnace slag is rapidly chilled as by immersion in water .
the department may reject material containing mill waste cinders large pieces of ungranulated slag or other matter foreign to the production of slag in the normal operation of the blast furnace or electric furnace .
furnish material of such nature that it will compact to the satisfaction of the engineer .
b. sieve analysis .
sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num num screenings .
a. furnish screenings for no .
num size gravel stone or acbfs .
where crushed material is specified ensure that it is crushed from material larger than the numinch num mm sieve .
b .
physical properties .
maximum loss sodium sulfate soundness test num num structural backfill for num bedding and backfill .
furnish structural backfill for num bedding and backfill consisting of ccs gravel natural sand sand manufactured from stone foundry sand acbfs or rpcc .
furnish acbf slag according to supplement num .
the use of rpcc is permitted without wear testing or sodium soundness testing requirements if the contractor provides information proving the material met this specification at the time of its original incorporation .
the use of rpcc is not permitted in conjunction with aluminum pipe or aluminum coated steel pipe .
ensure that the rpcc use does not contain more than two percent steel .
reclaimed asphalt concrete is not allowed for any bedding or backfill materials .
use foundry sand if the material meets these requirements and meets the requirements of the ohio epa division of surface water policy num beneficial use of nontoxic bottom ash fly ash and spent foundry sand and other exempt waste and all other regulations .
ten days before using foundry sand on the project submit written permission from the ohio epa to the engineer .
instead of written permission from the ohio epa the contractor may elect to have an independent consultant prequalified by odot in remedial design environmental site assessment review the proposed usage .
the consultant will provide all documentation utilized to ensure that the proposed usage is according to all ohio epa regulations .
ensure that the consultant coordinates all epa required meetings documentation and testing requirements .
ensure that the consultant certifies this to the department .
a .
structural backfill type num and num .
num .
furnish type num structural backfill that meets the gradations of items num num or num except num to num percent may pass the no .
num sieve .
furnish type num structural backfill that meets the gradations of size no .
num or num from table num .
num .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or washed gravel num loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum num percent by weight of fractured pieces one or more faces minimum type num only num deleterious substances shall not exceed the following material type percent by weight shale and shaly material num chert that disintegrates in num cycles of the soundness test num ensure that the portion of the material passing through the no .
num num m sieve has a maximum liquid limit of num and a maximum plasticity index of num .
crush gravel for type num from material retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
b .
structural backfill type num .
num .
furnish type num structural backfill that meets the gradations of num.a num.a or one of the well graded gradations below sieve size total percent passing num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num to num num .
physical properties percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or gravel num loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum num ensure that the portion of the material passing through the no .
num num mm sieve has a maximum liquid limit of num and a maximum plastic index of num .
num coarse aggregate for items num num and num .
in addition to the requirements of num the following aggregate requirements apply .
when the total combined quantity of the listed items is greater than num square yards num mnum provide size no .
num or num from table num .
if the total combined quantity of the listed items is less than num square yards num mnum then provide one of the following sizes from table num no .
num num num num or num .
if gravel or limestone no .
num or num size is selected in either of the above cases then ensure that the coarse aggregate incorporated into the concrete is tested according to odot supplement num .
ensure that the validity of results of freeze thawresistance testing is as outlined below average total percent expansionnum status of source approval num to num valid for four years from date approvednum num to num valid for two years from date approvednum num to num not approved one retest allowednum num not approved no retesting allowednum num as measured at num cycles .
num if a notable change in the properties of the aggregate originating from the affected source is determined from quality control testing a retest of freezethaw resistance may be requested before the original expiration date .
the laboratory will make the determination to retest .
num except as noted the department will not retest the material unless the producer of the material sends a written request to the department with substantiation that significant changes in operation have been made e.g .
new processing equipment material from a new ledge etc .. num if the average total percent expansion is greater than num but the durability is greater than or equal to num the department may accept the source for two years .
the laboratory will maintain a list of approved sources .
num non pavement openhearth electric arc furnace and basic oxygen furnace steel slag aggregate use .
provide steel slag according to the following requirements .
nonconfined applications .
when using oh eaf and bof slag in applications where the steel slag will not be confined ensure that the slag meets the requirements in num.a deleterious substances and crushing and in num.b aging and stockpiling requirements .
recycled steel slag from department or nondepartment projects may be used in applications where the recycled steel slag will not be confined .
confined applications .
when using oh eaf and bof slag in applications where the steel slag will be confined ensure the steel slag meets all requirements of num .
the use of recycled steel slag from department or nondepartment projects is not allowed in confined applications .
a. deleterious substances soft pieces .
deleterious substances include soft lime lime oxideor magnesia agglomerations or any foreign materials prone to rapid disintegration under construction processing and weathering conditions .
furnish steel slag with less than num percent deleterious substances soft pieces by weight .
the department will use supplement num hand crushing of soft pieces to determine the soft pieces .
crushing of steel slag is not allowed .
b .
aging and stockpiling requirements .
stockpile and age all steel slag as follows num .
grade and stockpile the material into maximum size piles of num ton num metric tons .
before and during the stockpiling operation add water to these materials to provide a uniform moisture content not less than their absorbed moisture .
ensure that the stockpile is maintained in a moist condition during the required stockpiling period .
num .
ensure that the producer mixes the stockpile when the outside surface of the pile has crusted over .
the department will inspect the stockpile every num months to ensure no crusting occurs .
do not mix frozen stockpile material .
suspend the aging period when the stockpile is frozen for more than one month .
num .
ensure that this aging period is at least num months in duration and starts over if any new material is added to the pile during the aging period .
c. identification of steel slag .
clear definitive and undisputable identification of the proposed material being steel slag is required .
the producer will show the department evidence that the material supplied is steel slag .
this information will consist of but is not limited to the following num .
steel producer .
num .
production dates .
num .
production rates .
num .
stockpiling dates .
num .
type of steel furnaces .
num .
all known department and nondepartment projects where the material was previously used .
this identification of steel slag and the source may be supplemented by other information approved by the department or by using num years of good performance data .
ensure that the producer submits to the department projects where the steel slag has been used without expansion or tufa problems .
the department will review the above projects as part of the identification approval process .
d. tufa performance verification of steel slag .
tufa is a precipitate form of calcium carbonate that can clog up the underdrain systems .
some steel slag sources clog up underdrain systems and some do not .
tufa performance verification is based on field performance and departments inspection of the underdrain systems .
tufa performance verification is required .
ensure that the producer submits past projects that are at least num years old that used the proposed steel slag source to the department .
the department may consider projects that are less than num years old for tufa performance verification if it can be determined by the department that the age of the steel slag incorporated in the project was num years old or greater .
ensure the producer supplies the department with construction plans with the underdrains and underdrain outlets marked on the plans or other suitable method approved by the department showing the underdrain system .
ensure the producer marks the underdrain outlets in the field for inspection .
the department will inspect the underdrain systems for tufa deposits .
if tufa deposits are found in the outlets or in the underdrain system the department will reject the steel slag source .
e. expansion testing of steel slag .
after the aging and stockpiling requirements are met expansion testing is required for steel slag .
perform expansion testing according to pennsylvania department of transportation ptm no .
num the odot equivalent to this test or expansion testing acceptable to the department .
ensure that the producer hires an independent aashto accredited and department approved laboratory to perform at least half of the expansion testing .
at the producers option up to half of the required expansion testing may be performed by the producers laboratory .
the laboratory will observe the expansion testing and approve each independent and producer laboratory .
perform expansion testing for every num tons num metric tons or fraction thereof of the material stockpiled in accordance with num.b .
for steel slag less than num years old retain a split portion of the expansion sample .
reduce the split sample to num lbs num g and test for total percent mgo by xray florescence and total percent periclase hard burned mgo by xray diffraction .
the maximum allowable total expansion for each test is less than num percent .
if any one test fails in the stockpile the department will reject the entire stockpile .
when sampling for expansion ensure that the producer notifies the department at least num hours before the sampling .
the department will verify that the sample came from the correct stockpile and take independent split samples if required .
submit the expansion test data and a suitably presented summary of the expansion test data to the department for approval .
submit xray florescence and xray diffraction data to the department .
the department reserves the right to perform independent testing to verify the laboratory results at any time .
the department expansion test data takes precedence over the producer or independent laboratory expansion testing results in the event of a conflict .
the department will make the final determination on all conflicting data .
if the material fails the expansion testing then stockpile the material for a minimum of two additional months from the date of last sampling and retest for expansion .
only materials that pass the expansion test are approved for use .
num suitable materials for embankment construction .
natural soil natural granular material granular material types slag material brick shale rock random material rap rpcc or pcs as further defined below are suitable for use in embankment construction .
the engineer will submit samples of soils not identified from the plan subsurface investigation from borrow sources or materials appearing questionable in the field .
furnish acbfs according to supplement num .
furnish rpcc with the reinforcing steel cut to a maximum length of num inch num mm outside the pieces .
ensure that pieces of rap do not exceed num inches num mm in the largest dimension .
furnish steel slag according to num .
when using steel slag rpcc or rap completely blend it with at least num percent natural soil or natural granular material .
when using coal completely blend it with natural soil or natural granular materials .
make at least num percent of the blend natural soil or natural granular materials .
a .
natural soils .
furnish natural soils as defined in num.i and classified as department group classifications anuma anumb anuma anumb and anum as further defined below furnish soils with a maximum dry density of at least num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum .
do not use soils having a liquid limit in excess of num or soils identified as department group classifications anum or anum in the work .
b. granular embankment materials .
furnish natural granular materials as defined in num.h and classified as department group classifications anuma anumb anum anuma anum anum or anum .
do not use granular material classified as anum .
c. granular material types .
furnish ccs gravel acbfs durable sandstone durable siltstone gs or blended natural soil or natural granular materials blended with oh bof eaf or rpcc as detailed above .
furnish durable sandstone and siltstone with a slake durability index greater than num percent according to astm d num .
except for gs furnish the following gradations for the granular material types by weight num .
granular material type a. furnish material having less than num percent by weight of the grains or particles passing the no .
num num m sieve .
num .
granular material type b .
for item num furnish the gradation of items num num or num .
for item num furnish the gradation of items num num or num except num to num percent will be allowed to pass the no .
num num m sieve .
num .
granular material type c. furnish well graded material that meets the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num num .
granular material type d. furnish the gradation of num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve less than num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve less than num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve and num to num percent passing the no .
num num m sieve .
num .
granular material type e. furnish any of the coarse aggregates from no .
l through num inclusive on table num .
num .
granular material type f. furnish material according to the following a .
well graded material .
b .
a gradation with a top size from num inches num mm to num inches num mm and a bottom size of no .
num num m sieve .
c. an evenly graded material between the top and bottom size .
d. compactable stable and serves the intended use .
d. shale .
furnish shale as defined in num and as further defined below .
ensure that the shale is tested for durability to determine whether the shale is durable or nondurable shale .
test the shale according to the following procedure num .
obtain a piece of shale that is typical and representative of the rest of the shale .
the size of the piece should be about num inches num mm .
if a numinch num mm sample is not available then the shale is nondurable .
num .
place the piece of shale in a bucket of water .
examine the deterioration or slaking of the shale after num hours .
if the shale has deteriorated then the shale is nondurable .
num .
if the shale has not deteriorated after being in water for num hours then break down the shale over a num inch num mm sieve by hand pressure .
if num percent or less of the shale is retained on the num inch num mm then the shale is nondurable .
num .
if more than num percent of the shale is retained on the num inch num mm sieve or then perform a field test for durability .
the field test for durability consists of compacting the shale with six passes of a steel drum roller which has a minimum compaction force of num pounds per lineal inch num knmm of roller drum width .
provide documentation to the engineer to verify the roller meets the compaction force requirement .
a .
if more than num percent of the shale breaks down by visual inspection then the shale is nondurable .
b .
if less than num percent of the shale breaks down by visual inspection then the shale is durable .
num aggregate materials for num .
furnish aggregate that is ccs crushed gravel crushed acbfs or steel slag .
furnish steel slag according to num furnish acbfs according to supplement num .
determine aggregate acceptance before incorporation into the work based on samples taken from stockpiles .
a. gradations .
furnish ccs crushed gravel crushed acbfs and steel slag that meets the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num num num furnish steel slag that has num to num percent passing through the no .
num numm sieve furnish gravel used under item num that is crushed from material retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
b .
physical properties .
furnish ccs crushed gravel acbfs and steel slag that meets the physical property requirements percent of wear los angeles test maximum ccs or crushed gravel num loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum num percent by weight of fractured pieces one or more faces minimum num num num does not apply to steel slag ensure deleterious substances in ccs crushed gravel and acbfs do not exceed the following material type percent by weight shale and shaly material num chert that disintegrates in num cycles of the soundness test num ensure that the portion of the material passing through the no .
num num m sieve has a maximum liquid limit of num and a maximum plasticity index of num .
num materials for items num num and num .
furnish ccs gravel acbfs gs oh slag bof slag eaf slag rpcc or rap for materials .
if rpcc and rap are used provide the following information num .
specification item that the material was originally constructed under .
num .
the applicable material requirements of the original construction item .
if the original construction requirements meet or exceed the requirements of this specification then the shale sodium soundness and los angeles abrasion test for rap and rpcc may be waived .
the plastic index and clay requirements are not required for rap .
use rpcc that is free of steel .
furnish oh bof and eaf slag according to num use acbfs according to supplement num .
furnish gs according to num .
a. gradations .
furnish for items num num and num rap materials according to the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num except for gs and rap use the following gradations for items num num and num .
furnish materials for item num according to one of the following gradations sieve size type a type b type c total percent passing num num inch num mm num num size no .
num or num from table num num inch num mm num to num num to num num inch num mm num to num num to num num inch num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num do not use rap for type c material .
furnish materials for item num according to the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num furnish materials for item num according to the following gradation sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num b .
physical properties .
item num item num item num percent of wear los angeles test maximum num loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum num percent by weight of fractured pieces one or more faces minimum num gravel used portion retained on a no .
num num mm sieve one or more faces minimum crushed num maximum plasticity index of material passing no .
num num m sieve num deleterious substances shall not exceed the following material type percent by weight item num item num item num shale and shaly material num num num clay num num where the major portion of the material in a coarse aggregate from a source on record at the laboratory has shown the characteristics of acquiring a mudlike condition when tested for soundness test it for soundness and ensure that the maximum loss is num percent .
num rock and aggregate materials for item num .
a .
crushed aggregate slope protection and filter aggregate for dump rock fill .
furnish crushed gravel limestone sandstone rpcc acbfs oh slag bof slag or eaf slag for crushed aggregate slope protection and filter aggregate for dump rock fill .
use acbfs slag according to supplement num .
use oh bof and eaf slag according to num .
furnish size no .
num or num from table num or according to the following gradation for crushed aggregate slope protection sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num to num num num inch num mm num to num num num inch num mm num to num num inch num mm num to num for a filter for rock channel protection use size no .
num or num from table num .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum except for acbfs num loss sodium sulfate soundness test maximum except for rpcc num percent by weight of fractured pieces minimum ccs or gravel num loss for rpcc aashto t num soundness of aggregates by freezing and thawing num num num use method c using num cycles .
b. dumped rock fill and rock channel protection .
furnish gravel broken recycled portland cement concrete rpcc broken sandstone broken siltstone and broken limestone for dumped rock fill and rock channel protection .
furnish sandstone siltstone and limestone that is free of laminations seams and fractures or injury due to blasting .
except for rpcc test for soundness according to astm d num .
use materials having a maximum num percent single slab loss and a maximum num percent cumulative loss .
slab heights and lengths will be a minimum of num inches .
for rpcc test for soundness according to aashto t num as stated in num.a .
the department may waive testing when the stone source has a known durability history .
do not use thin slablike pieces or any pieces having a dimension larger than num inches num m. do not use rpcc with reinforcing steel protruding more than num inch num mm beyond the outside surface of the concrete pieces .
furnish dumped rock fill and rock channel protection materials consisting of the four material types defined below num .
type a material has at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than an numinch num m but less than a numinch num m square opening and at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a num inch num m square opening .
furnish material smaller than an numinch num m square opening that consists predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines and that is free of soil .
num .
type b material has at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a numinch num m but less than a numinch num m square opening and at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than an num inch num m square opening .
furnish material smaller than a numinch num m square opening that consists predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines and that is free of soil .
num .
type c material has at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a numinch num mm but less than an numinch num m square opening and at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a num inch num m square opening .
furnish material smaller than a numinch num mm square opening that consists predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines and that is free of soil .
num .
type d material has at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a numinch num mm but less than a numinch num m square opening and at least num percent of the total material by weight larger than a num inch num mm square opening .
furnish material smaller than a numinch num mm square opening that consists predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines and that is free of soil .
num aggregate for water quality structures .
a .
fine aggregate .
num .
furnish fine aggregate consisting of washed natural sand washed sand manufactured from stone or gravel or washed lightweight sand prepared by expanding products such as clay diatomite shale or slate .
num .
sieve analysis .
sieve size total percent passing num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num b. coarse aggregate .
num .
furnish coarse aggregate consisting of washed gravel washed ccs or washed lightweight aggregate prepared by expanding products such as clay diatomite shale or slate .
num .
gradation .
furnish any of the coarse aggregates from size no.num through no.num inclusive on table num num .
ensure that the percent by weight of material passing the no .
num num m sieve in the course aggregate does not exceed num percent .
num .
physical properties .
percent of wear los angeles test maximum num num masonry units num clay or shale brick .
furnish clay or shale brick conforming to astm c num with the following modifications num furnish bricks of such size and shape as to allow their incorporation in the structure in conformance with the specified dimensions of the structure .
num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num concrete brick .
furnish concrete brick according to astm c num with the following modifications num and num use cement conforming to num portland cement .
num use aggregate that conforms to the quality requirements of num .
num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num sample and test the brick according to astm c num .
furnish bricks of such size and shape as to allow their incorporation in the structure in conformance with the specified dimensions of the structure .
furnish bricks that have a rectangular crosssection with square corners .
ensure that the ends edges and one face are plain surfaces .
num concrete masonry blocks .
furnish concrete masonry blocks conforming to astm c num with the following modification num and num use cement conforming to num portland cement .
num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num furnish blocks of such size and shape as to allow their incorporation in the structure in conformance with the specified dimensions of the structure .
num concrete incidentals num glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp dowel and deformed bars .
furnish round and straight fiber reinforced polymer gfrp dowel bars .
furnish deformed grfp bars meeting the material requirements of aci num .
ensure resin used to manufacture the gfrp bars consists of an epoxy vinyl ester resin .
ensure the glass fiber used is ecr glass which meets astm dnum .
ensure that the minimum glass fiber content is num percent by weight .
furnish dowels and deformed bars of a type meeting the dimensional requirements of the standard construction drawings provide certified test data according to num with each shipment .
num preformed fillers .
furnish preformed fillers according to aashto m num or aashto m num with the following modification num for materials manufactured as described in num and num ensure that the producer certifies to the engineer that the asphalt content is at least num percent by weight of the filler .
or furnish semirigid closedcell polypropylene foam preformed fillers according to the following num .
water absorption num astm d num or aashto t num num .
compression recovery num astm d num or aashto t num num .
extrusion num inch astm d num or aashto t num num .
density num lbcu.ft .
astm d num or aashto t num num .
heat resistance num f numf astm d num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num hot applied joint sealer furnish hot applied joint sealer conforming to astm d num type ii .
use this material as the primer for type num membrane .
num burlap cloth .
furnish burlap cloth according to aashto m num class num .
num sheet materials for concrete curing .
furnish sheet materials conforming to astm cnum for moisture loss and reflectance only .
num liquid membraneforming compounds for curing concrete .
furnish liquid membraneforming compounds conforming to astm c num with the following modification num in addition liquid membraneforming compounds will have a minimum solids content of num .
num water retention liquid membraneforming compound when tested in accordance with num shall have a water loss of not more than num kgmnum num hours and num kgmnum num hours .
num reflectance type num curing compound will have a minimum daylight reflectance of num .
num in addition mix type num curing compound until uniform in color and consistency and then pour into a glass graduated cylinder kimax num ml to the num ml mark .
the type num curing compound should have a rate of settling such that its uniformly white portion as visible to the eye is not less than num ml at num hours and not less than num ml at num hours after filling the kimax cylinder .
the test should be performed at num num of num num oc .
during this test the glass cylinder should be stoppered and left undisturbed .
num in addition equip the containers for type num white pigmented liquid membrane forming compounds with mechanical agitators .
assign each container in any batch or lot a number as the container is being filled .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num airentraining admixtures .
provide airentraining admixtures conforming to aashto m num .
conform to supplement num for approval .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num preformed elastomeric compression joint seal for concrete .
a .
general .
provide preformed elastomeric compression joint seal conforming to astm d num with the following modifications num ensure that the size and design is as shown on the plans .
num the engineer will perform inspection at the project site .
num if sampled provide a minimum of num feet num m with all manufacturers markings num in addition ensure that markings are every num foot num mm .
use lubricants recommended by the seal manufacturer to install preformed compression seals .
b. qualification .
obtain department approval of each design shape width depth web and shell thickness before use .
submit drawings of the seals showing all dimensions and dimension tolerances and weight per foot meter with the request for approval .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num chemical admixture for concrete .
provide chemical admixtures conforming to astm c num .
ensure that the minimum relative durability factor is num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num neoprene sheeting .
provide material conforming to the following test description specification requirement thickness inch astm dnum num breaking strength grab lb astm dnum num num long .
trans .
adhesive strip num wide num long lb astm dnum num burst strength psi astm dnum num heat aging num hr .
num f num  bend without cracking astm dnum no cracking of coating low temperature brittleness num hr .
num  f bend around  mandrel astm dnum no cracking of coating furnish material according to the departments qpl .
num high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm resin .
provide low viscosity nonfuming high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm resin conforming to the following viscosity less than num cps brookfield viscometer model rvt with ul adaptor or model lvf spindle and ul adaptor c num f num c astm d num density greater than num lbgal ca num f num c astm d num flash point greater than num f num c penskymartens cc astm d num vapor pressure less than num mm hg c num f num c astm d num tg dsc greater than num f num c astm dnum shelf life must be num year minimum at manufacturers recommended environmental considerations gel time greater than num min num g mass astm d num thin film percent solids greater than num by weight bond strength greater than num psi num mpa astm c num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num non shrink non metallic materials .
provide anchoring materials for installing anchor bolts dowels and similar material in concrete which are nonshrink num solids two part resin and hardener fast setting and moisture insensitive .
a .
provide certified test data according to num showing compliance with the following requirements .
include manufacturers installation and application requirements .
test description specification requirements notes bond strength dry astm c num num day min .
num psi average of three samples num bond strength after subjected to num cycles freezethaw testing astm c num specimens subjected to astm cnum method b testing and the tested conforming to astm c num min .
num psi average of three samples num heat deflection astm dnum num day min .
num f linear coefficient of shrinkage astm cnum max .
num pullout strength test dry see procedure below num hours min .
load num lbs average of three cylinders in dry condition pullout strength test wet see procedure below num hours min .
load num lbs average of three cylinders in wet condition num a total of six samples will be made under astm c num .
three of the astm c num samples will be tested under astm cnum method b and those samples tested .
pullout strength test procedure .
perform pullout strength tests under dry and wet conditions as follows num .
dry condition epoxy steel cast three concrete test blocks or cylinders a minimum of num inches num mm in width or diameter by num inch num mm in depth .
use concrete with a compressive strength of num num psi at numdays center a num num inch num mm deep hole drilled the diameter required by the manufacturers requirements for installing a no .
num numm rebar in the block or cylinder by drilling or forming .
dry the hole surfaces and clean the holes following manufacturer instructions .
fill the hole with adhesive materials according to manufacturer recommendations .
insert a no .
num numm deformed reinforcing bar num inches num mm long cleaned and degreased into the hole .
hold and center the bar perpendicular to the concrete surface in the groutfilled hole during the curing period .
num .
wet condition epoxy steel cast three concrete test blocks or cylinders a minimum of num inches num mm in width or diameter by num inch num mm in depth .
use concrete with a compressive strength of num num psi at numdays .
center a num num inch num mm deep hole drilled the diameter required by the manufacturers requirements for installing a no .
num numm rebar in the blocks or cylinders by drilling or forming .
wet the holes surfaces prior to applying the anchoring material by filling the hole with water and letting stand for five minutes .
turn the samples over for two minutes to allow the excess water to drain from the hole turn all samples over to the upright positions and immediately fill hole with adhesive materials according to manufacturer recommendations .
insert a no .
num numm deformed reinforcing bar num inches num mm long cleaned and degreased into the hole .
hold and center the bar perpendicular to the concrete surface in the adhesivefilled hole during the curing period .
cure the specimen at num num f num num c for num hours .
for the pullout strength test apply an axial load to the bar at a rate of num inch num mm per minute until the bar pulls out of the specimen or the concrete block or cylinder cracks or spalls .
record the failure mode and applied load .
b. epoxy materials will also conform to astm cnum type iv grade num class a b or c. supply the anchoring material in nonreactive containers and with their sds .
label containers with the name of the product the manufacturer the shelf life expiration date the batch number quantity and provide application instructions .
maintain storage areas between num and num f num and num c. only use materials on the departments qpl .
num quick setting concrete mortar .
provide prepackaged mortar material that requires the addition of water only .
only use materials meeting the following criteria a .
capable of being extended num percent by dry mortar weight with aggregate meeting the following requirements num .
gradation requirements of table num for no .
num num num or a combination thereof .
num .
aashto m num maximum passing no .
num num m sieve not to exceed num percent .
num .
aashto t num and t num absorption not more than num percent .
num .
aashto t num soundness loss not more than num percent .
a .
ensure that the material meets the following requirements test type num type num compressive strength astm c num psi mpa num hour num num num num num hour num num num hours num num num num num days num num compressive strength astm c num psi mpa num hour num num num num num hour num num num hours num num num num num days num num initial set time min astm c num num minutes num minutes bond strength astm c num psi mpa num hours num num num num num days num num num num flexural strength astm c num psi mpa num hour num num num day num num num num freeze and thaw astm c num use either procedure b or a num procedure b num cycles durability factor num num procedure a num cycles durability factor num num num extend test specimens num percent by dry mortar weight with aggregate .
num test the mortar as received with the addition of water .
ensure that the amount of water is designated on the packing container by the manufacturer .
b. prequalify the material by placing and having the material evaluated conforming to supplement num for num years .
at the end of the num year rating the material will meet the following criteria num .
percentage debondingdelamination num num .
percentage spalling num num .
mid panel average crack width num inch num mm and total length of mid panel cracks num feet num m total length num .
edge crackingdebonding average crack width num inch num mm and total length of cracks num feet num m furnish the laboratory with a certified copy of test results from a recognized laboratory showing compliance with the requirements of this specification for item .
c. furnish the laboratory written documentation of the method of surface preparation and any primers adhesives or activators used in the field test .
those will become requirements of the material system for subsequent approval or use .
a recognized laboratory is one that is regularly inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory of the national institute of standards and technology .
provide quick setting concrete mortar packaged in strong moisture resistant paper bags or other suitable containers capable of withstanding shipping normal handling and storage without breakage .
the package will protect the material from deterioration when stored in a dry condition for a period of num year .
each package or container must display information regarding the minimum nominal yield and instructions for mixing .
calculate volumetric yield determinations using the manufacturers recommended water content .
furnish materials listed on the departments qpl .
num nonshrink mortar .
provide nonshrink mortar conforming to astm c num with the following modification num in addition ensure that the fluidity of the grout at the maximum water content is at least equal to a flowable mixture as defined in astm c num section num and that the minimum flow is num num drops of the flow table in num seconds .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num concrete sealers a .
provide an epoxyurethane sealer incorporating a two component cross linked urethane and conforming to the following requirements num .
absorption astm cnum nonair entrained concrete .
proportion and mix concrete according to astm cnum .
sealed concrete under total immersion will not exceed num after num hours or num after num days num .
scaling resistance astm cnum a rating of no scaling after num cycles on the sealed concrete non air entrained concrete as compared to severe scaling on untreated concrete .
num .
nchrp num series num cube test num weight gain not to exceed num of untreated cube num absorbed chloride not to exceed num of untreated cube num .
nchrp num series iv southern exposure num absorbed chloride not to exceed num of untreated concrete num .
volatile organic compounds voc maximum astm d num num lbs.galnum gml as applied record and report the application rate square footagegallon of sealer during the tests .
provide test data from an approved independent testing facility .
the sealer manufacturer funds the testing costs .
furnish the test data a one quart one liter sample and the sds to the office of materials management omm .
omm will determine material acceptance .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
b .
provide an nonepoxy sealer conforming to the following requirements num .
absorption astm cnum nonair entrained concrete .
proportion and mix concrete according to astm cnum .
sealed concrete under total immersion will not exceed num after num hours or num after num days .
num .
scaling resistance astm cnum a rating of no scaling after num cycles on the sealed concrete non air entrained concrete as compared to severe scaling on untreated concrete .
num .
nchrp num series num cube test num weight gain not to exceed num of untreated cube num absorbed chloride not to exceed num of untreated cube num .
nchrp num series iv southern exposure num absorbed chloride not to exceed num of untreated concrete num .
volatile organic compounds voc maximum astm d num num lbs.galnum gml as applied record and report the application rate square footagegallon of sealer during the tests .
provide test data from an approved independent testing facility .
the sealer manufacturer funds the testing costs .
furnish the test data a one quart one liter sample and the sds to the omm .
omm will determine material acceptance .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num soluble reactive silicate .
provide a soluble reactive silicate srs that is a blend of nakflxsiox sodium potassium fluoro or other silicate surfactants polymers and stabilizers capable of thoroughly saturating and sealing concrete .
the treatment system will meet the following performance requirements a .
scaling resistance treated concrete abraded by sufficient wire brushing to break any film remaining on the surface after drying will pass astm c num scaling resistance test with a rating of num slight to moderate scaling after num cycles nonair entrained concrete as compared to a rating of numsevere scaling on untreated concrete .
b. absorption the absorption of treated concrete under total immersion will not exceed num percent after num hours or num percent after num days astm c num nonair entrained concrete .
concrete should be proportioned and mixed in accordance with astm c num .
c. skid resistance the skid resistance of treated concrete pavement will not be reduced by more than num percent as compared to the same untreated pavement .
astm e num using astm e num ribbed tire at num mph num kph five test average .
d. aashto t num as modified .
the standard t num resistance of concrete to chloride ion penetration will be modified as follows in addition to section num intentionally break the specimens so they have a full depth crack through the middle of the slab .
install section num dams around the perimeter of the reassembled cracked concrete specimens .
caulk around the perimeter of the dam to assure that only the crack and the concrete will allow water to pass through or be absorbed .
after assembly measure the crack width at three locations and report the crack width .
perform the ponding of num until the num solution comes through the specimens crack .
record and report the time required for the solution to appear through the specimens crack .
remove the solution from the specimens and redry according to num aashto t num .
after drying apply the srs to the specimens top surface at the manufacturers recommended rate of application .
record and report the rate of application .
air dry the srs coated dammed sample specimens for num days .
after num days re perform the ponding with num chloride solution until solution comes through the specimens crack or num days .
record the time the until the ponded solution comes through the crack .
acceptable srs materials will have a value of num or more when the ponding time before srs application is divided into the ponding time after srs application .
sections num num num and num of aashto t num will not apply .
have tests performed by an approved independent testing facility acceptable to the department .
submit test data a one quart one liter sample a technical data sheet and the sds to the omm for approval .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num gravityfed resin .
provide non shrink non metallic resin conforming to astm c num type num grade num class b or c and the following the maximum viscosity at the lowest allowable temperature will be num cps .
the manufacturer will provide test data to verify the viscosity at the lowest temperature for the class for which it is to be approved .
a minimum average sand retention of num for three samples tested according to the sand penetration test method described below .
show no signs of cracking debonding or insufficient curing during the sand penetration test a .
sand penetration test method .
this test will be conducted with the following equipment and materials num .
num oz num ml wax coated paper cup .
maximum top diameter num num num mm bottom diameter num num num mm height num num num mm .
num .
num num grade sand astm c num num .
num pint nonabsorbent container num .
num oz num ml plastic cup num .
stirring stick or spatula num .
scale accurate to num g num .
disposable gloves num .
stop watch num .
thermometer num .
paint brush b .
perform the test as follows num .
assure the material and the room is at num f num c num .
determine and record the tare weight of the paper cup num .
num .
introduce num grams of num num graded sand num into the paper cup .
num .
record the weight of the cup and the sand .
num .
consolidate the sand in the cup by lifting the cup approximately  inch num mm and dropping num to num times .
then lightly tap the sides of the cup num to num times with the fingers .
the sample may also be placed on a vibrating table for num to num seconds .
num .
measure enough material into the num oz plastic cups num to make at least a num g sample .
num .
combine the components into the nonabsorbent container num and mix according to the manufacturers recommendations using a spatula or stirring stick num .
num .
pour numg of material over the sand and record the weight of the resin cup and sand .
num .
allow the resin sand and cup to set undisturbed for num hours at num f num c. reweigh the resin cup and sand .
num .
remove as much of the paper cup from around the hardened resin and sand matrix as possible .
lightly brush any loose sand from the matrix .
weigh the hardened matrix .
num .
calculate the percent of sand retained f as follows f e d a num where a tare weight of paper cup g b weight of cup and sand g c weight of fresh mixture of resin cup and sand g d weight of cured mixture of resin cup and sand g e weight of resin sand matrix as measured in step num g num .
report the average of three specimens mixed separately .
num .
also calculate and report the percent loss due to curing g as follows g d c c b num num .
examine the sand resin matrix for signs of insufficient curing and bond or excessive shrinkage .
material approval .
the manufacturer will provide certified test data verifying compliance with the above requirements technical data sheet current sds for the material num gallon sample and a letter certifying that the product formulation will not be altered without notification to the department and omm .
omm will determine materials acceptance and include in the departments qpl .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num epoxy injection resin .
provide epoxy injection resin capable of application positive adherence and strength development when applied to moist or wet surfaces at temperatures of num f num c and above .
use products that contain num solids material and no nonreactive diluents solvents or other fillers .
provide materials that meet the following requirements a .
the injection material will meet the requirements of astm c num type iv grade num and class b or c and have a maximum viscosity of num cps at the lowest ambient material and substrate temperature to be used .
b .
the paste materials will meet the requirements of astm c num type i grade num and class b or c. material approval .
the manufacturer of the materials is responsible for prequalifying the material and submitting the following to the omm an independent certified test data indicating that the materials when mixed according to the manufacturers recommendations meet the requirements listed above .
manufacturers technical data sheet for the paste and injection materials .
sds for paste and injection materials .
num gallon sample or num kits of the injection materials furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
steps removed num concrete and clay pipe num nonreinforced concrete pipe .
provide nonreinforced concrete pipe conforming to astm c num astm c numm with the following modifications num does not apply .
num provide cementitious materials conforming to num except num .
num provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num ensure that the manufacture furnishes the number of pipe shown in the minimum requirements for sampling materials table section num .
num in addition perform external load crushing strength tests with hard rubber blocks on wood strips with plaster of paris bedding fillets .
num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from materials delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
ensure that the manufacturers of these materials are certified by the office of materials management according to supplement num .
num ensure that the markings also include p to denote nonreinforced pipe .
testing equipment .
ensure that every manufacturer furnishing concrete pipe under these specifications furnishes all facilities and personnel needed to perform the tests .
num reinforced concrete circular pipe .
provide reinforced concrete circular pipe conforming to astm c num astm c numm with the following modifications ensure that the minimum dload of the reinforced concrete pipe is as follows size minimum dload num in num mm num lb num kg num in num mm num lb num kg num in num mm num lb num kg num in num mm num lb num kg num in num mm num lb num kg num in or larger num mm or larger num lb num kg num .
in addition ensure that this pipe is circular reinforced concrete pipe with circular or elliptical reinforcement with and without quadrant and s strip reinforcement .
num the acceptability of the pipe design is determined according to section num .
all designs in astm c num astm c numm tables num through num inclusive are accepted designs with the numinch num mm crack dloads as follows astm c num astm c numm table no .
dload numinch crack num mm crack num class ii num lb num kg num class iii num lb num kg num class iv num lb num kg num class v num lb num kg all designs in tables num through num are accepted designs with noted numinch num mm crack and ultimate dloads .
for intermediate dloads in tables num through num of astm c num astm c numm steel areas for a given wall thickness may be interpolated between tables num and num num and num and num and num for a size and dload as accepted designs .
where different concrete strengths are listed in the tables use the higher concrete .
in addition steel areas interpolated as above between table num and table num numinch num mm through numinch num mm using the higher concrete strength and interpolation of the circumferential steel between table num num and table num using the wall thickness and stirrup designs in table num are accepted designs .
pipe manufactured according to an accepted pipe design will be accepted at the option of the laboratory according to the basis of acceptance described in section num or num .
provide reinforced concrete pipe with sstirrups according to figure num figure numm and the following requirements num .
provide steel conforming to num num num or num .
ensure that the wall thickness amount of circular reinforcement sstirrup system and concrete strength comply with tables num num and num num .
ensure that the spacing centertocenter of adjacent inner rings of circumferential reinforcement in a cage does not exceed num inches num mm for pipe up to and including pipe having a num inches num mm wall thickness or exceed wall thicknesses for larger pipe and in no case exceed num inches num mm .
num .
ensure that each line of sstirrups have a continuous s shape extending longitudinally from end to end of the pipe .
ensure that they extend from the inner cage toward the outer surface of the pipe for a distance not less than the minimum amplitude .
ensure that sstirrups pass around and are in contact with each inside circumferential member of the inner cage .
ensure that each line of sstirrups lie essentially in a plane passing through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
num .
where more than one length of stirrup material is used per line make a lap round one circumferential member of the inner cage .
ensure that the ends of s shaped stirrups at splices include an outer bend .
do not use more than three lengths of s material in a line and ensure that the minimum length of a section of sstirrups is num inches num m. figure num illustrative example of sstirrup support system for numinch crack dload num numinch diameter pipe minimum area per support num square inch num lines spaced num num inches .
for other classes and sizes see tables num num and num .
figure numm illustrative example of sstirrup support system for num mm crack dload num num mm diameter pipe minimum area per support num mmnum num lines spaced num mm .
for other classes and sizes see tables numm numm and numm .
table num table numm numinch crack dload num num mm crack dload num ultimate strength dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe inch wall thick ness inch circular reinforcement in circular pipe internal dia .
of pipe mm wall thick ness mm circular reinforcement in circular pipe inft of pipe cmm of pipe inner cage outer cage inner cage outer cage reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num psi reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num psi reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num all permitted reinforcing steel concrete strength num psi all permitted reinforcing steel concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in addition test the pipe designs covered by tables num num num and num and astm c num astm c numm tables num through num and interpolated designs by the threeedge bearing method .
when the test load on the pipe reaches num percent of the required numinch num mm crack dload without developing a numinch num mm or larger crack accept the test specimen for strength .
if any test specimen fails to pass this test but attained the numinch num mm crack continue the test until the ultimate dload is reached .
num in addition accept pipe num inches num mm and larger in diameter covered by tables num num num and num and astm c num astm c numm tables num through num and interpolated designs according to section num and the following requirements num .
when pipe from a plant has been approved by the laboratory for a specified design and pipe from the same plant has wall and steel area not less than the approved pipe .
num .
when it has been established that two or more plants have complied with the above requirements for the class and size under consideration and the plant under consideration has established compliance with the above requirements for an adjacent size and the wall and steel area are not less than the pipe tested at the two plants .
num provide cement according to num .
num provide fly ash according to num num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num provide steel according to num num num or num .
num ensure that no more than two holes are cast drilled or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each piece of pipe for the purpose of handling or laying .
taper the holes unless drilled and before backfilling fill the tapered holes with portland cement mortar precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar or a device on the departments approved list specifically designed for filling the hole .
fill drilled holes with portland cement mortar .
num and num in addition perform strength tests using methods described in astm c num astm c numm .
num in addition ensure that pipe designs covered by tables num num num and num and astm c num astm c numm tables num through num have the number of samples selected as shown in the minimum requirements for sampling materials table for each size class and production lot pipe of the same size and class made from the same materials and by the same process and approximately the same production date for test .
table num numinch crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe inch wall thick ness inch circular reinforcement in circular pipe sstirrups inft of pipe minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circumferential spacing on inner cage minimum amplitude of stirrups num inner cage outer cage reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in inch inch inch all permitted reinforcing steel concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num number of lines in the table indicates the number of longitudinal lines required in each top and bottom portion of the pipe .
the area of each support element in a pipe is two times the crosssectional area of the sstirrups wire used .
there shall be an equal number of these lines of sstirrups on either side of the midpoint of both the top and bottom of the pipe .
see figure num .
num the amplitude is the overall width of the line of stirrups .
table numm num mm crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe mm wall thick ness mm circular reinforcement in circular pipe sstirrups cmm of pipe minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circumferential spacing on inner cage minimum amplitude of stirrups num inner cage outer cage reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num or num only concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mm mm mm mm all permitted reinforcing steel concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num number of lines in the table indicates the number of longitudinal lines required in each top and bottom portion of the pipe .
the area of each support element in a pipe is two times the crosssectional area of the sstirrups wire used .
there shall be an equal number of these lines of sstirrups on either side of the midpoint of both the top and bottom of the pipe .
see figure numm .
num the amplitude is the overall width of the line of stirrups .
table num numinch crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe wall thick ness circular reinforcement in circular pipe inft of pipe sstirrups minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circum .
spacing on inner cage min .
amplitude of stirrups num inch inch inner cage outer cage in inch inch inch concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num refer to footnotes in table num table numm num mm crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe wall thick ness circular reinforcement in circular pipe cmm of pipe sstirrups minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circum .
spacing on inner cage min .
amplitude of stirrups num mm mm inner cage outer cage mm mm mm mm concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num refer to footnotes in table numm table num numinch crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe inch wall thick ness inch circular reinforcement in circular pipe sstirrups minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circum .
spacing on inner cage minimum amplitude of stirrups num inft of pipe inner cage outer cage concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in inch inch inch concrete strength num psi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num refer to footnotes in table num table numm num mm crack dload num ultimate strength dload num internal dia .
of pipe mm wall thick ness mm circular reinforcement in circular pipe sstirrups minimum area per support element number of lines num longitudinal spacing circum .
spacing on inner cage minimum amplitude of stirrups num cmm of pipe inner cage outer cage concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mm mm mm mm concrete strength num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num refer to footnotes in table numm num perform compression tests on cores according to astm c num astm c numm .
num does not apply .
num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
num furnish materials from suppliers certified according to supplement num .
num in addition after the capital letter d designate the dload the design wall thickness in millimeters inches expressed as a decimal .
ensure that pipe with sstirrups have the symbol s. ensure that pipe requiring axis orientation without lift holes i.e .
stirrup pipe quadrant reinforced pipe elliptically reinforced pipe has the centerline of the crown of the pipe marked inside and outside with the symbol tb .
mark pipe with quadrant steel with the symbol q .
mark pipe with elliptical reinforcement with the symbol e. mark pipe with deformed wire reinforcement required in the design with the symbol df .
num reinforced concrete pipe epoxy coated .
provide type a reinforced concrete epoxy coated pipe conforming to num and type b conforming to num with the following modification in the plant prepare the interior barrel and joint surface areas of the concrete pipe to remove all forms of oil laitance and other deleterious materials and then line them with a highbuild polyamidecured twocomponent coal tar epoxy coating military specification dodpnuma sh .
spray the lining compound to obtain a continuous and relatively uniform and smooth lining with a minimum dry film thickness of num inch num m .
ensure that all coated pipe are free of surface irregularities such as air bubbles delamination lumping sagging blistering pinholing or porosity in the coating film .
num reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe .
provide reinforced concrete elliptical culvert storm drain and sewer pipe conforming to astm c num astm c numm with the following modifications num delete class hea .
table num includes additional design requirements .
num all materials processes of manufacture and finished pipe are subject to inspection and approval by the department .
when directed by the laboratory the manufacturer will cut holes in sections of the finished pipe for inspection .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num .
num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num provide steel according num num num or num .
num in addition manufacture horizontal elliptical pipe heii and heiii using the design requirements of table num .
num in addition ensure that pipe made in accordance with num has three lines of reinforcement of elliptical shape .
place the outer and inner lines of reinforcement so that the nominal protective covering of the concrete over the reinforcement in the barrel of the pipe is num inch num mm subject to the variations permitted in section num .
ensure that the third or middle line is in contact with and fastened securely to the inner line at the vertical axis of the pipe both top and bottom and to the outer line at the horizontal axis on both sides .
ensure that the length of the middle line is the average of the length of the inner and outer line .
ensure that the middle line is of an elliptical shape and runs smoothly between the specified points of contact with the inner and outer lines .
num ensure that no more than two holes are cast drilled or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each piece of pipe for the purpose of handling or laying .
taper the holes unless drilled and before backfilling fill the tapered holes with portland cement mortar precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar or a device on the departments approved list specifically designed for filling the hole .
fill drilled holes with portland cement mortar .
num select the specified number of pipe as noted in the minimum requirements for sampling materials table for the purpose of test at the plant and at random from the lot to be shipped or at the project site from the pipe delivered and that are pipe that would not otherwise be rejected under these specifications .
test pipe according to section num except the laboratory may accept pipe num inches num mm and larger in diameter according to section num and the following requirements num .
when pipe from a plant has been approved by the laboratory for a specified design pipe from the same plant with wall and steel area not less than the approved pipe may be approved by means of tests on cores verifying absorption strength wall and steel area .
num .
when it has been established that two or more plants have complied with the above requirements for the class and size under consideration and the plant under consideration has established compliance with the above requirements for an adjacent size and the wall and steel area are not less than the pipe tested at the two plants .
num ensure that the load to produce a numinch num mm crack and the ultimate load as determined by astm c num astm c numm threeedge bearing method is not less than shown in tables num num and num .
the ultimate strength test may be waived when the test load on the pipe reaches num percent of the required num inch num mm crack dload without developing a numinch num mm or larger crack .
num perform compression tests for satisfying the minimum specified concrete strength requirement from cores drilled from the wall of the pipe .
ensure that the diameter of the core is such that the capped height to diameter or ld ratio lies between one and two .
ensure that the cores are secured prepared for testing and tested by methods prescribed in the appropriate sections of astm c num astm c numm .
ensure that the compressive strength of each core tested is equal to or greater than the design strength of the concrete .
if a core does not meet the required strength test another core from the same pipe .
if this core does not meet the required strength the department may reject the pipe .
make additional tests on other pipe to determine the acceptability of the lot .
when the cores cut from a section of pipe successfully meet the strength test requirement ensure that the core holes are plugged and sealed by the manufacturer in a manner such that the pipe section will meet all of the test requirements of these specifications .
num does not apply .
num does not apply .
num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
ensure manufacturers of these materials are certified according to supplement num .
num in addition place the plant location on each pipe and for pipe manufactured to design requirements of num place the letter a after the pipe class .
ensure that the markings are legible and indented in the pipe section or painted on with waterproof paint .
table num design requirements for horizontal elliptical pipe equiv .
round size inch rise inch span inch minimum wall thickness inch minimum reinforcement inft heii heiii dloads num num num num utl .
num utl .
num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num the test load in lbft equals dload nominal inside span in feet .
concrete strengthnum psi .
table numm design requirements for horizontal elliptical pipe equiv .
round size mm rise mm span mm minimum wall thickness mm minimum reinforcement cmm heii heiii dloads num num num num utl .
num utl .
num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num num num num num num lines totaling num num lines totaling num the test load in knm equals dload nominal inside span in mm .
concrete strengthnum mpa .
num precast reinforced concrete box sections .
provide precast reinforced concrete box section conforming to astm c num with the following modifications ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified by the laboratory according to supplement num .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num .
num provide carbonate microfines according to num and table num .
num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num provide reinforcement according to num or num .
provide longitudinal distribution reinforcement according to num num or num .
num for the following box sizes span by rise refer to astm cnum numxnum num num num numxnum num num num num and numxnum num num num feet .
for the following box sizes span by rise refer to supplemental specification num numxnum num num num num num num numxnum num num num num num num numxnum num num num num num num and numxnum num num num num num num feet .
num provide hardened concrete that contains a minimum of num percent entrained air for wetcast sections with spans less than num feet num mm and for all sections with spans num feet num mm and greater .
num lift holes are not permitted .
use handling devices that do not require a hole through the box .
num verify concrete strength using cylinders .
do not ship items before the design strength of the concrete is reached .
num a minimum cover of num inch num mm over both circumferential and longitudinal reinforcement is required at the mating surfaces of joints .
num in addition mark the identification of the plant on each box section .
for box sections num feet num mm or greater mark the reinforcing steel areas for the section on each box section .
place the manufacturers name and required product information on the inside of the box section within the top onehalf of the culvert .
num precast reinforced concrete threesided flat topped culverts .
provide precast concrete three sided flat topped culverts according to astm c num with the following modifications provide flat deck culvert structures with a minimum clear span measured normal to the structure at the bottom of the haunch of num feet num mm and a minimum opening rise measured from bottom of leg to bottom of deck at the centerline of the structure of num feet num mm and a maximum clear span of num feet num mm and maximum opening rising of num feet num mm .
ensure that the minimum wall and deck thicknesses is num inches num mm and num inches num mm respectively measured under the haunch normal to the structure and at the centerline of the span measured perpendicular to the structure .
ensure manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to supplement num .
num .
ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations a structural load rating and shop drawings according to num .
ensure the shop drawings include the following num .
load rate the structure according to the requirements of section num of the departments bridge design manual .
num .
all material specifications .
num .
all plan view .
num .
all elevation view .
num .
all headwall and wingwall attachment requirements .
num .
all dimensions .
num .
all maintenance of traffic phases .
num .
all section sizes .
num .
all design handling strength .
the manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the department .
ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required num .
for top mounted guardrail show the guardrail plate and bolt locations in the plan view .
ensure that holes are a minimum of num inches num mm from a joint .
num .
for side mounted guardrail show additional reinforcing details according to the plan details .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num .
num provide carbonate microfines according to num and table num .
num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num use chemical admixtures according to num .
use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing steel is used .
an approved list of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the laboratory .
manufacturers should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength entrained air content workability etc .
of their concrete mixes .
the manufacturers choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure .
num provide airentraining admixture according to num .
num provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num grade num grade num or num .
in lieu of epoxy coated reinforcement an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the approved dosage and provide reinforcement according to num num or num grade num grade num or num num num or num .
provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast structural unit into a castinplace structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit .
provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num or num when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel .
provide galvanized coatings according to num when these connections are designed using connection plates hardware or concrete inserts .
num design according to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num .
include a future wearing surface loading of num psf .
num ensure that the concrete cover dimension over reinforcement is a minimum of num inches num mm in the slab and in the exterior of the leg .
ensure that the interior of the leg reinforcement cover tapers from num inch num mm at the bottom of the leg to num inches num mm at the bottom of the haunch .
ensure that the ends of longitudinal reinforcement have a minimum cover of num inch num mm and spacers used to position the reinforcement are plastic or epoxy coated steel regardless of whether a corrosion inhibiting admixture is used .
num ensure that the top slab is produced with a keyway joint .
the keyway provides a void volume equivalent to that of num inches num mm prestressed beam as per standard construction drawing psbdnum .
ensure that the joint in the leg sections is designed to produce a shear key or interlocking joint .
ensure that nonadjoining outside legs are flat .
sandblast the joint surfaces to the satisfaction of the department or a num pounds per square inch num mpa water blast no more than num days prior to shipping .
ensure that the culvert is designed such that the sections when laid together will make a continuous line with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities all compatible with the permissible variations of section num .
num application of membrane waterproofing at any location other than the final location shown on the plans is prohibited .
num ensure that the aggregate cement and water are manufactured in conformance with num and num .
ensure that the temperature requirements of num and num are met .
ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate microfines material is not less than num pounds per cubic yard num kgmnum of concrete .
if used add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution .
consider the water in the solution as mixing water for the purpose of determining the wc ratio of concrete .
num cure the threesided sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum design handling strength as defined in the shop drawings .
test a cylinder to check each sections design handling strength .
repeat this test as often as needed .
only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling strength has been met .
if the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths then the minimum handling strength is assumed to be num percent of the design strength .
ensure that the curing then continues either in or out of the forms until the specified minimum design strength is met .
num steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated enclosure to contain the live steam or heat .
the initial application of the steam or heat is from two to four hours after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place .
if retarders are used increase the waiting period to num to num hours .
as an alternative determine the actual time of initial set according to astm c num .
do not start curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed .
during the waiting period ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than num f num c. during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat ensure that the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding num f num c per hour until the curing temperature is reached .
ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed num f num c. hold the design temperature until the concrete has reached the desired design strength .
do not direct the application of live steam on the concrete forms so as to cause localized high temperatures .
num provide water curing according to num and num method a .
num provide membrane curing according to num method b .
num ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met .
num holes for handling or setting are not permitted .
do not move members before the design handling strength of the concrete is reached or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached .
ensure that the manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them .
num ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of num percent entrained air .
num keep the cylinders and matching culvert section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with the corresponding culvert section or upon agreement by the department keep the cylinders at a location that will provide the same environment as the culvert sections .
num for each section of the culvert produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are identifiable with the matching culvert section .
num conform to supplement num for acceptance .
num ensure that cylinder strengths conform to supplement num .
num plug the core holes by using a concrete that is the same as that used in the section and cured in according to section num or by a nonshrink grout that exceeds the concrete design strength .
num the design in the plan reflects the external top slab elevation of the structure .
if the structure supplied has a deck thicker than the plan design eliminate the difference between the design top slab elevation and the supplied top slab elevation by a reducing the leg length .
the department may approve alternate methods to eliminate the difference between the design top slab elevation and the supplied top slab elevation .
the department will not approve a change in the top slab elevation from that shown on the plans .
the clear span shown is the minimum for the structure .
the manufacturer may provide a clear span greater than that shown .
base the exact footer locations for both the elevation and offset on the manufacturers shop drawings .
ensure that these footer locations are such that the centerline of the leg at the bottom of the haunch matches the centerline of the footer .
all changes to the project resulting from the manufacturers dimensional changes in the structure are at no charge to the department .
ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips .
ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and regular finish being defined as a numinch variation within num feet num mm variation within num m. num ensure that the slab and walls are perpendicular with a diagonal difference of not more than num percent .
ensure that the length of each section is within num inch num mm of the design length .
consider the length is the average of the length measured at each side and at the middle of the threesided section .
num ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is num inch num mm except that the cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top slab is not less than num inches num mm .
the above tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint .
num resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval .
num make repairs according to the departments requirements .
the department will not make additional payments for culvert repairs .
repairs are acceptable if in the opinion of the department the repairs are sound properly finished and cured .
num perform inspection at the project site .
furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to supplement num .
num form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a wood panel forming system will not be cause for rejection .
in addition hairline cracks less than num inch num mm are not cause for rejection .
num ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the threesided section num foot num mm below the leg haunch .
add the product marking upon removal of the forms .
the manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final .
num precast reinforced concrete arch sections .
provide precast reinforced concrete arch sections according to astm c num with the following modifications this item shall consist of manufacturing precast reinforced concrete arch sections for culverts .
ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to supplement num .
num ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations a structural load rating and shop drawings according to num .
ensure the shop drawings include the following num .
load rate the structure according to the requirements of section num of the departments bridge design manual .
num .
all material specifications .
num .
all plan view .
num .
all elevation view .
num .
all headwall and wingwall attachment requirements .
num .
all dimensions .
num .
all maintenance of traffic phases .
num .
all section sizes .
num .
all design handling strength .
the manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the department .
ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required num .
for top mounted guardrail the guardrail plate and bolt locations are shown in the plan view .
holes shall be a minimum of num inches num mm from a joint .
num .
the corrosion inhibitor being used if any and dosage rate .
dosage rate will be approved by the laboratory .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num .
num provide carbonate microfines according to num and table num .
num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num use chemical admixtures according to num .
use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing steel is used .
an approved list of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the laboratory .
manufacturers should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength entrained air content workability etc .
of their concrete mixes .
the manufacturers choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure .
num provide airentraining admixture according to num .
num provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num grade num grade num or num .
in lieu of epoxy coated reinforcement an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the approved dosage and provide reinforcement according to num num or num grade num grade num or num num num or num .
provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast structural unit into a castinplace structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit .
provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num or num when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel .
provide galvanized coatings according to num when these connections are designed using connection plates hardware or concrete inserts .
num design according to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num .
include a future wearing surface loading of num psf .
num ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the outside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of num inches num mm .
ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the inside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of num num inches num mm .
the clear distance of the end circumferential wires shall not be less than num inch num mm nor more than num inches num mm from the ends of the sections .
reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing single or multiple layers of welded wire fabric threelayer maximum or utilizing a single layer of deformed billet steel bars .
the welded wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the section to maintain the shape and position of reinforcement .
longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars .
the ends of the longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall be not more than num inches num mm from the ends of the sections .
the outside and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the corners of the culvert shall be bent to such an angle that it is approximately equal to the configuration of the culverts outside corner .
num tension splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall not be made .
for splices other than tension splices the overlap shall be a minimum of num inches num mm for welded wire fabric or deformed billet steel bars .
the spacing centertocenter of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be not less than num inches num mm or more than num inches num mm .
for the wire fabric the spacing centertocenter of the longitudinal wire shall not be more than num inches num mm .
the spacing centertocenter of the longitudinal distribution steel for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than num inches num mm .
num ensure the sections are produced with butt ends .
the ends of the sections shall be such that when the sections are laid together they will make a continuous line of sections with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities all compatible with the permissible variations in these specifications .
provide a chamfer on the outside surface at the sections joint to form a void for a num num numinch num num mm flexible plastic gasket num .
num application of membrane waterproofing on the arch section at any location other than the final location shown on the plans is prohibited .
num ensure that the aggregate cement and water are manufactured according to num and num .
ensure that the temperature requirements of num and num are met .
ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate microfines material is not less than num pounds per cubic yard num kgmnum of concrete .
if used add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution .
consider the water in the solution as mixing water for the purpose of determining the watercement ratio of concrete .
num cure the arch sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum design handling strength as defined in the shop drawings .
test a cylinder to check each sections design handling strength .
repeat this test as often as needed .
only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling strength has been met .
if the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths then the minimum handling strength is assumed to be num percent of the design strength .
ensure that the curing then continues either in or out of the forms until the specified minimum design strength is met .
num steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated enclosure to contain the live steam or heat .
the initial application of the steam or heat is from num to num hours after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place .
if retarders are used increase the waiting period to num to num hours .
as an alternative determine the actual time of initial set according to astm c num .
do not start curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed .
during the waiting period ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than num f num c. during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat ensure that the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding num f num c per hour until the curing temperature is reached .
ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed num f num c. hold the design temperature until the concrete has reached the desired design strength .
do not direct the application of live steam on the concrete forms so as to cause localized high temperatures .
num provide water curing according to num and num method a .
num ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met .
holes for handling or setting are not permitted .
do not move members before the design handling strength of the concrete is reached or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached .
ensure that the manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them .
num ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of num percent entrained air .
num keep the cylinders and matching culvert section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with the corresponding culvert section or upon agreement by the department keep the cylinders at a location that will provide the same environment as the culvert sections .
num for each section of the culvert produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are identifiable with the matching culvert section .
num conform to supplement num for acceptance .
num ensure that cylinder strengths conform to supplement num .
num plug the core holes by using a concrete that is the same as that used in the section and cured according to section num or by a nonshrink grout that exceeds the concrete design strength .
num the underrun in length of a section shall not be more than num inch num mm .
all changes to the project resulting from the manufacturers dimensional changes in the structure are at no charge to the department .
ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips .
ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and regular finish being defined as a num inch variation within num feet num mm variation within num m. num the internal dimensions shall vary not more than num percent from the design dimensions or more than num mm num num inches whichever is less .
the haunch dimensions shall vary not more than num mm num inch from the design dimension .
num ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is num inch num mm except that the cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top slab is not less than num inches num mm .
the above tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint .
num resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval .
num make repairs according to the departments requirements .
the department will not make additional payments for culvert repairs .
repairs are acceptable if in the opinion of the department the repairs are sound properly finished and cured .
num perform inspection at the project site .
furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to supplement num .
num form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a wood panel forming system will not be cause for rejection .
in addition hairline cracks less than num inch num mm will not be cause for rejection .
num ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the arch section num foot num mm below the leg haunch .
add the product marking upon removal of the forms .
the manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final .
num precast reinforced concrete round sections .
provide precast reinforced concrete elliptical and circular arch sections according to astm c num with the following modifications this item shall consist of manufacturing precast reinforced concrete elliptical and circular arch sections for culverts .
ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to supplement num .
num .
ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations a structural load rating and shop drawings according to num .
ensure the shop drawings include the following num .
load rate the structure according to the requirements of section num of the departments bridge design manual .
num .
all material specifications .
num .
plan view .
num .
elevation views .
num .
headwall and wingwall attachment requirements .
num .
dimensions .
num .
all maintenance of traffic phases .
num .
section sizes .
num .
design handling strength .
the manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the department .
ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required num .
for top mounted guardrail the guardrail plate and bolt locations are shown in the plan view .
holes shall be a minimum of num inches num mm from a joint .
num .
the corrosion inhibitor being used if any and dosage rate .
dosage rate will be approved by the laboratory .
num in addition provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash conforming to num .
num provide carbonate microfines according to num and table num .
num provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num use chemical admixtures conforming to num .
use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing steel is used .
an approved list of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the laboratory .
manufacturers should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength entrained air content workability etc .
of their concrete mixes .
the manufacturers choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure .
num provide airentraining admixture conforming to num .
num provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num grade num grade num or num .
in lieu of epoxy coated reinforcement an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the approved dosage and provide reinforcement according to num num or num grade num grade num or num num num or num .
provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast structural unit into a castinplace structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit .
provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to num or num when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel .
provide galvanized coatings according to num when these connections are designed using connection plates hardware or concrete inserts .
num modify the first sentence as follows design according to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num .
include a future wearing surface loading of num psf .
num ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the outside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of num inches num mm .
ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the inside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of num num inches num mm .
the clear distance of the end circumferential wires shall not be less than num inch num mm nor more than num inches num mm from the ends of the sections .
reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing single or multiple layers of welded wire fabric threelayer maximum or utilizing a single layer of deformed billet steel bars .
the welded wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the section to maintain the shape and position of reinforcement .
longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars .
the ends of the longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall be not more than num inches num mm from the ends of the sections .
form the outside and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the arch such that it is approximately equal to the configuration of the arch shape .
num in addition tension splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall not be made .
for splices other than tension splices the overlap shall be a minimum of num inches num mm for welded wire fabric or deformed billet steel bars .
the spacing centertocenter of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be not less than num inches num mm or more than num inches num mm .
for the wire fabric the spacing centertocenter of the longitudinal wire shall not be more than num inches num mm .
the spacing centertocenter of the longitudinal distribution steel for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than num inches num mm .
num ensure the sections are produced with butt ends .
the ends of the sections shall be such that when the sections are laid together they will make a continuous line of sections with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities all compatible with the permissible variations in these specifications and section num of astm c num .
provide a num num inch num num mm minimum chamfer on the inside and outside surface at the sections joint .
ensure that the design of the arch in its final constructed location is structurally continuous throughout the arch unit providing for flexural compressive and shear force transfers .
for arches that gain structural continuity by a cast in place closure at the project site provide concrete with the same compressive strength as the precast arch .
in addition the cast in place closure shall provide continuity in the transverse direction num degrees to the span along the lay length of the arches .
num ensure that the aggregate cement and water are manufactured according to num and num .
ensure that the temperature requirements of num and num are met .
ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate microfines material is not less than num pounds per cubic yard num kgm of concrete .
if used add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution .
consider the water in the solution as mixing water for the purpose of determining the watercement ratio of concrete .
num cure the arch sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum design handling strength as defined in the shop drawings .
test a cylinder to check each sections design handling strength .
repeat this test as often as needed .
only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling strength has been met .
if the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths then the minimum handling strength is assumed to be num percent of the design strength .
ensure that the curing then continues either in or out of the forms until the specified minimum design strength is met .
num steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated enclosure to contain the live steam or heat .
the initial application of the steam or heat is from num to num hours after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place .
if retarders are used increase the waiting period to num to num hours .
as an alternative determine the actual time of initial set according to astm c num .
do not start curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed .
during the waiting period ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than num f num c. during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat ensure that the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding num f num c per hour until the curing temperature is reached .
ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed num f num c. hold the design temperature until the concrete has reached the desired design strength .
do not direct the application of live steam on the concrete forms so as to cause localized high temperatures .
num provide water curing according to num and num method a .
num ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met .
holes for handling or setting are not permitted .
do not move members before the design handling strength of the concrete is reached or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached .
ensure that the manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them .
num ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of num percent entrained air .
num cores drilled from the section are not permitted .
num keep the cylinders and matching arch section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with the corresponding culvert section or upon agreement by the department keep the cylinders at a location that will provide the same environment as the arch sections .
num for each section of the arch structure produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are identifiable with the matching arch section .
num conform to supplement num for acceptance .
num ensure that cylinder strengths conform to supplement num .
num the underrun in length of a section shall not be more than num inch num mm .
all changes to the project resulting from the manufacturers dimensional changes in the structure are at no charge to the department .
ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips .
ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and regular finish being defined as a num inch variation within num feet num mm variation within num m. num the internal dimensions shall vary not more than num percent from the design dimensions or more than num num inches num mm whichever is less .
the haunch dimensions shall vary not more than num inch num mm from the design dimension .
num ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is num inch num mm except that the cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top is not less than num inches num mm .
the above tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint .
num resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval .
num all interior and exterior arch surfaces shall have a smooth steel form finish .
num make repairs according to the departments requirements .
the department will not make additional payments for arch repairs .
repairs are acceptable if in the opinion of the department the repairs are sound properly finished and cured .
num the department may perform inspection at the plant conforming to supplement num but final inspection and acceptance will be at the project site .
furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to supplement num .
num form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a steel panel forming system will not be cause for rejection .
in addition hairline cracks less than num inch num mm will not be cause for rejection .
num ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the arch section num feet num m above the base of the arch .
measure the num feet num m from the base of the arch along the circumference of the interior surface .
add the product marking upon removal of the forms .
the manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final .
num perforated concrete pipe .
provide perforated concrete pipe according to astm c num astm c numm and num or num .
ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to supplement num .
num concrete drain tile .
provide extraquality concrete drain tile according to astm c num astm c numm with the following modifications ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to supplement num .
num this specification covers extraquality concrete drain tile only .
num does not apply .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num num provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to supplement num .
testing .
ensure that the manufacturer furnishes all facilities and personnel to carry out the tests .
num vitrified clay pipe .
provide vitrified clay pipe according to astm c num with the following modifications num perform all tests except hydrostatic according to astm c num .
num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num clay drain tile .
provide extraquality clay drain tile according to astm c num with the following modifications num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
num num and num ensure that the manufacturer furnishes all facilities and personnel to carry out the tests .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num bituminous pipe joint filler .
provide cold applied mineral filled joint sealing compound for joints of bell and spigot or tongue and groove sewer or drain pipe conforming to the following a .
composition .
provide a steamrefined petroleum asphalt or a refined coal tar dissolved in a suitable solvent and containing an appropriate stiffener .
b .
general requirement .
provide a bituminous plastic cement that has a smooth uniform mixture not thickened or livered and that shows a separation easily overcome by stirring .
ensure that the material is of such consistency and properties that it is readily applied with a trowel a putty knife or with a caulking gun without pulling or drawing .
provide a material that when applied to metal concrete or vitrified clay surfaces exhibits good adhesive and cohesive properties and has only slight shrinkage after curing .
provide a material that is not damaged by exposure to below freezing temperatures .
c. detail requirements .
provide materials conforming to the following requirements num .
when applied in a layer num to numinch num to num mm thick on a tinned metal panel and cured at room temperature for num hours the bituminous plastic cement shall set to a tough plastic coating free from blisters .
minimum maximum num .
grease cone penetration unworked num grams num c num sec astm d num mmnum num num num .
weight kgl num num .
nonvolatile num g num to num c num hrs num num .
ash by ignition num num furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num resilient and flexible gasket joints .
provide resilient and flexible gasket joints for concrete pipe according to astm c num astm c numm .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num resilient and flexible joints .
provide resilient and flexible joints for vitrified clay pipe according to astm c num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num precast reinforced concrete manhole riser sections flat slab tops catch basins and inlet tops and portable barriers .
provide precast reinforced concrete manhole riser sections flat slab tops catch basins and inlet tops and portable barriers according to astm c num astm c numm with the following modifications num provide precast catch basin tops where permitted by the plans .
num provide cement according to num except num .
num provide fly ash according to num .
num provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of num .
num provide steel according to num num num or num .
provide epoxy coated steel according to num for the manhole flat slab tops catch basin tops and inlet tops only .
num ensure that no more than two holes are cast drilled or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each piece of each riser section for the purpose of handling or laying .
taper the holes unless drilled and before backfilling fill the tapered holes with portland cement mortar precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar or a device on the departments approved list specifically designed for filling the hole .
fill drilled holes with portland cement mortar .
num absorption test does not apply num perform inspection at the project site .
num in addition mark the plant location on each manhole top or barrier section .
ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to supplement num ensure structures that have a span of num feet or greater and are located under the traveled way including the treated shoulder width are designed in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings .
provide a cover sheet containing the preparers and checkers first name last name initials and content responsibility .
preparers and checkers shall initial each sheet for their content responsibility .
the preparers and checkers shall not be the same individual .
have an ohio registered engineer review approve sign seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter according to orc num and oac num .
provide a load rating report in accordance with the odot bridge design manual .
num preformed flexible joint sealant .
provide preformed flexible joint sealant for concrete conduit according to astm c num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num precast reinforced concrete outlets .
provide precast reinforced concrete outlets composed of cement conforming to num except num .
provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of num .
provide epoxy coated steel reinforcement conforming to num .
do not provide holes for handling or laying .
ensure that the outlet hole are the same size as the outlet pipe .
perform inspection at the project site .
ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to supplement num .
num steel aluminum and plastic pipe num acceptance .
corrugated metal pipe conforming to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num may be accepted for shipment to and immediate use in construction projects when provided from suppliers certified according to supplement num .
num metallic coated corrugated steel conduits and underdrains .
provide conduits and underdrains having a corrugation depth of num or num inch num or num mm and according to aashto m numm numm with the following modifications num helical corrugated pipe numinch num mm diameter and larger shall have at least two annular corrugations at each end of each pipe length .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness coated of steel pipe and pipearches is as follows pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness inch inch inch inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness mm mm mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to aashto m num m num or m num .
table num pipe requirements nominal inside corrugation depth minimum diameter nominal width of lap inch mm inch mm inch mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num ensure that the minimum number of longitudinal rows of perforations is four .
num coupling bands shall have annular corrugations .
num ensure that coupling bands are not more than two nominal sheet thicknesses thinner than the thickness of the pipe to be connected .
for pipes numinch num mm diameter and smaller ensure that the coupling band is not thinner than the numinch num mm nominal sheet thickness .
for pipes numinch num mm diameter through numinch num mm diameter ensure that the coupling band is not thinner than the numinch num mm nominal sheet thickness .
for pipe diameters over num inches num mm provide coupling bands that have at least one annular corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugation of each pipe section joined .
num metallic coated corrugated steel conduits numinch num mm corrugations .
provide conduits according to aashto m numm numm with the following modifications num helical corrugated pipe shall have at least two annual corrugations at each end of each pipe length .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness coated of steel pipe and pipearches is as follows pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness inch inch inch inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness mm mm mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to aashto m num m num or m num .
num provide coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness coated of num inch num mm and that have at least one annular corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined .
num structural plate corrugated steel structures .
provide structural plate pipe pipe arch and arch structures according to aashto m num aashto m numm with the following modification num assembly bolts may be galvanized by an electrolytic process .
num precoated galvanized steel culverts .
provide conduits and coupling bands according to aashto m numm numm as modified by num and num .
ensure that the precoated galvanized steel sheets conform to aashto m numm numm type b .
ensure that the polymeric coating is num mils num m on the interior and num mils num m on the exterior .
num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches with paved invert numinch num mm corrugations .
provide conduits and coupling bands according to num and to aashto m num .
provide either type b half bituminous coated pipe or pipe arches with paved invert or type c fully coated pipe or pipe arches with paved invert .
num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches with paved invert numinch num mm corrugations .
provide conduits and coupling bands according to num and to aashto m num .
provide either type b half bituminous coated pipe or pipe arches with paved invert or type c fully coated pipe or pipe arches with paved invert .
num square and rectangular steel tubing .
provide square and rectangular steel tubing according to astm a num or astm a num grade b with the following modifications galvanize the tubing according to num .
test the tubular steel from all heat numbers supplied for toughness according to astm e num except as modified herein .
take and test tubing test samples before delivery of the railing .
ensure that the taking of the test samples is witnessed and the testing is performed by an independent test laboratory .
submit certified test data for review and approval as specified in num .
perform testing on test specimens obtained from galvanized tubing with the same heat number as that being used .
conduct the testing at a temperature of num f num c on num numinch num num mm specimens supported to provide a numinch num mm clear span .
do not remove the galvanizing from the specimens .
cut three num numinch num num mm test specimens from each of the unwelded sides for a total of nine specimens .
if all three unwelded sides are not large enough to remove num numinch num num mm specimens then remove nine specimens from any unwelded side .
disregard the three specimens from the side with the lowest average shear area when calculating the final average shear area .
if specimens were not removed from three unwelded sides then disregard the three specimens with the lowest average shear area .
calculate the final average shear area using the six remaining specimens .
if the average shear area falls below num percent reject material from the heat represented by these tests .
however if the average shear area is num percent or greater the department will allow one retest at a sampling frequently three times that of the first test and with no samples excluded in calculating the average .
reject materials not having a num percent average shear area upon retest .
before galvanizing the manufacturer of the tubing shall identify the product with the steel heat number or with some number that is traceable to the heat number and with the manufacturers unique identification code to facilitate acceptance or rejection of the material .
ensure that the identification method is such that identification is on only one face of the section and is repeated at intervals no greater than num feet num m and does not extend into the curved surface of the tubing at the corners .
num corrugated steel spiral rib conduits .
provide conduits that have a centertocenter rib spacing of num num inches num mm .
provide conduits and fittings according to aashto m num type ir with the following modifications num fabricate pipe from aluminum coated sheet according to aashto m num .
num the ribs shall conform to aashto m num section num .
num reroll the ends of the individual pipe sections to form at least two annular corrugations on each end .
paint the rerolled end with zinc rich paint .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness coated of steel pipe is as follows pipe diameter wall thickness diameter wall thickness inch inch mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num coupling bands shall have annular corrugations .
num coupling bands shall conform to num .
num a bell and spigot joint according to astm anum anumm may be used with the following modifications num these joints may be used for conduits ranging in size from num nummm to num nummm inches in diameter .
num ensure the bell and spigot has a soil tight joint by use of a shop applied gasket on the bell end and a field applied gasket on the spigot end .
num provide a minimum of num nummm inch nominal sheet thickness or not more than two num nominal sheet thickness thinner than the thickness of the pipe to be joined .
num ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to num .
num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe numinch num mm corrugations .
provide pipe according to num and aashto m num type d. num bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe numinch num mm corrugations .
provide pipe according to num and aashto m num type d. num corrugated steel box culverts .
provide corrugated steel box culverts according to astm a num .
ensure that all manufacturers are preapproved .
ensure that manufacturers not preapproved submit a structural design criteria and analysis method to the department before the project letting for approval .
the department maintains a list of all preapproved manufacturers .
ensure that the manufacturer submits shop drawings and design calculations for review and written approval before manufacture .
submit a minimum of seven copies of the drawings .
allow a minimum of four weeks for approval .
ensure that the shop drawings include the following a .
all structural design and loading information .
b .
all material specifications .
c. all plan view .
d. all elevation view .
e. all headwall and wingwall attachment requirements .
f. all dimensions .
g. all maintenance of traffic phases .
h. all plate size and dimensions .
the manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the department .
num spiral rib steel pipe arch .
provide conduits according to aashto mnum type iia with the following modifications num fabricate pipe from aluminum coated sheet according to aashto m num .
num the ribs shall conform to aashto m num section num .
num coupling bands shall have annular corrugations .
num coupling bands shall conform to num .
num ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to num .
ensure that the minimum wall thickness of spiral rib steel pipe arches is as follows pipearch size wall thickness size wall thickness inch inch mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .
provide type ia pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner .
provide corrugated exterior conduits and smooth liners according to num with the following modifications to aashto m num num provide polymer precoated galvanized steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner pipe with plain cut helical ends .
match mark ends .
install conduit so that match marks align and are in accordance with the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer .
provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness coated of .num inch and that are a minimum of num wide .
ensure coupling bands are polymer precoated galvanized steel .
num ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to astm dnum numbnum that is a minimum of num wide and centered over the joint .
num aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .
provide type ia pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner .
ensure that the interior liner conforms to num .
ensure that the corrugated exterior conduit material conforms to aashto mnum .
provide corrugated exterior conduits per num or num with the following modifications to aashto mnum num provide aluminum coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner pipe with plain cut helical ends .
match mark ends .
install conduit so that match marks align and are in accordance with the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer .
num provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness coated of .num inch and that are a minimum of num wide .
ensure coupling bands are aluminum coated steel .
num ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to astm dnum numbnum that is a minimum of num wide and centered over the joint .
num galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner .
provide type ia pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner .
ensure that the interior liner conforms to num .
ensure that the corrugated exterior conduit material conforms to aashto m num .
provide corrugated exterior conduits per num and num with the following modifications to aashto mnum num provide galvanized coated steel conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner pipe with plain cut helical ends .
match mark ends .
install conduit so that match marks align and are in accordance with the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer .
num provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness coated of .num inch and that are a minimum of num wide .
ensure coupling bands are galvanized coated steel .
num ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to astm dnum numbnum that is a minimum of num wide and centered over the joint .
num corrugated aluminum alloy conduits and underdrains .
provide conduits and underdrains having a num num or numinch num num or num mm corrugation depth and according to aashto m numm numm with the following modifications num and num provide helically corrugated pipe num inches num mm in diameter and larger that have at least two circumferential corrugations at each end of each pipe length .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe and pipe arches is as follows pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness inch inch inch inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pipe pipearch diameter wall thickness size wall thickness mm mm mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to aashto m numm numm .
num provide coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness coated of num inch num mm .
for pipe diameters num inches num mm and larger provide coupling bands that have at least one circumferential corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined .
num corrugated aluminum alloy conduits .
provide conduits having a numinch num mm corrugation depth and according to aashto m numm numm with the following modifications num and num provide helically corrugated pipe that have at least two circumferential corrugations at each end of each pipe length .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe is as follows pipe diameter wall thickness diameter wall thickness inch inch mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to aashto m numm numm .
num provide coupling bands that are not lighter than numinch num mm nominal sheet thickness and that have at least one circumferential corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined .
num aluminum alloy structural plate conduits .
provide aluminum alloy plates and fasteners for structural plate conduits according to aashto m numm numm .
num corrugated aluminum spiral rib conduits .
provide conduits that have a centertocenter rib spacing of num num inches num mm .
provide conduits and fittings according to aashto m num type ir with the following modifications num reroll the ends of the individual pipe sections to form at least two annular corrugations on each end .
num ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe is as follows pipe diameter wall thickness diameter wall thickness inch inch mm mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num coupling bands shall have annular corrugations .
num coupling bands shall conform to num .
num ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to num .
num corrugated aluminum box culverts .
provide corrugated aluminum box culverts according to astm b numb numm .
ensure that all manufacturers are preapproved .
ensure that manufacturers not preapproved submit a structural design criteria and analysis method to the department before the project letting for approval .
the department maintains a list of all preapproved manufacturers .
ensure that the manufacturer submits shop drawings and design calculations for review and written approval before manufacture .
submit a minimum of seven copies of the drawings .
allow a minimum of four weeks for approval .
ensure that the shop drawings include the following a .
all structural design and loading information .
b .
all material specifications .
c. all plan view .
d. all elevation view .
e. all headwall and wingwall attachment requirements .
f. all dimensions .
g. all maintenance of traffic phases .
h. all plate size and dimensions .
the manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the department .
num corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing .
provide corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing according to aashto m num type c and cp .
if type s or sp is specified provide corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe conforming to num .
only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to supplement num .
num corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe .
provide conduits coupling bands and fittings according to aashto m num type c. only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to supplement num .
num corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .
provide smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pipe closed profile polyethylene pipe couplings and fittings conforming to aashto m num with the following modifications provide type s or type d. if perforated is specified provide type sp .
num nominal sizes of num to num inches num mm to num mm are included .
num in addition nominal diameters of num num num and num inches num num num and num mm are included .
num for the additional nominal diameters listed for num the inner liner of type s and sp pipe and both inner and outer walls of type d pipe shall have the following minimum thicknesses diameter inner wall thickness inch mm inch mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num for the additional nominal diameters listed for num the pipe shall have a minimum pipe stiffness at num percent deflection as follows diameter pipe stiffness inch mm pii nmmm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in addition couplings for corrugated pipe shall be bell and spigot or bellbell couplings or clampon bands for all sizes up to and including num inch num mm diameter .
couplings for type d pipe shall be a bellbell or bell and spigot coupling .
the coupling may be welded on one end of each length of pipe by means of a full circumferential weld .
stitch welds are not permitted .
couplings for pipe diameters num inches num mm and larger shall be bellbell or bell and spigot .
num in addition pipe with diameters num through num inches num through num mm inclusive may be marked aashto mnum .
num only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to supplement num .
num polyethylene plastic pipe based on outside diameter od .
provide polyethylene plastic pipe based on od coupling and fittings conforming to astm fnum with the following modifications num provide pipes with outside diameters from num to num inches .
table num minimum wall thickness outside diameter inches dimension ratio minimum wall thickness inches num num num num polyethylene compound .
ensure the resin compound for the pipe and fittings meets the requirements of astm d num with a cell classification of penumc and a plastic pipe institute designation of pe num .
compounds that have higher cell classifications in one or more properties are acceptable if the specified property value is exceeded .
num provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification requirements .
no electrofusion or internal joints permitted .
num polyethylene profile wall pipe .
provide polyethylene profile wall pipe coupling and fittings conforming to astm f num with the following modifications num provide pipes with inside diameters from num to num inches .
no electrofusion joints permitted .
num no electrofusion joints permitted .
num delete .
num provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification requirements .
num smoothwall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe .
provide smooth wall perforated and nonperforated pvc plastic pipe and fittings according to astm f num type ps num minimum with the following modifications num perforated pipe shall have a minimum of four rows of perforations .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe .
provide pvc corrugated smooth interior pipe joints and fittings according to astm f num with the following modifications num perforated pipe may be specified .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe .
provide pvc open profile wall pipe and fittings with integral bell joints according to astm f num with the following modifications num only molded or fabricated fittings conforming to the requirements of specification f num may be used .
num ensure a pipe stiffness of num or greater .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe .
provide pvc solid wall pipe and fittings with nominal size of num num num num num and numinch num num num num num and num mm diameter according to astm d num sdr num with the following modifications num the retest provisions do not apply .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe .
provide pvc drain waste and vent pipe and fittings according to astm d num with the following modifications .
num the retest provisions do not apply .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num abs and polyvinyl chloride composite pipe .
provide abs and pvc composite pipe and fittings according to astm d num with the following modifications .
num the retest provisions do not apply .
num furnish certified test data as defined in num to the engineer .
num polyvinyl chloride largediameter solid wall pipe .
provide pvc solid wall pipe and fittings according to astm f num with the following modifications num the retest provisions do not apply .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num abs drain waste and vent pipe .
provide abs schedule num plastic drain waste and vent pipe and fittings according to astm d num with the following modifications num perform inspection at the project site .
num the retest provisions do not apply .
num furnish certified test data as defined in num to the engineer .
num polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe .
provide polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe for drainage pipe from num to numinch diameters according to astm f num with the following modification .
num provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification requirements .
num polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe .
provide poly propylene corrugated double wall pipe for nonpressure sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe from num to numinch diameters according to astm f num and storm sewer pipe from num to numinch diameters according to astm f num with the following modification .
num provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification requirements .
num polypropylene triple wall pipe .
provide polypropylene triple wall pipe and fittings for non pressure sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe from num to numinch diameters according to astm f num with the following modification .
num provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification requirements .
num welded and seamless steel pipe .
provide welded and seamless steel pipe according to astm a num or astm a numa numm grade b with the following modifications num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe .
provide glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe and fittings for nonpressure applications according to astm d num and for pressure applications according to astm d num with the following modifications num provide a minimum pipe stiffness of num psi .
num furnish certified test data as defined in num to the engineer .
num reinforced thermosetting resin pipe .
provide reinforced thermosetting resin pipe and fittings according to astm d num.the shortterm rupture strength hoop tensile stress shall be a minimum num psi num mpa .
test pipe according to a astm g num for num hrs of accelerated weathering following cycle num as defined in appendix xnum or b astm g num for a minimum of num hours of accelerated weathering following a minimum of cycle num as defined in appendix xnum .
after testing the surface of the pipe will show no fiber exposure crazing or checking and may have only a slight chalking .
after testing the color change of the glass resin sample shall show a delta e using lab color space of less than num .
use adhesive recommended by the manufacturer for joining pipe and fittings .
pigmented resin will be used throughout the pipe wall thickness .
furnish certified test data as defined in num to the engineer showing compliance with these specifications .
num paint num inorganic zinc silicate primer paint .
provide inorganic zinc silicate primer paint conforming to aashto m num type i and the following modification num a green colorant approximately no .
num of fs numc .
follow the submittal requirements of supplement num to obtain approval of materials conforming to this specification .
submit new certified test results if the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed or as requested by the department .
furnish materials certified according to supplement num and listed on the departments qpl .
num ozeu structural steel paint .
this specification covers the formulation and testing of a threecoat structural steel paint system consisting of an organic zinc prime coat an epoxy intermediate coat and a urethane finish coat ozeu .
material requirements for the respective coats are as follows a .
general .
for each lot of all coatings furnish a coated card drawdown card that shows the color gloss and general appearance of the material covered by the lot .
use a minimum card size of numinches by numinches .
the color must match the color card furnished for the contract or order within visual limits determined by the engineer .
in case of disagreement provide test data according to astm d num showing a color difference of no greater than num e cie num lab .
b. organic zinc prime coat .
provide an organic zinc prime coat consisting of a zinc dust filled two or three component epoxy polyamide and selected additives as required .
the coating shall also meet the following num .
physical requirements .
total solids by weight of paint astm d num num percent minimum pigment by weight of total solids astm d num num percent minimum total zinc dust by weight of pigment astm d num num percent minimum total zinc by weight of total solids by calculation astm d num num percent minimum total solids by volume astm d num num percent minimum color greenish gray approximating fs numcnum visual comparison pot life .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the pot life specified with no evidence of gellation .
the coating will be in a freeflowing condition and easily sprayed .
num .
qualitative requirements .
a. mixing .
section num sspcpaint num using only a high shear jiffy mixer .
b .
storage life .
section num sspcpaint num. c. mudcracking .
section num sspcpaint num .
num .
material quality assurance .
analysis for each component .
material quality assurance will conform to the requirements of supplement num .
c. epoxy intermediate coat .
provide a twopart epoxy intermediate coat composed of a base component and curing agent suitable for application over the zinc rich primer .
the base component shall contain an epoxy resin together with color pigments mineral fillers gellant leveling agent and volatile solvents .
the curing agent component will contain a liquid polyamide resin and volatile solvent .
the coating shall also meet the following num .
physical requirements .
a .
color .
white meeting or exceeding fsnumcnum according to astm e num. b .
components .
two mixed before application .
c. volume solids astm d num .
num percent minimum .
d. pot life .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the pot life specified with no evidence of gellation .
the coating will be in a freeflowing condition and easily sprayed .
e. curing time .
num settotouch astm d num .
num hours maximum at num f num c. num drytorecoat astm d num .
num hours maximum at num f num c. f. fineness of grind astm d num .
hegman num minimum .
g. volatile organic compounds voc maximum astm d num .
num lbgalnum gl as applied .
num .
material quality assurance .
material quality assurance will conform to the requirements of supplement num .
d. urethane finish coat .
provide a twocomponent urethane finish coat composed of a polyester andor acrylic aliphatic urethane and suitable for use as a finish coat over the white epoxy polyamide intermediate coat .
the coating shall also meet the following num .
physical requirements .
a .
finish specular gloss astm d num .
use fed .
std .
numcnum gray num minimum after num hours weathering resistance .
color change less than num e c.i.e num lab astm dnum .
b .
volume solids astm d num .
num percent minimum .
c. curing time at num f num c and num rh .
settotouch astm d num num minutes minimum num hours maximum .
d. pot life .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the pot life specified with no evidence of gellation .
the coating will be in a freeflowing condition and easily sprayed .
e. volatile organic compounds voc maximum astm d num .
num lbgalnum gl as applied .
f. colors .
num specified.num brown fsnumc num green fsnumc num blue fsnumc num num contractors choice unless specified on plans num elective .
as specified on the plans .
g. gloss requirements astm d num .
full gloss minimum num unless specified on the plans semigloss num to num lusterless matte maximum num num .
material quality assurance .
material quality assurance will conform to the requirements of supplement num .
performance requirements .
test the coating system which consists of the organic zinc prime coat the epoxy intermediate coat and the urethane topcoat prior to use .
prepare three panels for each of the specified tests according to astm d num except provide a minimum thickness of num inch num mm and use astm a numa numm hot rolled steel .
blast clean using coal slag abrasive the surface to equal as nearly as is practical the standard sa num num of astm d num steel structures painting council sspcspnum meets this requirement .
ensure that the surface has a nominal height of profile of num to num mils num to num m verified by using appropriate replica tape .
coat and cure the panels according to the manufacturers printed instructions .
provide a dry film coating thickness for the system to be tested as follows organic zinc num to num mils num to num m epoxy num to num mils num to num m urethane num to num mils num to num m the coating system shall pass each of the following tests a .
fresh water resistance test astm d num .
scribe the panels according to astm d num to the depth of the base metal in the form of an x having at least numinch num mm legs and immerse panels in fresh tap water at num num f num num c. after num days of immersion examine the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that the coating shows no blistering softening or discoloration .
rate blistering according to astm d num .
b .
salt water resistance test astm d num .
scribe the panels as specified in a above and immersed panels in a water solution of num percent sodium chloride at num num f num num c. after num num and num days of immersion examine the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that the coating shows no blistering or softening .
rate blistering according to astm d num .
replace the sodium chloride solution with a fresh solution after examination at num and num days .
c. weathering resistance test .
test the panels according astm d num method d using ultra violet a num bulbs .
place the panels on test at the beginning of a wet cycle .
after num hours of continuous exposure examine the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that the coating shows no blistering or loss of adhesion .
perform the num degree specular gloss measurements on the sprayed panels utilized for this test .
average the three initial measurements one per panel together .
also average the three final measurements together .
d. salt fog resistance test .
scribe the panels as specified in a above and test them according to astm b num .
after num hours of continuous exposure examine the coating to verify that it shows no loss of bond and that it shows no rusting or blistering beyond num inch num mm from the center of the scribe mark .
rate blistering according to astm d num .
e. adhesion test astm d num type iv .
test the panels according to the following num .
lightly sand the coating surface and aluminum dolly and apply a quick set adhesive .
num .
allow adhesive to cure overnight .
num .
scribe the coating and adhesive around the dolly before testing .
num .
make a minimum of num trials to failure and report the num trials .
ensure that each trial is greater than num pounds per square inch num mpa .
reject trial if fracture at the primerblast interface occurs .
f. pencil hardness test astm d num .
determine the hardness of an individual coat or the coating system by performing a pencil hardness test according to astm d num .
meet or exceed scale of hardness hb for the coating .
prequalification .
before approval submit copies of the manufacturers certified test data showing that the coating system complies with the performance requirements of this specification to the laboratory ensure that the certified test data also states the following physical properties for each coating density pounds per gallon gml solids percent by weight solids percent by volume viscosity drying time and voc content pounds per gallon gml .
use an independent testing laboratory approved by the laboratory to develop the test data .
include with the test data the brand name of the paint name of manufacturer number of lots tested and date of manufacture .
submit new certified test results if the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed or as requested by the department .
sampling .
the laboratory will establish acceptance variances .
furnish materials certified according to supplement num and listed on the departments qpl .
num reinforcing steel num epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
provide epoxy coated reinforcing steel according to astm a numa numm with the following modifications num ensure that steel reinforcing bars to be coated conform to num num or num and are free of oil grease or paint .
num ensure that the coating material meets the requirements listed in annex anum and is a color that facilitates inspection of the installed bar .
the color is subject to approval of the director .
num sample required .
num evaluate the adhesion of the coating by bending production coated bars around a mandrel of specified size according to the bending tables in astm a num astm a numm or astm a num astm a numm as applicable .
perform the bend test for adhesion of the coating at a uniform rate and ensure that it takes up to num seconds to complete .
place the two longitudinal deformations in a plane perpendicular to the mandrel radius and ensure that the test specimens are at thermal equilibrium between num and num f num and num c. num perform tests inspection and sampling at a site specified by the director .
sampling for testing requires three numinch num m samples for each bar size for each coating lot and for each heat of steel reinforcing bars .
num report of test results required .
where reinforcing bar cages for prestressed concrete beams are fabricated by tack welding patch the areas damaged by the tack welding according to astm a num section num permissible amount of damaged coating and repair of damaged coating .
num deformed and plain billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement .
provide deformed and plain billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement according to astm a num astm a numm with the following modification num where positive identification of a heat can be made perform one tension test and one bend test from each bar designation number of each heat in the lot .
where identification of the heat is not practical perform one tension test and one bend test for each bar designation number in each lot of num tons num metric tons or fraction thereof .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num rail steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement .
provide rail steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement according to astm a numa numm .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num axle steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement .
provide axle steel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement according to astm a numa numm .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num electric resistancewelded carbon and alloy steel mechanical tubing .
provide grade num carbon steel round tubing with a minimum num ksi num mpa yield strength according to astm a numa numm with the following modifications num galvanize both the interior and exterior of the tubing with a minimum thickness of num ozft num gmnum zinc .
if welded tubing is used remetallize the outside weld with zinc .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num colddrawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement .
provide cold drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement according to astm a num or astm a num with the following modification num completely cover galvanized wire with a coating of pure zinc of uniform thickness so applied that it will adhere firmly to the surface of the wire .
ensure that the minimum weight of zinc coating is num ounces per square foot num gmnum of surface as determined by astm a num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num fabricated steel bar or rod mats for concrete reinforcement .
provide fabricated steel bar or rod mats for concrete reinforcement according to astm a numa numm with the following modifications num use deformed bars .
num provide longitudinal bars conforming to grade num of num num or num .
num provide longitudinal bars according to num grade num .
provide transverse bars according to num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement .
provide welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement according to astm a num or astm a num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num deformed steel wire for concrete reinforcement .
provide deformed steel wire for concrete reinforcement according to astm a num or astm a num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num welded deformed steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement .
provide welded deformed steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement according to astm a num or astm a num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num coated dowel bars .
provide coated dowel bars according to aashto m num with the following modifications num the core material will consist of steel according to num num or num .
coat all surfaces of dowel bars .
suitably recoat ends of dowel bars that have been cut to length after coating or have not had the uncoated ends coated during manufacturing or fabrication .
prepare surface and patch uncoated bar ends with material equivalent to the original epoxy coating .
if the contractor elects to use basket supports for positioning of the above dowel bars as specified in num.b or as shown on the plans provide a fusionbonded epoxy coated basket dowel bar assembly .
repair uncoated areas with surface preparation and patching material equivalent to the original epoxy coating .
suitably repair coating on the dowel bars or baskets damaged during installation .
do not expose coated dowels to weather or sunlight for a period exceeding num days .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num epoxycoated steel wire and welded wire fabric for reinforcement .
provide epoxy coated steel wire and welded wire fabric for reinforcement according to astm a num with the following modifications num ensure that plain or deformed steel wire or welded wire fabric to be coated conform to num num num or num and is free of oil grease or paint .
num ensure that the coating thickness conforms to type a .
provide dry film thickness of num to num mils num to num mm .
num test coated steel wire or welded wire fabric at the manufacturers plant before shipment or at other sites as designated by the laboratory .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num plastic supports for reinforcing steel .
conform to supplement num .
num galvanized reinforcing steel option for bridge structure spirals .
as an option to num provide galvanized reinforcing steel for the spiral bars only in round column and drilled shaft reinforcing steel cages .
galvanized steel will conform to astm anum class num .
the galvanized coated reinforcing steel will meet all other requirements of num .
the galvanized coating will be applied after the reinforcing has been fabricated .
if the galvanized surface becomes damaged during handling in the field repairs will conform to astm anum .
where a sample is requested provide a replacement splice conforming to the lap length requirements for epoxy coated reinforcing .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num fence and guardrail num barbed wire .
furnish barbed wire according to astm a num type z class num galvanizing or astm a num type i with the following modifications a. astm a num type z class num .
num ensure that the weight of coating for various gages of wire composing the strands and barbs are not less than num ounces per square foot num gmnum of surface .
num furnish no .
num num num num or num num steel wire gage barbed wire .
ensure that the barbs are four point round steel wire spaced num inches num mm centertocenter .
num select one sample according to section num from each num spools or fraction thereof .
num perform inspection at the project site .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
b. astm a num type i .
num does not apply .
num perform inspection at the project site .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num woven steel wire fence type num .
furnish woven steel wire fence according to astm a num type z class num galvanizing with the following modifications num ensure that the fence fabric is design number num .
num perform inspection at the project site .
in addition ensure that all hardware and attachments are galvanized according to num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num chainlink fence .
furnish chainlink fence according to aashto m num with the following modifications num furnish posts gate frames and post braces made of type i or type iii material .
furnish type i material conforming to the requirements of table num .
furnish type iii material conforming to the requirements of table num .
fasten the fabric to the posts using either aluminum alloy or galvanized steel bands or wires .
furnish wires that have a numinch num mm minimum diameter and a zinc coating or steel fasteners that are not less than num ounces per square foot num gmnum .
furnish stretcher bars that have a num numinch num num mm crosssection or an equivalent crosssection with a length equal to full height of fabric .
furnish steel truss rods that have a steel numinch num mm diameter or equivalent crosssection and that have suitable adjustment .
table num steel posts gate frames and post braces usage nominal fence height num ft or less section thickness outside diameter or dimensions in weight nominal lbft tolerance minimum yield strength psi line posts grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num csection num num num num num hsection num num num num num end corner pull posts grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num gate posts for nominal width of gate single or one leaf of double up to num ft incl .
grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num over num to num ft incl .
grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num over num to num feet incl .
grade num pipe num num num num over num feet round num num num num gate frames grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num tension wirenum post braces grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num rollform num num num num num round tubing num num num num num when tension wire is specified it will be of num in diameter .
table numm steel posts gate frames and post braces usage nominal fence height num m or less section thickness outside diameter or dimensions mm weight nominal kgm minimum tolerance yield strength mpa line posts grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num csection num num num num num hsection num num num num num end corner pull posts grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num gate posts for nominal width of gate single or one leaf of double up to num m incl grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num over num to num m incl .
grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num over num to num m incl .
grade num pipe num num num num over num m round num num num num gate frames grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num tension wiresnum post braces grade num pipe num num num num grade num pipe num num num num rollform num num num num num round tubing num num num num num when tension wire is specified it will be of num mm diameter .
furnish ornamental cap post tops made of steel malleable iron or cast iron .
furnish them with a hole suitable for through passage of the top rail .
ensure that they fit snugly to the post have a means of attaching securely to the post and exclude moisture from tubular posts .
furnish swing type gates complete with latches stops keepers hinges locks and fabric .
cover them with fabric matching the fence .
furnish hinges of adequate strength to support the gate and that do not twist or turn under action of the gate .
locate plunger bar type latches at the full gate height in a manner that will engage the gate stop .
forked latches may be used for single gates less than num feet num m wide .
furnish lockable latches .
furnish stops that consist of a flush plate with anchor placed in concrete to engage the plunger bar of the latch .
other approved types of stops may be used for single gates less than num feet num m wide .
keepers are substantial devices for securing and supporting the free end of the gate in open position .
furnish top rail couplings consisting of the outside sleeve type at least num inches num mm long .
ensure that a minimum of num percent of the coupling has an internal heavy spring to take up expansion and contraction .
furnish gate frames that are assembled by welding using properly designed formed sheet or sandcast fittings .
cover the gates with fabric matching the fence .
furnish offset type hinges .
furnish galvanized latches stops and keepers made of malleable iron except for plunger bars that may be galvanized tubular or bar steel according to section num .
furnish flat stretcher bars in num numinch num num mm sections .
furnish selfcentering outside rail couplings that are num inches num mm long .
furnish tie wire that has a numinch num mm minimum diameter and that meets an aluminum alloy .
furnish wrought or cast turnbuckles .
furnish truss and brace rods with an numinch num mm outside diameter or equivalent crosssection .
furnish beveled brace bands in num numinch num num mm section .
furnish bolts with an anodic coating at least num mil num m in thickness chromate sealed .
num .
ensure that the size of the fabric conforms to numinch num mm nominal diameter of coated wire num inch num mm mesh .
num table num .
type i zinccoated steel chain link fabric will have class d weight of coating .
num ensure that the vinyl covering is of a uniform medium green color .
num perform inspection at the project site .
num does not apply .
num .
increase the minimum weight of interior coating to an average of num ounces per square foot num gmnum and not less than num ounces per square foot num gmnum on an individual specimen .
table num diameters or plain end schedule num aluminum alloy pipe the weights and dimensions are as specified in ansi h num .
nominal pipe size material in mm brace rails num num num gate frames and rail couplings num num num line posts num num end and corner posts num num num gate posts single or one leaf of double gate opening ft m in mm to num to num num num num over num to num over num to num num num num overnum to num over num to num num num over num to num over num to num num num a num line post may be substituted in lieu of the line post shown on standard drawings chain link fence num num and walk gates fnum num .
this will be accomplished by reducing the num depth as necessary to accommodate the shorter posts .
all other dimensions shown in the standard drawings shall remain unchanged furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num deep beam rail .
furnish deep beam rail according to aashto m num type ii class a with the following modifications num perform inspection at the project site .
num when a field check of coating thickness shows insufficient coating thickness or shows insufficient coating weight sample and test the guardrail .
num the minimum check limits for both triple and singlespot tests apply .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num wire rope rail .
furnish wire rope rail according to aashto m num class a type i rope with the following modification num perform inspection at the project site .
obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
num fence posts and braces .
furnish round wood posts conforming to num and num .
furnish dimension timber posts and lumber for braces and stream crossings that are sound straight free from unsound or loose knots splits and shakes and that are treated according to num .
furnish steel line posts according to astm a num with the following modifications num furnish fasteners or clamps that have a numinch num mm diameter and that are galvanized according to astm a num type z class num .
num supply each post with a sufficient number of fasteners or clamps .
num ensure that the post lengths are as designated .
num furnish galvanized line posts and anchors according to num .
num delete .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num squaresawed and round guardrail posts .
furnish pressure treated squaresawed and round guardrail posts according to num and num .
cut posts from growing timbers that are free from unsound or loose knots and rot and from injurious or excessive shake and season checks that exceed num inch num mm in width .
ensure that the sweep does not exceed num inch num mm for the length of the post .
peel round posts their entire length removing all outer and inner bark and leather fiber by shaving the surface .
trim knots even with the post and saw both ends of the post square .
furnish round posts for the follow species only douglas fir knot diameter for posts of douglas fir shall not exceed num mm num in .. ring density for the species shall be at least num ringsperinch as measured over a num mm num in .
distance .
the diameter of the douglas fir posts shall be num mm num in .
at the ground line with a upper limit of num mm num in .. southern pine knot diameter for posts of southern pine shall not exceed num mm num in .. ring density for the species shall be at least num ringsperinch as measured over a num mm num in .
distance .
the diameter of the southern pine posts shall be num mm num in .
at the ground line with a upper limit of num mm num in .
ponderosa pine knot diameter for posts of ponderosa pine shall not exceed num mm num in .. ring density for the species shall be at least num ringsperinch as measured over a num mm num in .
distance .
the diameter of the ponderosa pine posts shall be num mm num in .
at the ground line with an upper limit of num mm num in .. furnish square sawed posts that are free from injurious cross grain and sapwood .
species white pine maximum slope of grain num in num nominal width of face num num num num shakes checks and splits green num num num num num seasoned num num num num num maximum wane num num num num num maximum allowable knots narrow face middle num of length num num num num num num end num num num num num num num sum in middle  of length num num num num num wide face edge knot in middle num of length num num num num num num edge knot at end num num num num num num num centerline num num num num num num sum in middle half of length num num num num num num furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num pressure treated guardrail and fence posts braces and blocks .
furnish pressure treated guardrail and fence posts braces and blocks according to aashto m num and num num and num .
furnish certified material according to supplements num and num .
num steel guardrail posts .
furnish steel guardrail posts in the sections and lengths as specified .
ensure that they are made of copper bearing steel when so specified .
furnish steel according to astm a numa numm .
furnish galvanized posts according to num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num guard posts .
furnish pressure treated wood posts according to num furnish posts that are either num numinch num num mm sawed square or num numinch numinch num mm diameter round when measured num inches num m from the top .
furnish posts that are num feet num inches num m in length and are embedded such that num inches num m remains exposed .
ensure that the centertocenter spacing is spaced at num feet num m intervals unless otherwise shown on the plans .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num structural steel and structure incidentals num structural steel .
furnish structural steel conforming to astm a num grade num anum num anum numw anum or numw .
ensure that materials designated to meet notch toughness requirements have a minimum longitudinal charpy v notch cvn energy absorption value as listed below .
sample and test according to astm a numa numm .
use the h frequency of heat testing and provide the test data as required by num .
astm designation thickness and connection method value min cvn anum gr .
num anum anumm up to num in num mm mechanically fastened or welded num ftlb num f num j num c anum gr .
num a numa numm anum gr .
numw a numa numm up to num in num mm mechanically fastened num ftlb num f num num j num c anum gr .
num a numa numm anum gr .
numw a numa numm over num to num in num to num mm welded num ftlb num f num num j num c anum gr .
num a numa numm anum gr .
numw a numa numm up to num in num mm welded num ftlb num f num num j num c anum gr .
numw up to num in num mm mechanically fastened or welded num ftlb num f num num j num c num if the yield point of the material exceeds num ksi num mpa the temperature of the cvn value for acceptability should be reduced by num f num c for each increment or part of increment of num ksi num mpa above num ksi num mpa .
num if the yield point of the material exceeds num ksi num mpa the temperature of the cvn value for acceptability should be reduced by num f num c for each increment or part of increment of num ksi num mpa above num ksi num mpa .
num the cvnimpact testing shall be at p frequency in accordance with astm a num .
num galvanized steel .
furnish galvanize steel according to astm a num after cutting bending and welding .
at the discretion of the engineer replace regalvanize or repair damaged galvanized material .
if a repair is authorized perform work according to astm a num except the department will not allow aerosol spray applications of paints containing zinc dust .
furnish bolts nuts washers and similar threaded fasteners that are galvanized according to astm a num or astm f fnum .
these items may be mechanically zinc coated according to astm b num class num .
except for astm a num astm a numm bolts electrogalvanizing may also be used if the coated item meets the thickness coating requirements of astm a num or astm f fnum .
num steel for piling .
furnish steel for hpiling conforming to astm a num grade num a numm grade num .
furnish steel for sheet piling according to astm a numa numm .
furnish steel for castinplace reinforced concrete piles conforming to astm a num grade num or num .
num cold rolled steel .
furnish cold rolled steel according to astm a num grades num through num for pins rollers trunnions and other similar parts .
num steel castings .
furnish steel castings according to astm a numa numm grade num or grade num num or aashto m num or astm a num grade num with the following modification ensure that steel castings are free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
no sharp unfilleted angles or corners are allowed .
num arcwelding electrodes and fluxes .
the following applies to all steel except for exposed bare astm a numa numm and astm a num grade numw a numa numm steels .
for exposed bare astm a numa numm and astm anum grade numw a numa numm applications see table num .
a. manual shielded metalarc welding .
num .
aws anum low hydrogen only num .
aws anum low hydrogen only b. submerged arc welding num .
aws num num .
aws num c. gas metalarc welding aws a num d. flux cored arc welding aws anum table num filler metal requirements for exposed bare applications of astm a numa numm and astm anum grade numw a numa numm steel .
welding process shielded metal arc submerged arc num gas metal arc or flux cored arc num num aws anum aws anum aws anum and aws num enum num or num electrodes that deposit weld metal meeting cnum cnuml cnum cnuml cnum or w analysis all electrodeflux combinations that deposit weld metal with a ninum ninum ninum ninum or w analysis num all electrodeflux combinations that deposit weld metal with a ninum ninum ninum ninum or w analysis num deposited weld metal will have a minimum impact strength of cvn num ftlb num j at num f num c only applied to bridges .
num the use of the same type filler metal having next higher mechanical properties as listed in aws specification is permitted .
num deposited weld metal will have a chemical composition the same as that for any one of the weld metals in this table for the shielded metal arc welding process .
num in conformance with those classifications allowed under aws dnum bridge welding code tables num and num .
the laboratory will issue a list of approved electrodes and combinations of shielding .
the laboratory will include electrodes in the list when certified test data submitted by the manufacturer is found in compliance with the specified requirements .
the certification will cover either process qualification or quality control tests .
to qualify such tests must be made within one year before the period covered .
for each submission of certified test data include the manufacturers statement that it will advise the laboratory immediately of any change in materials or processing used in the manufacture of the electrodes made within one year from the date of the tests .
when electrodes to be used are not included in the laboratorys list of approved electrodes and combinations of shielding submit certified test data as described above for each lot showing compliance with the specified requirements .
num highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers .
furnish highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers according to astm a num astm a numm with the following modification num if necessary for approval obtain samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
furnish bolts for steel use in bare unpainted applications according to astm a num a numm type num .
when galvanized bolts nuts and washers are specified mechanical galvanizing is permitted .
use galvanized bolts to fasten steel that has received an inorganic zinc prime coat according to num .
furnish highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers that also meet the requirements of supplement num .
provide samples to the laboratory for acceptance .
num machine bolts .
furnish machine bolts according to astm a num with the following modification if necessary for approval obtain samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the laboratory .
mechanical galvanizing is permitted .
num gray iron castings .
furnish gray iron casting according to astm a num class numb with the following modifications num two or more test bars will accompany each lot of castings or one pair of test bars may represent castings shipped to two or more projects provided the lot number or date cast are cast or anchored in both the bars and castings .
the identifying data or castings shall not interfere with the use of the casting .
num in addition ensure that castings are free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
ensure that the castings are generously filleted at angles and the arrises are sharp and perfect .
num ship test bars with the lot or make test bars representing the lot available to the laboratory at the place of manufacture or warehouse .
num ductile iron castings .
furnish ductile iron castings according to astm a num with the following modifications num in addition ensure that castings are free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blowholes and other defects in positions affecting their strength .
ensure that the castings are generously filleted at angles and arrises are sharp and perfect .
num send a keel block or yblock specimen made according to astm a num with the shipment for each heat number ladle number and date of casting .
num submit a certification stating that the test bars shipped with the castings were prepared according to the specified requirements .
num gray iron and ductile iron castings .
furnish gray iron and ductile iron castings according to aashto m num class numb with the following modifications test bars are required as outlined in num and num .
in addition submit certified test data for monthly proof load testing to the laboratory with each inspection of castings from that month .
design approval .
submit designs for cast frames grates and covers for manholes catch basins and inlets that vary from the standard construction drawings to the department for approval .
manufacturers will seek approval for such nonstandard designs well in advance of a projects sale date .
num sheet copper .
furnish sheet copper according to astm b num .
num phosphor bronze plate .
furnish phosphor bronze plate according to astm b num .
num cast bronze .
furnish cast bronze according to astm b num copper alloy no .
cnum with the following modification finish cast plates to plane surfaces and finish one plate of a pair at right angles to the other plate of the pair .
num leaded bronze .
furnish leaded bronze according to astm b num copper alloy no .
cnum with the following modification finish cast plates to plane surfaces and finish one plate of a pair at right angles to the other plate of the pair .
num sheet lead .
furnish sheet lead according to astm b num .
num aluminum for railings .
furnish aluminum other than permanent mold castings that conform to the following requirements portion of railing astm designation alloy condition or temper bnum sand castings b numb numm num tnum shims b num b numm num num washers b num b numm clad num num tnum tnum sheet and plate b num b numm num tnum drawn seamless tubes b num num or num tnum bars rods wire b num b numm num tnum bolts set screws b num b numm num num num tnum tnum nuts b num b numm num num tnum tnum extruded bars rods shapes b num b numm num or num num tnum tnum extruded tubes b num b numm num or num num tnum tnum pipe b num b numm num or num tnum rivets b num b numm num tnum num will have an anodic coating .
for permanent mold castings for bridge railing posts provide aluminum according to aashto m num .
num preformed bearing pads .
composition .
furnish preformed bearing pads consisting of a fabric and rubber body .
ensure that the pad is made with new unvulcanized natural andor synthetic rubber and unused cotton andor synthetic fabric fibers in proper proportion to maintain strength and stability .
physical properties .
the required surface hardness expressed in standard rubber hardness figures is num num shore durometer .
the minimum ultimate break down limit of pads under compressive loading is num pounds per square inch num mpa .
furnish pads to specified dimensions and accurately locate and cleanly cut all bolt holes .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num buried liner waterproofing membrane .
furnish buried liner waterproofing membrane according to astm d num with the following modification only num through num is approved .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num elastomeric bearings .
furnish bearing pads and elastomeric bearings conforming to aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii construction chapter num section num grade num requirements .
fabricate elastomeric bearing pads according to sections num and num .
test pads and bearings according to num num num num num num num and num .
include testing in the price bid for the bearings .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
furnish bearing pads and laminated bearings consisting of neoprene cast in molds under pressure and heat .
a plain elastomeric bearing pad and steel load distribution plate combination is classified as a laminated elastomeric bearing .
obtain test specimens according to astm d num or astm d num .
where test specimens are cut from the finished product a num percent variation from the original physical properties is allowed .
the use of compounds of nominal hardness between the values shown in table num is permitted and the test requirements interpolated .
table num physical properties grade num num num hardness durometer a astm d num .
num num num num num num tensile strength min psi mpa astm d num num num num num num num elongation at break min num num num accelerated tests to determine longterm aging characteristics overaged num hrs at num f num c astm d num hardness points change max num num num tensile strength change max num num num elongation at break change max num num num ozone num ppm in air by volume num strain num f num c astm d num num hrs samples to be solvent wiped before test to remove any traces of surface impurities no cracks no cracks no cracks compression set num hrsnum f num c astm d num method b max num num num adhesion bond made during vulcanization astm d num method b lbin knm num num num num num num furnish bearing pads that are individually molded cut from previously molded strips or slabs or extruded and cut to length .
mold laminated bearings together into an integral unit with all edges of internal steel laminates covered by a numinch num mm minimum thickness of elastomer .
fill indentations or grooves on the exterior surface of the bearings caused by external laminate restraining devices to a num inch num mm minimum cover by a revulcanized patch or by a silicon caulk conforming to federal specifications ttsnuma or by an approved equal .
ensure that the bearing manufacturer patches the bearings .
ensure that the external connection or distribution plates of laminated bearings are the same material as the attached structural steel and are similarly cleaned and coated .
furnish internal plates according to astm a num grade num or anumanumm ss grade num or grade num .
minimum thickness for the internal plates is num inch num mm .
debur all plates .
the bearing manufacturer will furnish certified test data for the elastomer base plate steel laminates and proof load .
the bearing manufacturer will produce one sample bearing for each bridge structure in the project plans .
ensure that the sample bearing for each bridge structure is of the same design and materials as the bearings furnished for that bridge structure .
the bearing manufacturer will ship the completed sample bearings to an independent testing laboratory for destructive testing for the following physical properties hardness durometer a astm dnum tensile strength astm dnum elongation at break astm dnum adhesion bond made during vulcanization astm dnum method b ensure that the bearing manufacturer submits to the project the certified test data for the sample bearings from the independent testing laboratory with the bearing manufacturers certified test data for the elastomer base plate steel laminates and proof load .
num waterproofing fabric .
furnish waterproofing fabric according to astm d num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num type num membrane waterproofing .
physical properties thickness astm d num num mils num m min .
width num inches num mm min .
pliability num bend over num inch num mm mandrel num f num c astm d num no effect elongation astm d num die c num min puncture resistancemembrane astm e num num lb num kg min .
permeance grainsftnumhrin hg astm e num method b num max .
water absorption by weight astm d num num max .
adhesion to concrete astm d num num min .
submit certified test data and letter of certification to the engineer .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num structural timber lumber and piling .
furnish structural timber lumber and piling according to num and aashto m num with the following modification airdry or kilndry timber and lumber to a moisture content not to exceed num percent by weight .
size and grade will conform to american lumber standards .
use only structural timber lumber and piling meeting the certification requirements of supplement num .
num prestressing steel strands .
furnish prestressing steel strands according to astm a num with the following modification num sample and inspect as directed by the laboratory .
num cellular polyvinyl chloride sponge .
furnish cellular pvc sponge according to aashto m num type i and with a minimum density of num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num type num membrane waterproofing .
furnish type num membrane waterproofing conforming to the following requirements .
physical properties thickness num inches num mm min .
width num inches num mm min .
weight num lbftnum num kgmmnum min .
tensile strength machine direction astm d num modified num num lbin num nmm num psi num mpa tensile strength astm d num num machine direction modified num num lbin num nmm num psi num mpa elongation at break astm d num modified num num brittleness astm d num pass softening point mastic astm d num num f num c min .
peel adhesion astm d num num num lbin num nmm cold flex astm d num num num inch num num mm specimennum bend over num inch num mm mandrel no cracking heat stability num num inch num num mm specimen vertically suspended in a mechanical convection oven num hr num f num c no dripping or delamination num num inches num mmminute test speed and num inch num mm initial distance between the grips .
submit certified test data and letter of certification to the engineer .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num aluminum for steps .
furnish aluminum for steps according to astm b num astm b numm alloys numtnum or numtnum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num reinforced propylene plastic manhole steps .
furnish reinforced propylene plastic manhole steps conforming to the details shown on the plans .
furnish steel rod according to num grade num that is continuous through the entire length of legs and tread .
the steel may be coated according to astm a numa numm .
ensure that the manufacturer furnishes written certification .
furnish propylene plastic according to astm d num table b num .
ensure that the manufacturer furnishes certified test data for the propylene plastic used in each lot of steps .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num miscellaneous num expansion shield anchors .
furnish anchors conforming to the dimension requirements of the project plans and the following a .
type a .
federal specification aanuma and aanum .
b .
type b .
federal specification aanuma .
the supplier or producer of the anchors will provide a certification showing certified test results of the proof load required in the federal specifications .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num calcium chloride .
furnish calcium chloride according to astm d num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num sodium chloride .
furnish sodium chloride according to astm d num type i grade num with the following modification num total chlorides nacl caclnum and mgclnum as nacl based on dry weight not less than num percent .
num lime and lime kiln dust .
a. furnish hydrated lime for masonry purposes according to astm c num type s. b. furnish quick lime for soil stabilization that is certified according to supplement num and listed on the departments qpland according to astm c num with the following modification num particle size of quick lime quick lime shall all pass the no .
num num mm sieve .
c. furnish lime kiln dust that is certified according to supplemental num .
furnish lime kiln dust that meets the following requirements .
perform chemical analysis of the lime kiln dust according to astm c num .
combined total calcium oxide and magnesium oxide num minimum available calcium hydroxide rapid sugar test astm cnum plus total mgo content calculated to be equivalent caohnum num minimum loss on ignition carbon dioxide plus moisture combined and free on asreceived basis num maximum free water asreceived basis num maximum sulfur as sonum num maximum sieve analysis .
sieve size minimum percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num m num no .
num num m num submit test results for the above requirements for every num tons num metric tons of lime kiln dust supplied to the department .
if multiple tests were performed include the average and standard deviation with the results .
num preservative treatment for structural timber lumber piling posts braces and blocks .
a .
general .
furnish structural timber lumber and pilings according to num and posts braces and blocks according to num except that moisture may be removed from the untreated lumber at the time of preservative treatment .
ensure that structural timber lumber piling posts and braces conform to the current awpa standards or aashto mnum and this subsection .
b .
materials .
furnish timber preservatives according to aashto m num and current awpa standards .
c. preparation for treatment .
sort the material into one kind or designated group of kinds of wood and into pieces of approximately equal size and moisture and sapwood content .
separate material to ensure contact of treating medium with all surfaces .
d. framing .
conduct all adzing boring chamfering framing graining mortising and surfacing before treatment .
e. incising .
incise lumber num inches num mm or more thick on all four sides .
incise lumber less than num inches num mm thick on the wide faces only except as shown on the plans .
incise douglas fir with a minimum dimension of num inches num mm using a suitable powerdriven machine before treatment .
do not incise douglas fir rails and rail posts .
use the spacing and shape of the cutting teeth and the method of incising necessary to produce a uniform penetration .
the minimum required depths of the incisions are as follows sizenum minimum depth of incision inch mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num intermediate size in proportion .
f. amount of preservative .
the required net retention in any charge is no less than num percent of the quantity of preservative specified but the average retention by the material treated under any contract or order and the average retention of any five consecutive charges are required to be at least num percent of the quantity specified .
ensure that the minimum amounts of preservative retained conform to aashto m num and the requirements set forth in the referenced awpa standard .
treat all species of structural timber lumber piling posts and blocks according to the current awpa standards .
g. acceptance .
accept only structural timber lumber piling posts braces and blocks according to supplement num .
h. sawn wood sign posts .
a sawn wood post must adhere to aashto m num wood products standards and be the allowable grade and species for the sizes shown in the following table asizes shown are nominal dressed sizes the sweep must not exceed .num foot in num feet .
sawn wood sign posts must be graded per the following southern pine inspection bureau spib standard grading rules western wood products association wwpa standard grading rules west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib standard grading rules posts must be treated per current aashto m num preservatives and pressure treatment processes for timber standards .
douglas fir and hemfir posts must be incised prior to treatment .
inspection shall be in accordance with awpa mnum .
quality control shall be in accordance with awpa mnum .
care of the posts shall be in accordance with awpa mnum .
num geotextile fabrics .
furnish fabric composed of strong rotproof polymeric fibers formed into a woven or nonwoven fabric .
products must be tested by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
the department will determine acceptance of type a b c and d fabric according to data obtained in the most current ntpep report laboratory results of evaluations on geotextiles and geosynthetics .
the ntpep testing results must meet or exceed the requirements listed in table num .
for all tests except ultraviolet exposure the products minimum average roll values marv as published in the ntpep report must also meet or exceed the requirements listed in the table .
if no marv value is published in the ntpep report the manufacturer must submit to the department certified test data showing the marv values for the product will meet or exceed the requirements listed in table num .
for type e material supply fabric conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum section num table num .
the department will accept type e material based on certified test data .
all minimum strengths shown are in the weakest principal direction .
ensure that the fabric is free of any treatment that might significantly alter its physical properties .
during shipment and storage wrap the fabric in a heavyduty protective covering to protect it from uv deterioration direct sunlight dirt dust and other debris .
furnish type a b c and d material according to the departments approved list and supplement num .
nominal post sizea no .
num structural light framing douglas fir free of heart center no .
num structural light framing hemfir free of heart center no .
num structural light framing southern yellow pine no .
num structural joists and planks douglas fir free of heart center no .
num structural joists and planks hemfir free of heart center no .
num structural joists and planks southern yellow pine no .
num posts and timbers also known as no .
num structural douglas fir free of heart center select structural hemfir free of heart center no .
num timbers southern yellow pine num by num inches num by num inches greater than num by num inches allowable grade and species table num property test method required value type a underdrains and slope drains minimum tensile strength astm d num num lb num n minimum puncture strength num astm d num num lb num n or astm d num num lb num n minimum tear strength astm d num num lb num n apparent opening size astm d num soil typenum soils with num or less passing no .
num num m sieve aos num mm soil typenum soils with num to num passing no .
num num m sieve aos num mm minimum permittivity astm d num num secnum type b filter blankets for rock channel protection minimum tensile strength astm d num num lb num n minimum elongation astm d num num minimum puncture strength num astm d num num lb num n or astm d num num lb num n minimum tear strength astm d num num lb num n apparent opening size astm d num aos num mm minimum permittivity astm d num num secnum type c sediment fences minimum tensile strength astm d num num lb num n maximum elongation astm d num num minimum puncture strength num astm d num num lb num n or astm d num num lb num n minimum tear strength astm d num num lb num n apparent opening size astm d num aos num mm minimum permittivity astm d num num secnum ultraviolet exposure strength retention num astm d num num type d subgradebase separation or stabilization minimum tensile strength astm d num num lb num n maximum elongation astm d num num minimum puncture strength num astm d num num lb num n or astm d num num lb num n minimum tear strength astm d num num lb num n apparent opening size astm d num same as type a permittivity astm d num num secnum num astm dnum is now the standard puncture resistance test required by aashto and ntpep .
ntpep will continue to publish product data tested under astm dnum until the product is retested under astm dnum .
num provide certified test data to the department .
include strength retention data at num num num and num hours num prefabricated edge underdrain .
furnish prefabricated edge underdrain consisting of a polymeric core with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm wrapped in fabric according to num type a .
ensure that the underdrain is flexible rectangular in shape and of hollow construction .
use core material that is resistant to petroleumbased chemicals naturally occurring soil chemicals and road deicing agents .
the core material will have sufficient flexibility to withstand bending and handling during installation without damage .
the core will provide a minimum of num square inches num mnum unobstructed one side only drainage area per num foot num m of width .
side walls of the core will have at least num percent open area to permit unobstructed flow through the filter and wall to the core .
the required minimum compressive strength of the prefabricated edge drain is num pounds per square foot num kpa with a maximum num percent compression in a parallel plate compression test astm d num .
the minimum single side core flow capacity is num gallons per minute per foot of width for a num gradient at num pounds per square inch bladder load according to astm d num .
furnish the manufacturers certified test results as specified num .
num temporary erosion control mats materials .
unless specifically itemized furnish any of the type mats listed below .
provide certified test data for each shipment of material .
a .
type a temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a machineproduced mat consisting of num percent agricultural straw covered on the top with a polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch to num num inch num num mm to num num mm mesh and sewn together with biodegradable or photodegradable thread .
num .
a consistent thickness with the straw evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
num .
a minimum mat width of num feet num m. num .
an average mat weight of num pound per square yard num gmnum num percent .
num .
a netting weight of approximately num pound per num square feet num kgnum mnum .
b .
type b temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a machineproduced mat consisting of num percent agricultural straw covered on the top with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch to num num inch num num mm to num num mm mesh and on the bottom with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch to num num inch num num mm to num num mm mesh sewn together with biodegradable or photodegradable thread .
num .
a consistent thickness with the straw evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
num .
a minimum mat width of num feet num m. num .
an average mat weight of num pound per square yard num gmnum num percent .
num .
a top netting weight of approximately num pounds per num square feet num kgnum mnum and a bottom netting weight of approximately num pound per num square feet num kgnum mnum .
c. type c temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a machineproduced mat consisting of num percent agricultural straw and num percent coconut fiber covered on the top with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch num num mm mesh and on the bottom with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch num num mm mesh sewn together with cotton thread .
num .
a consistent thickness with the straw and coconut fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
num .
a minimum mat width of num feet num m. num .
an average mat weight of num pound per square yard num gmnum num percent .
num .
a top netting weight of approximately num pounds per num square feet num kgnum mnum and a bottom netting weight of approximately num pound per num square feet num kgnum mnum .
e. type e temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a machineproduced mat consisting of num percent coconut fiber covered on the top and bottom with an ultraviolet stabilized polypropylene netting having an approximate num num inch num num mm mesh and sewn together with polyester thread .
num .
a consistent thickness with the coconut fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
num .
a minimum mat width of num feet num m. num .
an average mat weight of num pound per square yard num gmnum num percent .
num .
an ultraviolet stabilized polypropylene netting with a weight of approximately num pounds per num square feet num kgnum mnum .
f. type f temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a uniform open plain weave of undyed and unbleached single jute yarn .
num .
loosely twisted yarn not varying in thickness by more than onehalf its normal diameter .
num .
furnish mats in rolled strips with a .
a minimum length of num yards num m. b .
a width of num inches num inch num m num mm .
c. warp ends width num num. d. weft ends per yard meter num num num num. e. an average weight of num pounds per linear yard num kgm num percent .
g. type g temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
a machineproduced mat consisting of wood excelsior num percent of which is at least num inches num mm in length .
num .
excelsior cut from wood that is properly cured to achieve adequately curled and barbed fibers .
num .
a consistent thickness with the fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
num .
for use in ditches or channels cover the top and bottom of the excelsior with lightweight netting entwined with the excelsior for maximum strength and ease of handling or cover the top only with heavyweight netting machine sewn on maximum num to numinch num to num mm centers along the longitudinal axis of the material .
for all other applications cover the top with lightweight netting entwined with the excelsior for maximum strength and ease of handling .
num .
regardless of application lightweight netting consists of either netting having a maximum num num inch num num mm weave twisted craft check spelling paper yarn having a high web strength or biodegradable plastic .
num .
mat widths of num num num or num inches num num num or num m or greater num inch num mm .
num .
mat rolls of more than num feet num m in length .
num .
a mat weight of not less than num pound per square yard num gmnum constant weight air dry .
i .
type i temporary erosion control mat .
conform to the following num .
extruded polymeric plastic net having a mesh opening of approximately num num inch num num mm .
num .
a netting with an average weight of num pounds per num square feet num kgnum mnum num percent and a minimum tensile strength of num pounds over a numinch width num n over a num mm width in the weakest principal direction .
num tied concrete block mat .
furnish materials tested to astm dnum .
the department will determine acceptance of type num num and num based on independent third party test data .
the acceptable stability threshold shear values are type num num lbfft num pa type num num lbfft num pa type num num lbfft num pa furnish products according to the departments qpl .
num articulating concrete block revetment system .
furnish materials according to astm d num and tested according to astm d num .
the department will determine acceptance of type num num num based on independent third party test data .
the acceptable stability threshold shear values are type num num lbfft num pa type num num lbfft num pa type num num lbfft num pa furnish products according to the departments qpl .
num detectable warning devices furnish materials conforming to the following requirements products must be compliant with aashto m num .
products will be designed to be physically embedded into concrete and be of a color that visually contrasts with the concrete .
do not use black as a color .
products may be manufactured from materials of cast iron stainless steel polymer concrete reinforced polymer composite or granite .
products may be designed as either one time installation products or replaceable products .
surface applied stamped concrete concrete and brick products will not be permitted .
detectable warning devices will be provided with a minimum num year written warranty with at least the following a .
the installed device will remain aashto m num. compliant for the term of the warranty period .
b .
during the warranty period at least num of the truncated domes on installed device will remain entirely intact .
c. the installed device will remain securely affixed to and flush with the concrete substrate .
d. any surface coating applied to the installed product will remain in place and color fast .
e. at no cost to the department the manufacturer will replace the product including all installation costs if during the num year warranty period the product fails to comply with the above warranty requirements .
any new device installed under the warranty will meet the requirements of this specification as part of the department acceptance process for inclusion on the approved list submit the proposed warranty to the department along with material samples dimensional drawings and written installation procedures .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
begin warranty period upon contract acceptance .
at the preconstruction meeting provide the engineer with the written warranty signed by the executive officer of the manufacturing company .
num delineator materials num reflectors .
for bridge parapet bracket or bridge rail bracket furnish rectangular reflectors that are a minimum size of num num inches num num mm and that consist of reflective sheeting according to num or num adhered to an aluminum plate .
furnish white yellow or red reflectors as specified .
furnish aluminum plate for reflectors according to astm b num b numm numtnum with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm .
for ground mounted delineators furnish rectangular reflective sheeting according to num or num that is a minimum size of num num inches num num mm adhered to a flexible post .
furnish white yellow or red reflectors as specified .
for surface mounted delineators furnish a numinch num mm wide band of reflective sheeting according to num or num adhered completely around a flexible post .
furnish white or yellow reflectors as specified .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num flexible posts .
conform to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num raised pavement marker materials num raised pavement marker castings .
ensure that the casting is nodular iron according to astm a num hardened to num rc snow plowable in the two opposing longitudinal directions and designed to accommodate a replacement prismatic retroreflector .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num prismatic retroreflector and adhesive .
furnish reflectors that contain one or two prismatic reflective faces to reflect incident light from a single or opposite directions .
furnish reflectors with nominal dimensions of num num num inch num num num mm .
ensure that the reflector fits securely in the recessed area and does not protrude above the profile of the casting .
furnish manufacturer recommended retroreflector adhesive to bond the prismatic retroreflectors to casting .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num casting adhesive .
casting adhesives will follow a twostep acceptance procedure .
step num will be materials testing and a flow test .
a. furnish adhesive material conforming to aashto m num type iv except that the viscosity is num to num poise at num num f num num c the unit weight is num to num pounds per gallon num to num kgl and the air requirement is waived .
b .
for materials conforming to the above requirements provide samples of the adhesives to the department for flow testing .
the flow test procedure is num .
in a standard num num block of pine wood num in wide num in deep num in long cut a channel in the block that is num in wide by num in deep with a dado blade .
the channel will run longitudinally num inches long in the center of the num inch wide face of the wood block .
use tape to block off the ends of the channel .
num .
condition epoxy part a and part b and the wood block for a minimum of num hours at num f. num .
mix part a and part b epoxy separately for num seconds .
num .
mix part a epoxy with part b epoxy at the manufacturers required ratio for num minutes .
the total amount of sample mixed will equal num ml .
num .
temporarily dam off num inches of the channel at one end of the wood block .
num .
keeping the wood block flat pour mixed product into the blocked off end of the channel for num seconds .
the product should fill this blocked off volume .
remove the temporary dam .
num .
immediately place wood block with the epoxy filled channel on a num percent grade incline with epoxy placed at the top of the slope .
num .
record distance the epoxy flows down the incline .
num .
the average distance of three tests will be less than num inches .
step num will include a department controlled field application and performance test .
the epoxy adhesive will be field evaluated on an odot roadway project in north eastern ohio .
the roadway will be new asphalt pavement .
the roadway will be a minimum of num miles long and carry a minimum of num adt .
it will be the responsibility of the epoxy manufacturer to work with an odot approved rpm installer to find routes in ohio that meet these requirements and have them installed at no cost to the department as a part of an existing odot contract .
the casting adhesive will be evaluated after one year of service .
removal of any casting from the roadway after one year will be considered failure of the epoxy adhesive .
if no castings are removed from the roadway and the product meets the requirements listed above the epoxy adhesive will be approved and added to the qpl .
the adhesive will continue to be monitored and will remain approved as long as the product continues to perform to the satisfaction of the department approved materials will be incorporated on the departments qpl .
only furnish materials listed on the departments qpl .
num highway lighting materials num general .
furnish luminaires conduits wire switch gear and other electrical hardware that are listed with underwriters laboratories .
ensure that each item of manufactured electrical apparatus as a unit has a durable nameplate identifying the manufacturer and manufacturers product identification .
only provide samples when required by the laboratory .
num wire and cable .
ensure that each nonshielded wire or cable rated numkv is single conductor stranded copper with crosslinked thermosetting polyethylene insulation nonjacketed meets the requirements of icea snumnema wcnum and is of ul type rhhrhwuse except for conductors num awg and smaller for which those with insulation meeting the requirements of ul type xhhw may also be used .
ensure that each nonshielded wire or cable rated num volts is single conductor stranded copper with chemically crosslinked polyethylene insulation nonjacketed meets the requirements of icea snumnema wcnum and of ul type mvnum dry .
ensure that each cables identification device defining its use is either a tag tied onto the cable or a band applied around the cable .
ensure that cable tags are of copper brass or plastic except for tags within switch and device cabinets which shall be nonconducting num inch num mm minimum in thickness permanently fastened to the cables by means of cable tying straps .
ensure that cable identifying bands are approximately num inch num mm thick wrap completely around the cable and closed securely .
ensure that each tag or band is marked using num inch num mm minimum height embossed or engraved letters .
ensure that conductors shall be marked ckt followed by the circuit designation shown on the plans and that grounding conductors are marked gnd and that neutral conductors are marked neu and that hot conductors are marked line followed by num or num for single phase power or phase followed by a or b or c for three phase power .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num unit type ductcable systems ensure that factory made cableinduct has conductors as specified that the duct is high density polyethylene type iii class c category num grade num conforming to nema tcnum and that the duct has the manufacturers name and the year of manufacture included in the marking .
conductors and neutrals will conform to num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num rigid galvanized steel conduit and fittings ensure that rigid galvanized steel conduit complies with the requirements of ansi c num and ul num type i and that each length of conduit bears the ul label .
furnish fittings that comply with the requirements of ansinema fb num and ansiul numb .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride conduits and fittings .
furnish polyvinyl chloride conduit epcnumpvc conforming with nema standard tc num for normal above ground or below ground installation either concrete encased or direct burial .
use fittings conforming to nema standard tcnum references .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyethylene conduits and fittings .
furnish polyethylene conduit epecnumhdpe conforming to nema standard tc num for below ground only installation whether concrete encased or direct burial .
use fittings conforming to astm dnum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polymer concrete pull boxes ensure that the polymer concrete pull box and cover is of aggregate bound with a polymer resin .
ensure that the body of the box is of one piece construction .
ensure that all surfaces of the box and cover are smooth and that the cover has a molded slip resistant surface .
ensure that the cover is slip resistant and is labeled in clearly legible block letters num to num inches num to num mm in height integral to the cover with the word traffic lighting electric or comm to designate the circuits contained .
ensure that the cover closely fits the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts hex head unless penta head is specified in the plans and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover bolts fasten are of open bottom design .
ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of ansiscte num specification for underground enclosure integrity tier num including lateral loading requirements .
the load rating of the box shall be permanently denoted on the top surface of the cover .
the temperature range of the cover shall be at least numc to numc .
the pull box cover shall be polymer concrete .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num plastic pull boxes ensure that the plastic pull box and cover is of high density ultraviolet stabilized molded polymer or structural foam .
the box depth may be obtained through the use of extensions or stacking .
ensure that the cover is slip resistant and is labeled in clearly legible block letters num to num inches num to num mm in height integral to the cover with the word traffic lighting electric or comm to designate the circuits contained .
ensure that the cover closely fits the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts hex head unless penta head is specified in the plans and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover bolts fasten are of open bottom design .
ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of ansiscte num speicifcation for underground enclosure integrity tier num including lateral loading requirements .
the load rating of the box shall be permanently denoted on the top surface of the cover .
the temperature range of the cover shall be at least numc to numc .
the pull box cover shall be polymer concrete .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num portland concrete pull boxes .
a .
pull box .
ensure that the portland concrete pull box is constructed of reinforced portland cement concrete .
when the box is precast provide pull boxes from suppliers certified to supplement num .
ensure that the pull box cover is constructed according to num.b and as shown on the plans .
b .
pull box covers .
furnish metal pull box covers that conform to the following requirements num .
furnish numinch num mm thick steel plate for the steel cover conforming to num with a numinch num mm minimum flange around the edge and galvanized to conform to num .
display on the steel cover or on an attached brass or stainless steel plate tag clearly legible block letters num to num inches num to num mm in height with the word traffic lighting electric or comm to designate the circuits contained .
ensure that the word designating the use is in raised letters that are either integral to the steel cover or integral to a brass or stainless steel plate num inch num mm in thickness securely mechanically attached to the steel cover at the four corners of the tag and at intervals num to num inches num to num mm along the perimeter between corners .
num .
furnish gray iron or ductile iron with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm conforming to num .
certification is required .
ensure that the word traffic lighting electric or comm is cast in the top surface of the cover forming letters num to num inches num to num mm in height .
num junction boxes .
ensure that the junction boxes are iron castings hotdip galvanized in accordance with num .
ensure that the junction boxes meet the requirements of nema icsnumtype num .
when a drilled and tapped conduit entry is stipulated ensure that the junction box has adequate wall thickness and that a boss has been cast into the box if necessary .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num luminaires a. optical system .
furnish a luminaire set to the photometric distribution stipulated in the plan and that the distribution along with the settings required to produce it are clearly indicated on a durable label affixed to the interior of the housing in a position readily apparent and easily read by a worker lamping the luminaire .
furnish a luminaire with a borosilicate glass refractor free of striations and imperfections and embossed to clearly indicate the street side when the refractor may be installed in more than one position .
ensure the refractor is held firmly in the housing but is easily removed without the use of special tools .
furnish a luminaire with an aluminum reflector with a specular polished reflective surface free from scratches .
ensure the reflector is held firmly in the housing but is easily removed without the use of special tools .
furnish a luminaire with a socket for mogul base lamps where there is a choice of size for the application at hand .
furnish a lamp socket with a large center contact spring providing a firm contact with the lamp base and lamp grips to prevent the lamp from loosening .
ensure that the shell is shrouded in porcelain and that the wiring terminals and contacts are identified .
ensure that socket position adjustments have positive indexing such as holes lugs or notches and are not slots with infinite settings .
ensure that socket adaptors are not necessary and not used .
b. lamps .
furnish a luminaire that has been provided with a lamp of the type and wattage specified and that each lamp has a clear glass envelope a date recording feature and does not have any ballasting or starting components .
furnish high pressure sodium lamps that are first line high quality lamps having heat resistant clear glass envelopes with a quartz arc tube interior with horizontal initial lumens and approximate hours of life not be less than the values shown in table num .
table num ansi watts horizontal lumens initial economic life hours snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num snum num num num furnish high pressure sodium lamps that produce a minimum of num percent of the initial lumen output at the end of economic life .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
c. ballast .
ensure that the ballast is of an integral design contained within the luminaire housing .
if the ballast is to be wired line to line or phase to phase ensure that the ballast has an isolated primary winding .
furnish a ballast in conjunction with the starter in the case of high pressure sodium lamps capable of starting and operating the lamp at ambient temperatures as low as num f num c. at circuit voltage of nominal plus or minus num percent or the ballast manufacturers stated range if greater ensure that the ballast can start in conjunction with the starter in the case of high pressure sodium lamps and operate the lamp within the lamps ansi operating parameters for the full design life of the lamp .
furnish a ballast capable of operation with the lamp in an open or short circuit condition for six months without significant loss of ballast life .
furnish a starter of encapsulated solid state design capable of withstanding the temperatures encountered in the ballast compartment of the luminaire .
ensure that the starter provides a timed pulsing with sufficient follow through current to completely ionize and start all lamps that meet published ansi standards .
ensure that the starter has pushon type electrical terminations and is field replaceable with no adjustment necessary for proper operation .
ensure that there is a barrier type terminal block for connection of the incoming electrical circuit .
d. housing .
furnish a housing of cast aluminum .
ensure that the housing has a flat area on the top side on which a level may be placed and read by a worker leveling a mounted luminaire on an erected support .
ensure that the doors providing access to the optical and electrical components have hinges and latches of corrosion resistant materials that remain securely closed during operation .
ensure that the silicone rubber ethylene propylene terpolymer dacron felt or other durable gaskets and seals supplied by the manufacturer either as part of the basic luminaire or as options are in good condition and properly installed at the socket entry between the refractor and reflector and any other location where such gaskets or shields are part of the luminaire and options .
ensure that the exterior finish of the luminaire is a light gray color unless otherwise specified .
furnish a glare shield of aluminum or opaque plastic material when specified .
furnish a shield supplied by the manufacturer of the luminaire .
e. conventional luminaries .
ensure that the luminaire housing doors may be opened closed removed or installed without the use of tools .
ensure that the clamp for the slipfit mounting accommodates both num num inch num mm and num inch num mm nominal pipe mounting bracket .
ensure that a stop is provided as part of the housing to prevent over insertion of the bracket into the housing .
ensure that the clamp engages at least num num inches num mm longitudinally along the arm of the bracket arm between the extremes of a minimum of two clamping points .
ensure that the mounting clamp provides for leveling of the luminaire to the specified transverse and longitudinal position with respect to the roadway .
ensure that the luminaire is equipped with a device indicating the direction and amount of tilt over a range of zero to five degrees in any direction with indications at level three degree tilt and five degree tilt all accurate to one half degree .
ensure that the indicating device is clearly readable in daylight from a distance of num feet num m and in no way alters or reduces the amount of light from the luminaire .
ensure that the indicating device is constructed of a transparent container having one horizontal surface which is curvilinear in any vertical cross section for supporting an indicator and a damping fluid .
ensure that the damping fluid is a liquid which shall be suitable for operation at num f num c and that the transparent container is fabricated from clear ultravioletinhibited acrylic or similar material .
ensure that the glare shield will cut off the upward component of light and that it does not reduce the total output of the luminaire more than num percent .
ensure that the luminaire has a label or decal indicating the type of source and wattage rating .
ensure that with the luminaire installed in its normal operating position the label or decal is clearly legible in daylight at a distance of num feet num m. ensure that the labeling is in accordance with the provisions of nema publication odnum or eei publication tdjnum .
ensure that the complete conventional luminaire assembly including the lamp and all options including when required the glare shield does not weigh more than num pounds num kg .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
f. wall mounted underpass luminaires .
ensure that the assembly is weatherproof and sealed against dust .
ensure that a wire entry for the incoming power is provided on both of the vertical side surfaces of the housing that each entry is drilled and tapped for numinch num mm conduit and that the unused entry is properly closed with the screw type plug supplied by the manufacturer .
ensure that the luminaire housing doors may be opened closed removed or installed without the use of special tools .
ensure that the housing can be mounted onto a vertical flat surface by means of cap screws or bolts through the wall side of the housing .
for mounting on concrete use adhesivegrip anchors designed to be set into a drilled hole halffilled with material meeting num with a minimum hole depth of num inches .
ensure that the luminaire has the option for protecting the glass refractor with a guard or shield that is integral to the luminaire and does not have to be removed to gain access to the lamp or ballast .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
g. high mast low mast luminaires .
ensure that luminaires with a symmetric distribution shall have an initial intensity of no more than num candela per num lamp lumens at nadir and no more than num candela per num lamp lumens at angles between num and num degrees above nadir .
ensure that luminaires with an asymmetric distribution or a long and narrow distribution shall have an initial intensity of no more than num candela per num lamp lumens at nadir and no more than num candela per num lamp lumens at angles from num through num degrees above nadir .
ensure that the output efficiency of the luminaire shall be not less than num percent of the bare lamp lumens .
the luminaire shall emit at least num percent but no more than num percent of the bare lamp lumens at vertical angles of at least num degrees above nadir but no more than num degrees above nadir .
ensure that no portion of the arc tube of the lamp shall be viewable at angles of num degrees or more above nadir .
ensure that the photometric distribution is produced by an optical assembly consisting of a reflector alone or in combination with a refractor which redirects the output of a lamp mounted in a socket therein and that the reflector and refractor if used are each of a one piece design .
ensure that the optical assembly is field rotatable to align the light distribution horizontally independent of the orientation of the arm supporting the luminaire .
ensure that a luminaire for use with a num watt lamp has an auxiliary lamp support that engages the outer end of the lamp envelope .
ensure that the luminaire is of substantial design adequate to operate at mounting heights up to and including num feet num m and wind velocities up to and including num mph num kmh .
ensure that the luminaire mounts by means of a slip fit onto a horizontal numinch num mm pipe and that the luminaires integral mounting provides adjustment for leveling but remains secure and does not twist about the mounting pipe of the bracket when subjected to the vibration and wind loads of the installation .
ensure that the maximum weight of the complete luminaire does not exceed num pounds num kg and the maximum projected area does not exceed num square feet num mnum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyethylene fiberglass reinforced pull box with polymer concrete cover and support ring ensure that the pull box body is of fiberglass reinforced high density ultraviolet stabilized molded polyethylene with a polymer concrete cover support ring and polymer concrete cover .
ensure that the body of the box is of one piece construction .
ensure that the body of the box has a wall thickness of at least num inch num mm .
ensure that the cover support ring is permanently integrated into the box .
ensure that the cover is slip resistant and has in clearly legible block letters num to num inches num to num mm in height integral to the cover the word traffic lighting electric or comm to designate the circuits contained .
ensure that the cover closely fits the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover bolts fasten are of open bottom design .
ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of society of cable telecommunications engineers tier num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num circuit cable connections and terminations .
ensure that each connector or terminator is of the same voltage rating as the wire being connected or terminated except that num volt connectors may be used with num volt secondary service cable used in num volt service for the highway lighting circuits .
ensure that each connector or terminator is a compression style which fully encloses the conductors and is of high strength copper alloy not a metal other than copper which has been plated .
ensure that each connector used for a butt splice is a sleeve type with a stop in the center .
a .
termination of oversize wire .
ensure that each cable terminal of each device can properly accommodate the size of the wire being terminated .
if a terminal of adequate size can not be furnished ensure that a short length of smaller wire is connected to the oversize conductor through the use of a proper butt style crimp connector or a terminal block that no strands have been cut back in the oversize conductor to make the connection and that the smaller wire is rated to carry the full ampacity of the circuit protection device .
b. fused pullapart connection .
ensure that each fused pullapart cable connector kit is a molded synthetic rubber housing consisting of a female line side with two ports and a male load side with one port containing a socket type fuse holder wherein the fuse also acts as the pin for the load connection which is designed to break the circuit when the two halves of the connector body are separated .
ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct burial and exposure to sunlight .
ensure that the metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of num percent have individual compression connections for each wire on the line side have a crimp connection for the wire on the load side and have annular spring on the socket for each end of the fuse .
ensure that the fuse holder is for a standard midget num num numinch num num mm fuse .
ensure that the fuse is rated num vac num aic and does not have a glass body .
ensure that each cable port is sized for the wire or cable entering the entering the port and that there is a closure for the second line port if it is not to be used .
c. unfused pullapart connection .
ensure that each unfused pullapart cable connector kit is a molded synthetic rubber housing consisting of a female line side with two ports and a male load side with one port containing a line side socket and load side pin making a connection which is designed to break the circuit when the two halves of the connector body are separated .
ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct burial and exposure to sunlight .
ensure that the metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of num percent have an individual compression connection for each wire on the line side have a crimp connection for the wire on the load side and have an annular spring on the socket for the pin .
ensure that each cable port is sized for the wire or cable entering the port and that there is a closure for the second line port if it is not to be used .
d. unfused bolted connection .
ensure that each unfused reenterable cable connector kit is a rigid molded plastic sleeve closed on each end by a molded synthetic rubber female end housing having one or two ports as needed containing space in which the connection is made by crimping a lug onto each wire and then bolting all of the lugs together .
ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct burial and exposure to sunlight .
ensure that the metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of num percent and that each connecting bolt has a self locking nut .
ensure that each wire enters through a port sized for the wire and that there is a closure for the port if it is not to be used .
e. unfused permanent connection .
ensure that each cable splicing kit is a rigid transparent molded body having as many as two ports on each which allows the completed splice to be completely encapsulated by filling the mold with a resin compound .
ensure that the actual conductor connections are made using one time use compression connectors and that each wire or cable enters the mold through its own port .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num ground rods .
ensure that each ground rod is one piece at least  inch in diameter and num feet in length with a driving point on the lower end .
if other than circular cross section assure the periphery of the rod is num inches or more .
ensure that the rod is of solid construction and is num stainless steel and ul listed .
num inch by num feet galvanized rods may be installed through num .
after that date only ground rods meeting the material specifications above will be accepted .
ensure that the rod bears a label denoting that it is ul listed .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num power service components .
furnish the materials and equipment comprising a service pole including service equipment that meets the following requirements .
a .
service entrance conduit .
ensure that the service entrance or riser conduit is rigid galvanized steel with a rain tight galvanized steel service entrance head weatherhead threaded to fit the conduit containing a composition insert for three conductors .
b .
service disconnect .
ensure that the service disconnect is a properly rated fused switch of the ampacity specified and solid neutral .
ensure that the service fuses are cartridge fuses on the load side of the switch .
solid metal tie bars when used to tie two or more circuit poles together on a fused disconnect andor circuit breaker shall be constrcted of numinch min .
electricalgrade copper not aluminum .
c. lighting contactor .
ensure that the lighting contactor is of the open type electromagnetically held .
ensure that control of the contactor is through a photocell connected through a handoffautomatic selector switch accessible only with the contactor enclosure open .
ensure that the control circuit is a separate circuit with its own protection .
d. lighting circuit protection .
ensure that separate protection is provided on the load side of the lighting contactor for each lighting circuit and that such protection will open all line or phase conductors of the respective circuit should a fault occur on any one line or phase conductors .
e. photoelectric cell .
ensure that the photoelectric control is a twistlock plugin utility grade solid state cadmium sulfide type of the proper voltage rated for num watts maximum load with integral surge protection a failsafe mode in which the lighting circuits will remain energized and a hermetically sealed case .
ensure that the nominal turn on level is num footcandle num lux vertical and that the nominal turnoff level is num footcandles num lux vertical with tolerances of num percent for the specified values .
ensure that the photocell has a time delayed response that will not respond to flashes of light from lightning headlights of passing vehicles or emergency vehicle strobes and beacons .
ensure that the photoelectric control mounting bracket has a eeinema lockingtype receptacle .
f. switchgear enclosure .
ensure that components are mounted on a removable back panel of num gage or heavier enameled steel rather than directly on the back wall of the enclosure and that the back panel mountings do not penetrate the walls of the enclosure .
provide a welded grounding stud on the enclosure interior .
ensure that a neutral terminal bar of adequate ampere rating and with holes in number and of size to terminate each conductor separately is provided in each enclosure where neutral conductors are to be terminated .
ensure that an equipment grounding conductor terminal bar of adequate ampere rating and with holes in number and of size to terminate each conductor separately is provided in each enclosure where grounding conductors are to be terminated .
when there is no code or utility company prohibition a combination neutral and equipment grounding conductor bar may be furnished .
attach the grounding electrode conductor to the grounding stud .
provide a bonding jumper from the equipment grounding bar to the grounding stud .
ensure that an enclosure containing a disconnect switch with an external operating handle allows that handle to be padlocked in either the off or the on position .
ensure that the enclosure containing the service disconnect switch has an interlock to prevent the door from being opened when the switch is in the on position .
ensure that the enclosure provides for padlocking the door .
ensure that each switchgear enclosure is a nema icsnum type num fabricated from no .
num gage or heavier aisi type num or num annealed stainless steel with fully welded seams and a brushed finish .
all fasteners used in assembly of the enclosures shall conform to astm a numa numm aisinum series .
g. wiring schematic wiring diagram placards .
furnish both a schematic diagram and a wiring diagram of the entire power service from the power company service transformer secondary connection through the lighting branch circuit connections in triplicate with two copies delivered to the project and the third copy placed in the service disconnect enclosure .
the engineer will ensure that one of the two copies delivered to the project is filed with the project records and the other is delivered to the maintaining agency .
ensure that each placard to be attached to an apparatus enclosure is of multiple layers of plastic thermally bonded together to provide a plate of at least num inch num mm in thickness with engraved plain block letters at least num inch num mm in height .
ensure that placards designating the function of the apparatus contained in an enclosure or other such information are of white letters on a black placard .
ensure that placards warning of high voltage possibly present in an enclosure or other such warning are of white letters on a red placard .
h. customer service pole .
furnish a wood pole that complies with supplement num .
ensure that the pole and any cross arms or pole key is southern pine or western red cedar full length pressure treated in compliance with specifications of the american wood protection association or aashto mnum .
ensure that the pole is num feet num m minimum in length and class num or heavier and conforming to ansi num specifications and dimensions for wood poles .
ensure that the pole is reasonably straight without pronounced sweep or short crooks .
ensure that all pole hardware including racks braces straps guy anchors guy wire clamps bolts nuts washers screws nails etc .
is hot dip galvanized in accordance with num .
ensure that the grounding conductor is fastened to the pole with copper clad rolled point staples of adequate size .
ensure that the grounding conductor molding is either wood or plastic in sections not less than num feet num m long of sufficient width and groove depth to completely enclose the grounding conductor .
ensure that each pole anchor is of malleable iron or galvanized steel num inch num mm minimum diameter twoway or fourway expanding type .
ensure that each anchor rod is num inch num mm minimum diameter num feet num m minimum length galvanized steel with thimble eye .
ensure that each guy wire is num inch num mm minimum diameter conforming to astm a num galvanized steel .
i .
circuit breakers .
ensure that circuit breaker assemblies for lighting control circuits are num rated for continuous over num hours operation by the manufacturer and labeled so with a predefined minimum enclosure size and housed in an enclosure sufficient to achieve the num rating .
num multiple cell polyvinyl chloride conduit and fittings .
ensure that the multiple cell conduit consists of inner ducts conforming to nema tcnum type db in an outer conduit conforming to nema tcnum type epcnum or epcnum as specified except that size shall be the true inside diameter in a factory preassembled unit .
ensure that fittings are factory made couplings that couple inner ducts and the outer conduit simultaneously maintain the continuity and indexing of the inner ducts and are of a push fit design mechanically locked in place .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num luminaire supports .
ensure that the complete luminaire support from the luminaires down through the connection to the foundation or other structure to which the luminaire support is attached conforms to the requirements of aashtos standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
ensure that the combined stress ratio above the first field joint is greater than the combined stress ratio at the base of the pole .
the design wind speed for all areas of the state shall be num mph num kmh .
the department may require various tests including destructive tests at either the factory or on site prior to acceptance of a support in which case the departments representative will supervise the contractor andor manufacturer as the appropriate entity performs the tests on supports selected at random by the department from the lot produced for the project .
ensure that any support damaged by the testing is replaced at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that the support identification labels are adhesive labels with silver white reflective characters on a reflective green background meeting the requirements of num .
furnish certified luminaire supports according to supplement num .
a .
light poles .
ensure that the deflection of the pole from vertical when placed under the load of the bracket arm and a weight of num pounds num kg in place of each luminaire does not exceed an angle of num degree num minutes when tested in accordance with supplement num and that certified copies of the results obtained from the deflection tests are furnished the laboratory .
a pole and arm constructed from either aluminum or steel but not a combination of the two may be furnished .
ensure that each bracket arm is made from straight or tapered stock round or ovaliptic in cross section not less in size than num inch num mm nominal pipe .
ensure that the luminaire end of each bracket arm has an outside diameter equal to num inch num mm pipe is straight for a distance of eight inches num mm with the longitudinal axis canted not less than num degree and not more than num degrees above horizontal .
ensure that the bracket has an internal raceway with a minimum internal diameter of num num inches num mm free of projections and obstructions which when assembled to the shaft will permit installation of luminaire supply conductors without insulation damage and which will not require bending the conductors to a radius less than num inches num mm .
ensure that the pole does not have more than two sections that the shorter section of a sectional is at the top and that the shorter section of a sectional pole is not less than num feet num m in length .
ensure that the pole sections are joined by telescoping the bottom of the upper section over the top of the lower section for a minimum length of num num times the external diameter of the bottom of the upper section driving the joint tight and securing by through bolting with a stainless steel hex head bolt of a minimum diameter of num inch num mm .
ensure that a pole section does not have more than one longitudinal automatically electrically welded seam and no transverse seams .
ensure that the longitudinal welded seam is neat and uniform in appearance that the weld is not less than the thickness of the base material and that the bead height does not exceed num inch num mm .
ensure that the wall thickness is uniform throughout except at the weld bead .
ensure that the cross section of the pole is circular or multisided with no less than eight sides and that the difference between the major and minor diameters of poles of circular cross section or the difference between the maximum and minimum distances across corners for poles of multisided cross section measured at any point along the longitudinal axis does not exceed num inch num mm .
ensure that steel poles are tapered tubes with a true continuous taper not less than num inches per foot num mm per num mm and not more than num inches per foot num mm per num mm .
ensure that aluminum poles either spun or cold rolled are a true continuous taper except for the top and bottom sections which may be straight that no more than num percent of the total shaft length is straight and that the average rate of shaft taper including straight portions of the shaft is not less than num inches per foot num mm per num mm and not more than num inches per foot num mm per num mm .
ensure that the full design strength of the pole shaft section in bending can be transmitted through the base plate into the transformer base or the anchor bolts without permanent bending of the base plate or failure of the pole shaft to base plate connection .
ensure that there is a j hook inside the pole just below the top on which to hang the pole and bracket cable support assembly .
ensure that nonstructural castings for aluminum poles including the pole cap are of astm b numb numm or b num alloy s num a condition f. ensure that steel poles and bracket arms are hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of num .
furnish aluminum poles and bracket arms in natural aluminum with a satin brushed surface .
ensure that each light pole is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied to the edge of the base plate which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the pole was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the pole has been galvanized .
ensure that bolts nuts washers and other fasteners used to assemble the light pole are of galvanized steel conforming to num stainless steel conforming to astm a numa numm aisinum series or silicon bronze conforming to astm b num b numm .
ensure that each nonfrangible steel transformer base is capable of transmitting the design dead live ice and wind loads of the light pole to be mounted on it to the foundation without failure or permanent deformation has a flush door permanently attached by means of a topmounted continuous stainless steel hinge and is made from steel conforming to astm anuma numm hot dip galvanized after fabrication .
ensure that each frangible aluminum transformer base is capable of transmitting the design dead live ice and wind loads of the light pole to be mounted on it to the foundation without failure or permanent deformation has a flush aluminum door bolted or if specified permanently attached by means of a topmounted continuous stainless steel hinge and bears easily found and read durable labeling as to which aashto frangibility criteria the base meets .
ensure that the base has been tested and accepted by the fhwa as complying with the num aashto frangibility requirements .
ensure that the bolts and nuts used to fasten the base plate of the pole to the transformer base are heavy hex conforming to astm a num and galvanized in accordance with num .
when either the top or the bottom of an aluminum transformer bases is to be fastened against nongalvanized steel ensure that both the steel and the aluminum mating surfaces have been coated with a heavy film of zinc rich paint .
ensure that the anchor bolts are astm fnum steel with num psi num mpa minimum yield strength are galvanized in accordance with num and that the nuts are capable of developing the full strength of the anchor bolt and are galvanized in accordance with num .
b .
light towers .
ensure that the structural design of the light tower is based on a load of six luminaires or the actual number of luminaires to be installed whichever is greater .
ensure that the structural design of the light tower is based on each luminaire weighing num pounds num kg and having an effective projected area of num square feet num mnum or the actual weight and effective projected area of each luminaire whichever is greater .
ensure that the structural design of the light tower is based on the head frame assembly with lowering device weighing num pounds num kg and having a projected area of num square feet num mnum or the actual weight and effective projected area of the head frame and lowering device whichever is greater .
ensure that the luminaire lowering device consisting of the luminaire ring the head frame the winch the power cables and all miscellaneous mechanical and electrical equipment mounted in or on the pole and the pole are compatible with each other .
num .
luminaire ring .
ensure that the luminaire ring assembly is fabricated from steel which conforms to astm a numa numm and that the ring is fitted with a separate num inch num mm nominal steel pipe mounting arm directly attached to the ring for each luminaire .
ensure that the luminaire ring is supported by three wire ropes equally spaced around the ring .
ensure that the three wire ropes are of the same material and construction .
ensure that the wire rope for this purposed is num inch num mm minimum diameter and either galvanized steel hoisting cable or aircraft grade stainless steel control cable composed of num strands of num wires each .
ensure that each wire rope support cable is connected to the ring by a corrosion resistant device that will allow the connection to develop the full breaking strength of the wire rope while permitting ready adjustment of the length of the wire rope to level the ring .
ensure that the ring is equipped with a minimum of three spring loaded roller tipped centering arms equally spaced around the ring that are in continuous contact with the pole shaft and that the guide arm rollers are of a nonabrasive water resistant material .
ensure that the luminaire ring is equipped with three positive latching devices equally spaced around the ring that latch to the head frame supporting the ring in the raised position allowing tension to be removed from the lifting cables .
ensure that all moving parts of each latching device are part of the ring portion of the latch assembly and that each latch assembly incorporates a reflectorized flag that is clearly discernible from the ground when the ring is latched to the head frame .
ensure that the latching sequence shall not exert a horizontal force sufficient to cause an excess of num gs acceleration upon the luminaires .
ensure that the luminaire ring is equipped with a nema num corrosion resistant junction box for the connections between the main power cord bringing power to the ring and the separate power cords for each luminaire .
conform to article num of the nec for construction of the junction box .
ensure that each power cord has copper conductors of adequate size and insulation that each power cord is of suitable construction and that each power cord enters the junction box through a weather tight cord connector .
ensure that there is a cord support capable of withstanding a load of num num times the weight of the main power cord without damage to the cord transmitting the weight of the main power cord directly to the ring .
ensure that there is a weather tight power inlet on the luminaire ring which allows the main power cord in the base of the tower to connect to the ring when the ring is in the lowered position .
ensure that the junction box is equipped with a num volt class terminal block for the connections between the main power cord the luminaire power cords and the power inlet cord .
ensure that each luminaire ring is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent location which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the ring was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the ring has been galvanized num .
head frame assembly .
ensure that the head frame is fabricated from steel which conforms to the requirements of astm a numa numm .
ensure that the head frame assembly is equipped with pulleys for the wire ropes hoisting cables and rollers for the main power cord to the luminaire ring .
ensure that each hoisting cable sheave has a tread diameter of at least num times the cable diameter for galvanized cable and num times the cable diameter for stainless steel cable that the groove for the hoisting cable has a semicircular in cross section with a radius of onehalf the cable diameter plus num inch num mm that the sheave has an oilimpregnated bronze bushing and that the shaft on which the sheave turns is of stainless steel .
ensure that the rollers for power cord run on aisi num stainless steel shafts between coldrolled steel plates .
ensure that bending radius of the power cord is not less than num inches num mm .
ensure that keeper bars have been provided over the power cord and ring support cables to keep them in their respective tracks .
ensure that a guide is provided to separate the individual cables as they pass between the head frame and the top of the pole .
ensure that the head frame mechanism is protected from the weather by a domed cover of either copper free spun aluminum or fiberglass .
ensure that each head frame is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent location which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the head frame was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the head frame has been galvanized .
num .
transition plate .
ensure that there is a transition plate between the ring support cables and the main hoisting cable .
ensure that the luminaire ring support cables are secured to the transition plate by shop applied swagetype fittings designed to develop a connection strength equal to the breaking strength of the cable and prevent abrasion of the cable by the transition plate .
ensure that there is a cord support capable of withstanding a load of the weight of the main power cord plus a wind load on the cord equal that of a num mph num kmh wind perpendicular to the full length of the cord without damage to the cord connecting the main power cord to the transition plate .
num .
hoisting winch .
ensure that the winch is of cast iron and steel construction with an integral enclosed lubricant bathed worm and gear drive having a reduction great enough to be selflocking .
ensure that the winch has a pulling capacity at least five times greater than that required to lift the load .
ensure that the winch drum diameter is not less than num inches num mm that the drum flange diameter is at least num inches num mm greater than the diameter of the drum .
ensure that there is a cable guide or follower to prevent cable buildup at the ends of the winch drum .
ensure that the support plate for the winch bears a durable tag which identifies the manufacturer manufacturers model and year of manufacture for the lowering device .
num .
winch drive unit portable power unit .
ensure that the winch drive unit is powered by a heavy duty reversing drill motor minimum num w num horsepower rating num volt .
ensure that there is a mechanical slip clutch torque limiter incorporated into the output shaft and that there is a placard on the portable winch drive unit giving the settings and instructions for care of the torque limiter .
ensure that there is a separately packaged dry type isolated winding transformer included to permit operation of the drill motor from the lighting circuit by plugging into the luminaire power cord outlet in the base of the tower .
ensure that the cord outlet and plug for connecting the motor to the transformer are nema lnum devices .
ensure that he hoisting rate is between num and num feet per minute num and num mmin .
ensure that the hand control switch incorporates num feet num m of cable to allow operation of the lowering device from a position away from the pole and not beneath the ring and luminaires .
ensure that each winch drive unit frame is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent location which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the portable power winch drive unit was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after final finish has been applied to the frame .
num .
connection of tower to lighting circuit .
ensure that there is a separate terminal block for each conductor of the supply circuit in the base of the tower and that there are enough spaces on the blocks to allow the incoming circuit to split into three outgoing directions in addition to the feed to the tower itself .
ensure that the terminal block has set screw style terminations sized for num awg num awg for the incoming and outgoing lighting circuit and num awg num awg for the tower wiring .
ensure that there is a circuit breaker in a nema numrnum or numx enclosure located electrically after the terminal blocks for the lighting circuit and before the power cord leading up the tower to the luminaires .
ensure that the breaker enclosure is internally mounted and that the breaker is readily accessible through the tower hand hole .
ensure that the circuit breaker is a bolt on design sized at num amperes with a minimum interrupting capacity of num amperes for num volt circuits or sized at num amperes with a minimum interrupting capacity of num amperes for num volt circuits and is of a single handle rather than a tied handle design with one pole for each line or phase conductor .
ensure that each breaker pole has one or more mechanical lugs one per wire .
ensure that complete lug shields are installed on the breaker .
ensure that cord connector plug and inlet on the ring for electrical power to the luminaires are nema lnum devices for num volt systems or are nema lnum devices for num volt systems .
num .
operating manual .
furnish a complete manual including instructions on installation operation and maintenance for each type of the following lowering device winch assembly and portable power winch drive unit .
num .
shaft .
ensure that shaft of the tower is of not more than four round or multisided tapered steel sections for towers up to and including num feet num m five sections for towers over num feet num m up to and including num feet num m and six sections for towers over num feet num m. ensure that the shaft is of steel having a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa .
ensure that the shaft sections are joined by telescoping the bottom of the upper section over the top of the lower section for a minimum length of num num times the external diameter of the bottom of the upper section or two feet num m whichever is greater and driving the joint tight .
ensure that the sections have been prefitted and matchmarked at the factory .
ensure that the inside surface of the shaft is relatively smooth and that there are no more than two longitudinal welds which shall be made by automatic electric arc welding .
ensure that the longitudinal seam welds have complete penetration are of uniform density are no thinner than the shaft material and not more than num percent thicker than the shaft material .
ensure that the base plate is fabricated from steel which conforms to the requirements of astm a numa numm and that the shaft is joined to the base plate using the american welding society prequalified joint tcunumas or tcunumcgf .
ensure that the hand hole in the shaft is properly reinforced to avoid stress risers and that the reinforcements are welded to the shaft using a joint and techniques designed to insure total penetration plus an outside fillet equal to the thickness of the shaft material .
ensure that all welds in the shaft satisfy aws d num structural welding code article num for tensile stress when tested either by the ultrasonic method or by an approved alternate method and that certified results are furnished to the laboratory .
ensure that the door is fabricated from the same type steel as the shaft is attached with a continuous stainless steel hinge having nonremovable stainless steel hinge pins fits the opening closely and is securely held shut .
ensure that there are provisions for padlocking the handhole door closed and that each tower has been furnished with a vandal resistant padlock having a bronze or brass lock body and a corrosionprotected steel shackle keyed to the key number specified by the maintaining agency .
ensure that there are two holes tapped num num degrees apart provided at the base of the tower for the grounding conductors .
ensure that the shaft shall be hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of num .
ensure that each shaft is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied to the edge of the base plate which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the shaft was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the pole has been galvanized .
num .
anchor bolts and nuts .
ensure that each anchor bolt is steel conforming to astm fnum grade num and galvanized in accordance with num .
ensure that the nuts used with each anchor bolt are capable of developing the full strength of the anchor bolt .
num plastic caution tape .
furnish tape that is an inert material approximately num inches num mm wide composed of polyethylene plastic highly resistant to alkalis acids or other chemical components likely to be encountered in soils .
furnish tape that is bright red with identifying printing electric in black letters on one side only .
furnish tape in continuous rolls with the identifying lettering repeated continuously the full length of the tape .
num barrier reflector materials num barrier reflectors .
furnish concrete barrier retaining wall and bridge parapet reflector body housings that are made of acrylic or polycarbonate plastic or corrosion resistant metal of the following type type num barrier reflector .
ensure that the minimum reflective surface area of the reflector is num square inches num mm .
furnish white reflectors that reflect the following minimum candela of light at the indicated observation angles for each num footcandle num lx of incident light at the indicated entrance angles .
furnish amber reflectors that reflect at least num percent of these values .
minimum specific intensity cdnum lx entrance angle observation angle num num num num num num num num the entrance angle is measured in the horizontal plane between the direction of incident light and normal to the face of the reflector .
the observation angle is measured in the vertical plane between the observers line of sight and the direction of light incident to the reflector face .
type num barrier reflector .
furnish corrosion resistant metal guardrail blockout reflectors that are a minimum size of num num num inches num num num mm with num num mm predrilled mounting holes .
one or both sides shall be covered with a minimum num num inches num num mm of type g h or j reflective sheeting .
type num barrier reflector .
furnish acrylic or polycarbonate plastic guardrail blockout reflector housings with num num mm predrilled mounting holes .
products shall be structurally reinforced to withstand the force of thrown plowed snow .
new products will be tested by the department for a minimum of one winter season before approval .
one or both sides shall be covered with a minimum num num inches num num mm of type g h or j reflective sheeting .
type num barrier reflector .
furnish spring loaded guardrail blockout reflector reflector plate holding arm and holding plate made of plastic with uv protection .
the reflector plate shall have a minimum size of num x num x num inches .
one or both sides of the reflector plate shall be covered with a minimum num x num inches of type g h or j reflective sheeting .
the total height of the spring loaded guardrail blockout reflector shall be num inches which includes the reflector plate holding arm and holding plate .
the holding plate shall have num predrilled holes for numx num num inch long leg screw .
the spring shall be made of num phosmusic wire conform to astmanum standard specification requirements .
type num barrier reflector .
furnish ltype guardrail blockout reflector numxnum reflective and mounting plate made of durable flexible high density polyethylene hdpe plastic with uv protection .
the reflective plate shall have a minimum size of numxnum inches .
one or both side of the reflective plate shall be covered with a minimum of num square inches type g h or j reflective sheeting .
the mounting plate shall have two num num num mm predrilled mounting holes .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num traffic sign and support material num steel tube and pipe .
furnish steel tube and pipe according to astm a num grade b astm a num grade b or astm a num except provide tubing for truss and end frame diagonals according to num .
num uchannel posts .
furnish uchannel posts fabricated from steel into a characteristic crosssection that may be used alone or paired to form a heavier post by being bolted together back to back .
furnish posts with a uniform cross section for their full length .
cut posts square to a length tolerance num inch num mm and ensure that posts do not have ragged or sharp edges or cracks or other imperfections affecting strength or durability .
the back of the posts may be flat or contain raised longitudinal ribs .
furnish posts meeting the deflection criteria of supplement num .
furnish posts manufactured from rail or billet steel according to astm a num grade num .
furnish posts with a nominal weight before punching or galvanizing as follows post size number weight lbft kgm tolerances num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num furnish posts with numinch num mm diameter holes accurately punched on the centerline spaced at numinch num mm centers beginning not more than num num inches num mm from the top of the post through the entire length to allow bolting the posts back to back without redrilling using numinch num mm diameter bolts .
furnish posts that have been galvanized after punching according to num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num square posts .
furnish square posts fabricated from steel according to astm a num with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa with numinch num mm diameter diecut knockouts or open holes spaced on numinch num mm on the centerline of all four sides in true alignment and opposite each other .
furnish posts with the dimensional requirements conforming to the departments standard drawings .
furnish posts that have been finished with one of the following methods a .
both inside and outside of the post are hotdip galvanized according to astm a num gnum .
b .
the outside of the post has a zinc coating of num ounce per square foot num gmnum followed by chromate conversion coating and a crosslinked polyurethane acrylic coating .
the inside of the post has a zinc organic coating .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num wooden box beams .
furnish wooden box beams fabricated from num or num inch num or num mm thick laminated veneers with the grain oriented parallel to the length of the finished beam and the veneers glued together in a continuous process with lap or scarf joints connecting successive veneers in each layer staggered throughout the thickness of the beam .
a num degree miter shall be used for the corner joints .
the adhesive used shall be a phenolformaldehyde which conforms to astm d num .
the beams shall be pressure treated with a preservative meeting awpa standard unum commodity specification f composite materials .
num steel anchor bolts and nuts .
furnish anchor bolts made of steel conforming to astm f num grade num galvanized according to num at least num inches num mm beyond the threads with the end either bent or with a drilled and tapped steel plate .
furnish leveling nuts and anchor nuts capable of developing the full strength of the anchor bolt .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num steel poles and arms .
furnish poles and arms made of steel with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch num mpa and galvanized according to num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num base and arm plates .
furnish support or pole anchor bases and arm attachment plates fabricated from steel plate according to astm a num a numm or astm a num a numm grade num .
weld plates to supports poles or arms both inside and outside with fillet or full penetration welds equal to the wall thickness or by aws prequalified welding joints tc unumas or tc unumcgf .
the contractor may use a cast steel base of equivalent strength .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num handhole covers .
furnish handhole covers for poles and overhead sign supports made of numinch num mm galvanized steel or numinch num mm nominal aluminum alloy .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num pole caps .
furnish pole caps made of aluminum galvanized ferrous metal or zinc die casting .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num arm caps .
furnish arm caps made of steel that cover at least num percent of the end area .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num steel hardware .
furnish bolts numinch num mm diameter or larger according to astm a num a numm .
furnish bolts and screws less than numinch num mm diameter according to sae jnum grade num .
furnish nuts of all size except anchor nuts and leveling nuts according to sae jnum grade num .
furnish flat washers according to ansi bnum .
furnish lock washers according to asme bnum .
furnish ubolts according to astm a num .
furnish all hardware that is hotdipped galvanized according to astm a num or mechanically galvanized according to astm b num class num .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num stainless steel .
furnish any aisi num or num series stainless steel .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num stainless steel hardware .
furnish stainless steel hardware according to astm a numa numm aisi num series .
furnish bolts screws nuts washers handhole cover chains and ubolts that are passivated commercial grade .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum sheet and plate .
furnish sheets for extrusheet panels according to astm b num b numm numhnum or numhnum .
furnish sheets for flat sheet and overlay signs and sign post reflectors according to astm b num b numm numhnum numhnum or numtnum .
furnish plates for sign support structures according to astm b num b numm numtnum .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum extrusions .
furnish extruded panels and extrusions for extrusheet panels according to astm b num b numm numtnum .
for sign support structures provide rolled or cold finished bar rod and wire according to astm b num b numm numtnum provide extruded bars rods shapes and tubes according to astm b num b numm numtnum .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum tube and pipe .
furnish seamless pipe and seamless extruded tube according to astm b numb numm numtnum .
furnish extruded structural pipe and tube according to astm b num numtnum .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum castings .
furnish sand castings according to astm b numb numm numtnum or tnum .
furnish selfaligning aluminum extrusheet sign mounting clips with manufacturer identification mark conspicuously incorporated in relief on the top surface of the casting and in accordance with supplemental specification num .
furnish permanent mold castings according to astm b num numtnum or tnum .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum forgings .
furnish forgings according to astm b num b numm numtnum .
furnish certified material according to supplement num or supplement num .
num aluminum welding rods .
furnish welding rods according to aws ernum .
num aluminum hardware .
furnish hardware according to astm designation alloy conditiontemper bolts and screws b num b numm num num tnum tnum studswelded b num b numm num hnum nutshex b num b numm num num tnum tnum nutslock b num b numm num tnum washersflat b num b numm clad num num tnum tnum lock washers b num b numm num tnum rivetssolid b numb numm num num tnum tnum rivetsblind b numb numm num num num f f f in addition provide breakmandrel aluminum blind rivets with a stainless steel or aluminum mandrel .
furnish certified material according to supplement num .
num reflective sheeting type f. furnish sheeting according to astm d num type i including supplemental requirement snum .
num reflective sheeting type g. furnish type g reflective sheeting of microprismatic construction according to supplement num and according to astm d num iv including supplemental requirement snum .
do not furnish material of glass bead construction .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num reflective sheeting reboundable .
furnish reboundable reflective sheeting according to supplement num and according to astm d num type iii iv viii ix or xi including supplemental requirements snum and snum with watermarks or other identification marks inconspicuously incorporated into the face of the sheeting on a repeating pattern if necessary to distinguish the sheeting from other similarly appearing sheetings .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num reflective sheeting type h. furnish type h reflective sheeting according to supplement num and according to astm d num type viii including supplemental requirement snum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num reflective sheeting type j. furnish type j reflective sheeting according to supplement num and according to astm d num type ix or xi including supplemental requirements snum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num nonreflective acrylic opaque sheeting .
furnish nonreflective acrylic opaque sheeting according to astm d num except provide sheeting that does not incorporate any optical elements .
num silk screen inks .
furnish opaque and transparent process color inks used in the silk screen process that the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting accepts and warrants according to supplement num .
use inks that provide a tough durable film of uniform thickness and appearance on the sign surface .
furnish transparent process color inks used in the reverse screen process according to the daytime color specification limits table in astm d num .
num transparent acrylic electronic cuttable films .
furnish transparent acrylic electronic cuttable films the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting warrants according to supplement num .
use films that provide a uniform appearance on the sign surface .
furnish films according to the daytime color specification limits table in astm d num .
num sign lighting and electrical signs material num changeable message sign electrical type .
a .
general .
electrical changeable message signs consist of units or groups of units containing arrangements of pixels that use electrical circuitry to display different messages .
place signs in weatherproof cabinets .
integrate control logic units load switches monitor feedback circuits power supply etc .
within the sign cabinet or mount within a separate weatherproof enclosure as required .
b .
message type .
furnish electrical changeable message signs of the limited message or unlimited message type .
limited message signs contain pixels in an arrangement so that by the energizing of selected pixels two or more messages may be displayed .
unlimited message signs contain pixels arranged in full matrix or alphanumeric type modules positioned side byside to provide line units of the specified length .
ensure that the line units are capable of displaying messages containing letters and numerals limited only by the number of characters that can be accommodated .
ensure that the line units are capable of continually displaying alternating messages .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
c. display type .
furnish electrical changeable message signs consisting of lamp light emitting diode fiber optic light reflecting or hybrid types .
lamp type changeable message signs consist of individual incandescent bulbs .
light emitting diode changeable message signs consist of groups of individual light emitting diodes that acting together form individual character pixels .
fiber optic changeable message signs consist of fiber optic bundles that transmit light from a remote source to form individual pixels .
light reflecting changeable message signs consist of individual light reflecting panels .
hybrid changeable message signs consist of individual light reflecting panels each augmented by a light emitting pixel of the specified type .
ensure that the light emitting pixels are displayed when the corresponding reflecting panel is in the exposed position and concealed or deenergized when the corresponding reflecting panel is in the unexposed position .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num internally illuminated fixed message sign .
furnish internally illuminated fixed message signs of the required legend and that consist of an opaque housing with a face of translucent plastic .
if specified provide double faced signs .
illuminate signs using interior lamps located so the sign face is uniformly lighted .
furnish signs either with the legend on the exterior surface to maintain legibility when unlighted due to power failure or with the legend on the interior surface so as to be invisible when the sign is unlighted .
apply the legend using black silk screening or by direct applied characters to white sign faces unless otherwise specified .
design the sign faces for quick removal for maintenance and provide faces with a safety chain or like device .
if specified shield the sign faces with sunscreens louvering or visors .
furnish housings made of corrosionresistant material that is cast extruded or formed .
furnish mounting hubs that are similar to traffic signal design .
furnish weatherproof signs that have drainage weepholes .
furnish the sign with the appropriate hardware for mounting by span wire mast arm pedestal top or pole type bracket arms .
include fluorescent type lamps with ballast or led light source .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num sign flasher assembly .
furnish beacons consisting of single traffic signal sections with num or numinch num or num mm yellow lenses .
ensure that the flasher control unit flashes the beacons at a rate for each beacon of between num to num times per minute with the light period from onehalf to twothirds of the total cycle .
furnish flasher control units that have all solid state components and that meet nema tsnum part num .
house control units within a weatherproof corrosionresistant enclosure with a lockable door .
include the led lamps .
ensure that the manufacturer of led beacons is listed on the departments tap for led signal lamps .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num school speed limit sign assembly .
furnish yellow beacons that are num inches num mm or num inches num mm .
ensure that the flashers flash the beacons alternately at a rate for each beacon of num to num times per minute with the light period from onehalf to twothirds of the total cycle .
furnish flashers that have all solid state components and that meet nema tsnum part num .
ensure that the backing members with hardware are compatible with the method of support .
ensure that the manufacturer of led beacons is listed on the departments tap for led signal lamps .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num flexible conduit .
furnish galvanized steel flextube conduit with a waterproof pvc jacket according to ul num for wiring of lighted signs .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num timer with enclosure .
furnish a timer that allows automatic sign operation for a minimum of num times per day and for selected days of the week .
furnish a solid state timer with a backup battery to maintain timekeeping and program memory for at least num hours .
furnish a battery with a design life of num years under field conditions when power failures over the numyear period would accumulate to num days .
if installed outdoors house the timer within a lockable weatherproof corrosionresistant enclosure .
furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock complying with num .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num traffic signal material num vehicular signal heads conventional .
ensure that vehicular traffic signal heads conform to the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads standard .
in conformance with the above standard provide signal heads that are of cast nonferrous corrosion resistant metal .
traffic signals consist of specified assemblies of optical sections containing numinch num mm diameter lens opening a housing a door frame with stainless steel hinge pins and latching device visor wiring and includes led lamp in accordance with num .
retention hardware for led lamps if sharing threaded hole with visor hardware shall consist of minimum numinch num mm long set screw with retaining tab and captive wingnut or hex nut .
all hardware shall be stainless steel and set screw shall be inserted into signal section door using visible semipermanent threadlocking compound .
all hardware used to join optical sections together shall be stainless steel .
furnish signal heads with required mounting hardware .
furnish signal face orientation to traffic by serrated rings or other devices on housing sections and mounting hardware .
permit adjustment in increments not greater than num degrees of rotation and not affected by wind gusts when locked .
furnish galvanized steel or aluminum spacers and drop pipes num num inches num mm nominal pipe size num inch num mm actual diameter .
ensure that disconnect hangers have at least twelve terminals unless a greater number is required tethered heads shall use inch unpainted cast aluminum span wire clamps and cable entrance adapters with integral tristuds no tristud inserts stainless steel hardware and a single steelreinforced mounting hole .
freeswinging heads shall use cast iron span wire clamps and cable entrance adapters with tristuds .
tristuds shall be secured to the head using stainless steel nyloninsert or distorted thread locknuts .
a neoprene gasket placed under the clamp washer in the top signal section shall effectively seal the entrance adapter on the signal to make a waterproof connection and shall have a minimum thickness of num inch .
the inside surface of the visors shall have a finish of flat black .
all other exterior surfaces of the signal head and hardware shall have a finish of federal yellow or gloss black to closely agree with federal standard num color num or color num as specified in the plans .
the coating system used shall be durable uniform and weather resistant .
for polycarbonate signal heads obtain proper exterior colors by use of colored plastic rather than painting .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num vehicular signal heads optically programmed numinch num mm lens .
ensure that the signal sections conform to applicable portions of the ite standard and num .
furnish and mount optical sections with a numinch num mm lens size alone or in combination with additional sections of optically programmed or conventional optics types to form signal faces and heads .
furnish an optically programmed signal section that includes an led lamp .
balance adjusters used only if specified shall have a splined eyebolt design and splined external clamping body .
all assembly hardware shall be stainless steel .
furnish a visor with each signal section .
cable entrance adapters shall be of the tristud type with stainless steel hardware .
a neoprene gasket placed under the clamp washer in the top signal section shall effectively seal the entrance adapter on the signal to make a weatherproof connection and shall have a minimum thickness of num inch num mm .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num signal lamps .
a. vehicular and pedestrian light emitting diode led lamps .
prequalify vehicular and pedestrian led lamps according to supplement num .
furnish led signal lamp units that meet or exceed all the requirements of the current institute of transportation engineers ite publications .
led module shall be certified by the intertek led traffic signal module certification program and each unit shall have a decal indicating intertek certification .
all led signal lamp units shall be the latest model currently in production and new .
equipment no longer being manufactured shall not be accepted even if it meets the following specifications .
led signal lamp units shall conform to the following criteria num .
physical and mechanical requirements a .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be designed as a retrofit replacement for existing incandescent signal lamps and shall not require any special tools for installation .
the num num mm retrofit replacement led traffic signal lamp unit shall fit into existing traffic signal housings built to ite vehicular traffic signal heads vtcsh standards without modifications .
b .
installation of a retrofit replacement led traffic signal lamp unit into an existing signal housing shall only require removal of the existing lens and incandescent lamp .
the new unit shall fit securely in the housing door and connect to existing electrical wiring or terminal block by means of simple connectors .
removal of the reflector is optional .
c. each led signal lamp unit shall be identified on the back side with the following num manufacturers name and trademark num part number num serial number must be unique for each unit num voltage rating num power consumption watts and voltampere num vertical indexing indicator i.e .
up arrow or the word up or top if specific orientation of the module is required .
num date of manufacture minimum information required month year single units shall have identification markings as to the type and color of the module .
bimodals shall be marked with module type .
each led signal lamp unit shall have a label placed on the unit certifying compliance to ite standards for color and luminance .
d. the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be a single selfcontained device not requiring onsite assembly for installation into an existing traffic signal housing .
e. the assembly and manufacturing process for the led traffic signal lamp unit assembly shall be such as to assure all internal led and electronic components are adequately supported to withstand mechanical shock and vibration from high winds and other sources .
the led signal lamp shall survive num drops of num inches onto a smooth concrete surface without any loosening or breaking of internal components or change in operation .
f. the lens of the led signal lamp unit shall be capable of withstanding ultraviolet light direct sunlight exposure for a minimum time period of five years without exhibiting evidence of deterioration .
g. ensure that lenses will withstand a numinch num meter drop test are a minimum of num inch num mm thick and are free of bubbles and imperfections .
the lenses shall be smooth on the outside with no external facets to prevent dirt and debris build up .
h. each led traffic signal lamp unit shall comprise a uv stabilized polymeric outer shell multiple led light sources and a regulated power supply .
i .
if red or yellow lenses are tinted they shall match the wavelength chromaticity of the led .
do not furnish green tinted lenses .
j .
an optical assembly shall diffuse the light output and provide uniform illumination across the entire surface of the lens and eliminate the visibility of the individual leds to the observer .
the optical assembly shall be used for all ball modules and shall be optional on arrow and pedestrian modules .
k. the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be designed for universal installation in both span wire and standardstationary pole mount applications .
l. the arrow pattern produced by the arrow led traffic signal lamp units shall conform to the vtcsh standard for color size and shape .
the arrow led traffic signal lamp units shall not require a specific orientation or have a variance in light output pattern or visibility for any mounting orientation .
m. led pedestrian signal lamp units shall be designed as a retrofit replacement modular or screw in unit for the message bearing surface of a num num mm pedestrian traffic signal type anum housing .
n. the led pedestrian signal lamp unit shall fit into existing pedestrian signal housings without the need to modify the housing .
installation of the retrofit replacement led pedestrian signal lamp unit into an existing num num mm pedestrian signal housing shall only require the removal of the existing message bearing surface existing lamp components i.e .
lens lamp module gaskets and reflector and insertion of the retrofit replacement into the area once occupied by the removed assembly .
o .
the single pedestrian module shall be designed to display a full hand icon and a full walking person icon that complies with standards for this icon symbol for the size specified .
p. led traffic signal lamp units shall be visible at num feet num meters during sway conditions extended view until obscured by the visor .
q .
the module shall be designed to detect catastrophic loss of the led load .
upon sensing the loss of the led load the module shall present a resistance of at least numk ohms across the input power leads within num msec .
num .
electrical requirements a .
each unit shall incorporate a regulated power supply engineered to electrically protect the leds and maintain a safe and reliable operation .
the power supply shall provide capacitor filtered dc regulated current to the leds according to the led manufacturers specification .
b .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall operate on a num hz ac line voltage ranging as specified by ite specifications .
the circuitry shall prevent flickering over this voltage range .
nominal rated voltage for all measurements shall be num num volts rms .
c. all unit types shall be operationally compatible with the traffic signal equipment that each type is designed and intended to interface with .
e. two captive color coded num v num awg minimum jacketed wires num feet num m long conforming to the national electric code rated for service at num f num c are to be provided for an electrical connection .
f. the led signal shall operate with a minimum num power factor .
g. total harmonic distortion current andor voltage induced into an ac power cabinet bus by any sample of num signal lamp units shall not exceed num percent .
this value may be calculated using the rootmean square combination of the measured harmonic distortion from one sample led signal lamp unit .
h. led signal lamp units and associated onboard circuitry shall conform to the requirements in federal communications commission fcc title num sub part b section num regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise .
i .
the led signal lamp units shall incorporate circuitry to ensure that they show no evidence of illumination for input voltages below num volts .
led signal lamp units shall be illuminated unregulated illumination for all input voltages higher than num volts ac but less than num volts ac .
they shall have fully regulated illumination for applied voltages of num volts through num volts ac .
proof of the intended function of this circuitry shall be accomplished by connecting the lamps to a variable voltage source and slowly raising the applied voltage from zero volts up to num volts and then slowly lowering the applied voltage from num volts to zero volts .
j .
proposed led signal lamp units shall be less than or equal to the base wattage shown below at num f num c. retrofit wattage num r num red ball num or less num y num yellow ball num or less num g num green ball num or less num y num yellow arrow num or less num g num green arrow lnum or less num .
environmental requirements a .
green and red led traffic signal lamp units shall be rated for use in the ambient operating temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c. yellow signal lamps shall be rated at a range of num f to num f num c to num c. b .
the unit shall consist of a housing that is a sealed watertight enclosure that eliminates dirt contamination and allows for safe handling in all weather conditions .
num .
documentation requirements .
each led traffic signal lamp unit shall be provided with the following documentation a .
installation instructions .
b .
the manufacturer name brand and model number of all leds used shall be provided along with the led manufacturers recommended drive current and degradation curves .
num .
warranty .
the led signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if it exhibits a failure due to workmanship or material defects within the first num months of field operation .
the led signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if when operating over the specified operating ambient temperature and voltage ranges the unit does not meet or exceed all minimum luminous intensity requirements as defined in the specifications during the first num months of field operation .
the measured chromaticity coordinates of led signal lamp units shall conform to the requirements for chromaticity in the specifications over the temperature range provided in the specifications for the duration of the warranty period .
the manufacturer shall provide a written warranty against defects in materials workmanship and luminous intensity for led signal lamp units for a period of num months after installation of led signal lamp units .
replacement led signal lamp units shall be provided within num days after receipt of failed led signal lamp units at no cost except the cost of shipping the failed units .
an led pedestrian signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if the signal lamp unit does not attract the attention of or is not readable to a viewer both day and night at all distances from num feet num meters to the full width of the area to be crossed when operated over the specified operating ambient temperature and voltage ranges .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num pedestrian signal heads .
furnish pedestrian signal heads that conform to the ite specifications .
ensure that the signal heads alternately display the symbol of an upraised hand in portland orange and the symbol of a walking person in white light .
do not furnish outline style symbols .
furnish material for housings that consist of cast or sheet corrosion resistant nonferrous metal or polycarbonate plastic as specified in the plans .
adequately reinforce the housings .
ensure that the lens frames are nonferrous metal or polycarbonate material .
ensure that the lenses are glass or ultraviolet and impactresistant plastic and display the legend with translucent symbols within an opaque black background .
seal the lens to the door frame by the use of a weatherproof seal .
furnish an elastomeric gasket between the door frame and housing to ensure a dust and weatherproof seal .
use a signal head design that provides adequate dissipation of heat .
furnish pedestrian signal heads with required mounting brackets .
furnish either pipe type brackets or when compatible with the mounting position required by the plans twopiece hinged type brackets that support the signal head close to the pole .
furnish num numinch num mm galvanized steel pipe brackets with necessary fittings and adapters and that are one way or twoway as required .
orient the signal face to crosswalks by selective meshing of serration rings or other devices provided on housings and mounting brackets .
make adjustment in increments not greater than num degrees of rotation and that is not affected by wind gusts when locked .
furnish twopiece hinged brackets of cast aluminum with stainless steel hinge pins and when closed will be secured by a tamperproof bolt .
ensure that the mounting incorporates a terminal block for quick disconnect of field wiring .
ensure that the mounting design permits attachment to the pole by banding bolting or by lag screws in the case of wood poles .
finish signal exterior surfaces black with enamel coating .
finish interior surfaces of visors flat black .
for polycarbonate signals proper exterior colors shall be obtained by use of colored plastic material rather than painting .
also for polycarbonate signals pipes spacers and fittings constructed of polycarbonate plastic may be used in lieu of galvanized steel or aluminum .
furnish pedestrian signal head types according to table num .
table num signal head type symbol height inches mm anum anum num num num num dnum num num if specified furnish the types listed below a .
type anum .
furnish a signal head that utilizes the housings of two numinch num mm lens type vehicular traffic sections connected together to form a vertical unit .
ensure that the sections have square lenses .
ensure that the upper lens displays the symbol of an upraised hand in portland orange and the lower lens will display the symbol of a walking person in white .
b .
type anum .
furnish a signal head that utilizes the housings of two numinch num mm lens type vehicular traffic sections connected together to form a vertical unit .
ensure that the sections have square lenses with the same symbol position as type anum .
c. type dnum .
furnish a single housing signal head with a lens in one piece or in two sections one for each message .
color and mask the lens to display in portland orange the symbol of an upraised hand from the left compartment and the symbol of a walking person in white from the right compartment .
install a lamp in each compartment .
the upraised hand and the walking person symbols may be integral in the same compartment .
d. countdown .
num .
operation .
a .
display driver shall be designed to allow individual led failures without affecting other leds in the same display .
b .
the countdown timer shall be of the smart type which continuously samples the timing intervals presented by the pedestrian signal load switch drivers in order to learn the programmed timing being used by the controller .
c. during interval sampling time the countdown timer numerical display shall be blank .
d. sampling time to determine interval settings shall take a maximum of two complete signal cycles .
e. the unit shall be capable of displaying a countdown commencing at the onset of the pedestrian clearance interval and reaching zero at the end of the pedestrian clearance interval .
f. any interruption of the flashing pedestrian clearance display e.g .
preemption timing plan change during a countdown display shall immediately cause blanking of the countdown numerals .
the countdown timer shall relearn the pedestrian clearance interval upon return to normal service after preemption or immediately following a change in walk clearance time associated with a timing plan change .
num .
type anum .
the top section shall be identical to the num inch num mm type dnum pedestrian signal .
the bottom section shall consist of a countdown display in a num inch num mm housing .
num .
type dnum .
the left side of the signal section shall consist of an integral handwalking person display .
the right side compartment shall contain the countdown display .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num pedestrian pushbuttons .
furnish pushbuttons of sturdy construction that consist of a base housing and a removable cover .
furnish components that provide a pushbutton with normally open contacts and that include all electrical and mechanical parts required for operation .
ensure that the design of the pushbutton and its associated contacts and housing are sturdy and resistant to mechanical shocks and abuse .
ensure that a concentrated force of num pounds num n applied to the button or any exposed portion does not damage the unit or misadjusts the contacts .
furnish a housing with a curved back surface for mounting on poles of various diameters .
integrate the curved surface with the housing or supply an adapter with a flat back type housing .
attach the cover assembly to the housing by stainless steel machine screws resulting in a weatherproof and shockproof assembly .
furnish a hole threaded for a numinch num mm pipe in the housing for conduit attachment purposes .
furnish housing with manufacturer applied external surfaces of yellow color num federal standard num unless specified otherwise in the plans .
ensure that the maximum force required to operate the pushbutton is num pounds num n. furnish a raised or flush pushbutton with a minimum of num inches at its smallest dimension .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num loop detector units .
a. nema tsnum .
ensure that the loop detector units comply with the requirements of nema tsnum section num with the following modifications .
furnish shelf mounted loop detector units that are powered from num volts .
use solid state isolated output units for all controller applications where directly connected to a solid state digital controller unit .
ensure that the conductors in the cable harness for loop input pins are twisted three to five times per num foot num mm .
ensure that the electrical connections for fourchannel shelfmounted units either are the numpin ms connector as required by the foregoing specification or consist of four connectors of the type required for singlechannel shelfmounted detector units .
if specified design detector unit electrical connection plugs or wiring harness such that any multichannel shelfmounted detector unit may be readily replaced with singlechannel detector units .
accomplish this by furnishing only units with the connector type required for singlechannel shelfmounted detector units or by wiring the controller back panel to singlechannel harnesses which are in turn plugconnected to an adapter harness which is mated to the multichannel connector of the detector unit .
furnish loop detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
b. nema tsnum .
furnish loop detector units according to nema standards tsnum .
furnish loop detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num loop detector units delay and extension type .
ensure that the loop detector units of this type comply with the requirements of nema tsnum section num .
furnish shelfmounted loop detector units that are powered from num volts .
use solid state isolated output units for all controller application where directly connected to a solid state digital controller unit .
when specified apply the provisions of num for possible replacement of multichannel units with single channel units .
furnish loop detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num signal supports .
furnish signal poles and mast arms that are tapered tubes of a true continuous taper .
furnish tubes that are circular or regular polygons with six or more sides .
ensure that any measurements of circular tube diameter at a specific point along the longitudinal axis do not vary by more than numinch num mm .
ensure that the taper is between num and num percent .
a rectangular roundedcorner aluminum pole identification tag with minimum dimensions of num x num x num inches shall be attached to the pole at a height of num inches above the base plate .
the pole identification tag shall be clearly and deeply stamped with the odot standard construction drawing number design number and the fabrication date of the pole e.g .
tcnum des .
num num in characters with a minimum height of num in .
attach to the pole with four stainless steel num inch rivets .
fabricate mast arms of the true continuous taper type in two portions joined by overlapping of sections with the overlap being at least num num diameters as determined by the largest diameter of the outer portion .
assemble the sections with a numinch num mm minimum stainless steel or galvanized steel hex head throughbolt .
ensure that there is not more than one longitudinal automatically electrically welded seam on circular poles .
ensure that the welded seams are neat and uniform in appearance and have a thickness not less than the base material and a bead height not exceeding numinch num mm .
ensure that the wall thickness at each pole or arm crosssection is of uniform thickness except at weld beads .
do not place transverse seams or welds on true continuous taper type poles or arms .
weld according to num .
after fabrication hotdip galvanize poles and arms according to num .
do not use guy rods or trusstype arms .
furnish poles and mast arms with attachment plates and gussets .
assemble using highstrength bolts with the connection developing the full momentresisting capability of the arm .
do not allow the butt diameter of mast arms to exceed the nominal diameter of the pole at the point of attachment .
fit poles with a weldedon cast or plate steel base designed to mount on an anchor bolt foundation and ensure that each pole includes the furnishing of anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation .
furnish at least one numinch num mm diameter conduit ell for installation in each foundation .
furnish conduit ells made from steel complying with num however if they connect to nonmetallic conduit ensure that they are of the same nonmetallic material .
use steel anchor bolts conforming to astm f num grade num and galvanized according to num .
ensure that ends have a steel plate as shown on the plans .
ensure that the poles include a handhole near the base oriented as required .
reinforce the handhole with a weldedon steel frame with a grounding lug and fit it with a cover plate fastened by stainless steel screws .
ensure that the poles also include a cable and wire support jhook welded near the top and a removable pole cap .
design poles and arms so their interiors conceal wiring and their mast arms include grommeted wire outlets for the signal heads .
furnish hanger clamps with clevises on the mast arms for the signal heads as required .
ensure that arm caps are made of steel and cover at least num percent of the end area .
ensure that signal poles combining provisions for roadway lighting include an additional handhole located opposite the mast arm flange with the poles jhook located above .
furnish pedestrian pushbutton access holes and blind half couplings for controllers and pedestrian signal heads as required .
plug any unused holes .
furnish certified materials according to supplement num .
num strain poles .
furnish signal strain poles for the attachment of span wire that are steel tapered tubes according to the requirements of num .
ensure that all poles include a removable pole cap and messenger wire clamps with clevis and shackle unless otherwise specified .
a rectangular roundedcorner aluminum pole identification tag with minimum dimensions of num x num x num inches shall be attached to the pole at a height of num inches above the base plate .
the pole identification tag shall be clearly and deeply stamped with the odot standard construction drawing number design number and the fabrication date of the pole e.g .
tcnum des .
num num in characters with a minimum height of num in .
attach to the pole with four stainless steel num inch rivets .
furnish anchor bolt foundation type strain poles that include a weldedon cast or plate steel base bolt covers a handhole and a jhook as required by num and that also include at least one numinch num mm cable entrance with a weatherhead and a welded blind halfcoupling .
ensure that the poles include the furnishing of anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation .
furnish at least one numinch num mm diameter conduit ell for installation in each foundation .
furnish steel conduit ells that comply with num however if they connect to nonmetallic conduit ensure that they are of the same nonmetallic material .
furnish certified materials according to supplement num .
num wood poles .
furnish wood poles that conform to ansi num specifications and dimensions for wood poles that are made of southern pine or western red cedar and that are fulllength pressure treated according to num .
num down guy assemblies .
furnish expanding or screw type anchors capable of withstanding a guy tension of num pounds num kn when installed in firm moist soil .
ensure that each anchor rod is numinch num mm minimum diameter num feet num m minimum length galvanized steel with thimble eye .
ensure that all pole and attachment hardware is hot dip galvanized in accordance with num .
furnish numinch num mm minimum diameter guy wire that conforms to num and ensure that all accessories have a rated loading strength equal to or greater than the messenger wire minimum breaking strength .
furnish porcelain strain insulators of the wet process type .
furnish an num feet num m minimum length guy guard made of impact and ultraviolet light resistant yellow plastic that is fastened to the guy wire .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num pedestals .
fabricate pedestals for the support of traffic control equipment of numinch num mm schedule num steel or aluminum pipe .
fit the steel pipe with a weldedon base of plate or cast steel or when specified thread the steel pipe into a gray cast iron transformer type base .
furnish galvanized steel pedestals according to num .
thread aluminum pipe into an aluminum cast transformer type base .
design pedestals to mount on an anchor bolt foundation and include the furnishing of anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num conduit risers .
ensure that risers have conduit and fittings according to num and the weatherhead is made of aluminum or galvanized ferrous metal and threaded .
num cable support assemblies .
ensure that the cable grip used with cable support assemblies is of the proper size and strength for the cables and is of the flexible closed or split with rod type of stainless steel or tin coated bronze and equipped with a single u eye bale .
ensure that the smallest cable grip permitted has a minimum rated breaking strength of num pounds num kn .
ensure that the slings for cable supports are made from copper clad or galvanized multistrand steel wire with an overall diameter of not less than numinch num mm and a breaking strength of at least num pounds num n. use thimbles to form eyes at each end of the sling with grooves to match the wire .
adjust the sling to the proper length with the wire at each thimble lapped and secured with split bolt clamps .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num messenger wire a .
wire .
furnish seven strand astm a num class b utilities grade or stronger messenger wire except numinch num mm seven strand messenger wire must be high strength grade or stronger .
furnish numinch num mm seven strand astm a num class b high strength grade or stronger tether wire .
furnish all wire per astm a num with the following modifications num tags are not required on lengths less than num feet num m. b .
accessories .
for messenger wire ensure all accessories have a rated loading strength equal to or greater than num percent of the messenger wire minimum breaking strength .
for breakaway tether installations accessories within the turnbuckletensioned portion of the tether span shall have strength equal to or greater than num percent of the breaking strength of numinch numstrand astm a num high strength grade wire rope or num pounds num kn .
other portions of the tether assembly shall use accessories strength equal to or exceeding the wire rope used in that portion .
shooks shall be made of mild lowcarbon galvanized steel and of the wire size indicated on the plans larger wire sizes and higherstrength steel shooks shall not be substituted .
safety tie wire shall be num or num stainless steel num stranded numinch num mm with stainless steel wire rope clips .
if used lead sheet to wrap tether wire in breakaway anchors shall be commercially pure lead of thickness num to num inches num to num mm .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num cable and wire .
furnish cable and wire meeting the requirements of table num and rated at num volts with conductors of copper unless otherwise specified .
ensure that the cable or wire jacket is indelibly marked at intervals of not more than num feet num m with nomenclature stating the size the type the organization specifying the type and the manufacturers name or trademark .
table num cable and wire cable or wire number of conductors wire gage specification or type conductor type notes signal cable as specified as specified imsa num imsa num copper color coded stranded interconnect cable as specified as specified imsa num imsa num copper color coded stranded twisted pairs as specified as specified rus penum imsa num imsa num copper color coded solid interconnect cable integral messenger type as specified as specified imsa num imsa num copper color coded stranded twisted pairs as specified as specified imsa num imsa num copper color coded solid num loop detector wire single conductor num awg imsa num copper stranded loop detector lead in cable two conductor num awg imsa num copper twisted pair stranded shielded power cable two conductor as specified ul rhhrhw use or hhw cross linked polyethylene with an insulation thickness of num inch num mm min .
copper stranded num service cable two conductor duplex as specified aluminumnum twisted stranded ground wire single conductor ul rhhrhwuse or xhhw cross linked polyethylene copper stranded num loop detector lead in cable direct burial as specified num or num awg or as specified imsa num imsa num copper stranded loop detector lead in cable integral messenger type as specified num or num awg or as specified imsa num imsa num copper stranded notes num copper conductors may be substituted num ansiicea cable shall have solid insulations full count color coding nummil shield and num khz attenuation compliance .
all other specifications are manufacturers option unless specified .
num threeconductor cable may be specified .
permitted substitution num or num single conductor cable .
num minimum size is equal to the power or service cable whichever is larger .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num power service .
furnish risers for power service that are num to num numinch num to num mm diameter conduit and fittings according to num .
furnish weatherheads that are threaded and made of aluminum or galvanized ferrous metal .
include a disconnect switch with enclosure .
num disconnect switch with enclosure .
ensure that the switch enclosure is a ul listed watertight lockable stainless steel nema type num supplied with the conduit hubs listed on the enclosure ul label .
furnish an enclosure that contains as a minimum a singlethrow num pole solid neutral fused safety disconnect switch ul listed as suitable for a service disconnect with a minimum capacity of numamperes at num vac .
ensure that the unit can be padlocked in both the on and off positions .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num backplates .
furnish louvered backplates constructed of wrought sheet aluminum according to astm b num b numm numtnum .num inch num mm minimum thickness .
louvers shall be at least num percent of the total backplate area .
backplate base metal shall be anodized to maximize paint adhesion according to milanum type ii or type i. furnish backplates painted on both sides with at least two coats of flat black alkyd enamel paint or polyester powder coat no epoxy closely matching fedstdnumbnum .
furnish a backplate that extends num inches num mm beyond the outside of the signal assembly on all sides .
the overall outside shape of the installed backplate shall be rectangular .
the backplate shall allow no gaps between the backplate and the signal head or between signal sections .
a numinch num mm wide continuous outside border of fluorescent yellow reflective sheeting shall be applied to the front of the backplate .
border shall not be applied over the louvers .
reflective sheeting shall be type h or j listed on the departments qualified products list .
prepare backplate surfaces in accordance with num prior to applying the reflective material .
all assembly and mounting hardware shall be stainless steel conforming to num .
if used machine nuts shall be threaddeforming or nylon locknuts .
rivets shall not be used for mounting the backplate to the signal head .
a minimum of four mounting points shall be used on each signal section for attaching the backplate .
furnish all mounting hardware .
num traffic signal controller material num references and definitions .
nema tsnum type tsnumanum and type tsnumanum refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the national electrical manufacturers association nema standards publication no .
tsnum .
nema tsnum and type tsnum refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the national electrical manufacturers association nema standards publication no .
tsnum .
type num and type num refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the california department of transportation caltrans specifications titled traffic signal control equipment specifications and transportation electrical equipment specifications including all addenda .
type num refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the california department of transportation caltrans specifications titled transportation electrical equipment specifications including all addenda .
ip refers to equipment conforming to the internet protocol suite communication protocols defined by the internet engineering taskforce rfc num .
tap refers to the traffic authorized products list for products that have been authorized for use on intelligent transportation systems its for the ohio department of transportation .
num controller units .
a .
general requirements .
ensure that each controller unit contains internal time based coordination and if used in a hardwired coordination system provide an internal communication device or transceiver for connection to interconnect cables including multiconductor num volt cables twisted pair low voltage cables or fiber optic cables as shown on the plans .
if used in a closed loop system ensure that the local intersection controller contains all of the software features necessary to operate with the system requirements given in num and num .
when the signal timing and phasing configuration shown on the plans requires a pretimed operation ensure that the controller unit meets all requirements of this section and can also be configured in a pretimed sequential phase fixed interval mode .
furnish controller memories that are nonvolatile and do not require batteries or other sources of energy to retain data while power is removed from the controller .
b .
software .
furnish a communication port for connection to a laptop computer for database uploaddownload .
furnish software for the personal computer to completely program all features of the controller unit .
unless otherwise shown on the plans provide the controller unit with software that provides the following features even if not used by the signal phasing operation shown on the plans num .
nema num phase dual ring capability with four pedestrian movements num overlaps and the ability to program an exclusive pedestrian movement .
ensure that the controller is capable of being programmed for sequential phasing operation .
all controllers shall be capable of implementing flashing yellow arrow operation by remapping pedestrian channel yellow drivers to operate the yellow arrows .
num .
volume density functions num .
secondary coordination plans num .
time of dayday of week scheduler num .
time based coordination minimum num dials num offsets num splits num .
internal preemption for railroad and emergency vehicles .
railroad preemption shall conform to odot specifications .
num .
operator selectable single or dual entry in dual ring use num .
security access codes num .
detector features including delay timing carryover extension timing and detector switching num .
simultaneous gap out feature num .
if operated in a system communication capabilities to interface with hardwired masters dial up modems andor ip communication devices .
num .
data upload and download capability to a personal computer .
at least one ip port and one serial port shall be included .
num .
storage of detector counts utilizing phase detectors for a minimum num hour period in num minute increments num .
detector failure monitoring and logging features for constant calls and absence of calls furnish nummonth warranties or for the manufacturers standard warranty whichever is greater for the following equipment nema controller equipment a. tsnum controller units b .
bus interface units c. malfunction management units d. ts num conflict monitors caltrans controller equipment a .
model num conflict monitor units b .
numl nume and numlx controller units including the following subassembly units num nume numb numc cpu board num numa field io module num numb front panel .
num numab .
ensure that the warranty period begins on the date of shipment to the project .
ensure that each unit has a permanent label or stamp indicating the date of shipment .
label shall indicate the equipment vendor name and or logo .
c. type ts numanum .
furnish a controller unit that meets nema tsnum specifications and is shelf or rack mounted .
ensure that controller settings are programmable through a keyboard on the front panel .
ensure that the front panel contains an numline by numcharacter display .
ensure the controller is equipped with a datakey to support controller database uploaddownload .
securely attach the datakey to the top of the controller with fiberreinforced tape at the time of delivery to the project .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
d. type tsnumanum .
furnish a controller unit that meets nema tsnum specifications and is suitable for shelf mounting .
furnish a controller unit that includes all ports and inputoutput connectors for complete interchangeability between nema tsnum and tsnum cabinets .
ensure that controller settings are programmable through a keyboard on the front panel .
ensure that the front panel contains an eightline by numcharacter display .
ensure the controller is equipped with a datakey to support controller database uploaddownload .
securely attach the datakey to the top of the controller with fiberreinforced tape at the time of delivery to the project .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
e. type numl .
furnish controller units that meet the specifications for transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation including all addenda .
furnish a controller unit that is listed on the odot tap .
the type numl version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules unit chassis model numb cpu module single board model numa field io module model numb front panel display b num lines of num char .
model numb power supply module num amp .
power supply model numa num amp may be supplied in lieu of model numb model numa async .
serial communication module furnish a controller unit that is listed on the odot tap .
f. type nume .
furnish controller units that meet the specifications for transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation including all addenda .
the type nume version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules unit chassis model nume cpu module single board model numa field io for num cabinet model numb front panel display b num lines of num characters model numa or numb power supply model numa async .
serial communication module furnish a controller unit that is listed on the odot tap .
g. type numlx .
furnish controller units that meet the specifications for transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation including all addenda .
the type numlx version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules unit chassis model numc cpu module single board model numa field io for num cabinet model numb front panel display b num lines of num characters model numa or numb power supply model numa async .
serial communication module also equip all versions of the type num controller unit with the following num .
the appropriate communication port cables and connectors for communicating with a laptop computer .
num .
modems ports and cables for system communication if the controller is to operate as part of an interconnected signal system or has a telephone drop shown on the plans .
num .
furnish a serial communication cable to be used to establish periodic automatic time sync between the num controller software and the conflict monitor .
the cable shall consist of six feet num m of unshielded num conductor cable minimum num gauge stranded conductors with protective jacket .
end connectors shall be numpin d subminiature with backshell male and female with pin assignments shown in the table below .
numpin male numpin female num num num num num num num num num num num .
data key .
furnish a controller unit that is listed on the odot tap .
num cabinet .
ensure that all cabinets comply with the requirements of this section .
equip all nema specified cabinets as follows supply two through four phase controller operation with a minimum twelve position backpanel configured for four pedestrian movements and four overlaps with a twelve channel nema tsnum conflict monitor or nema tsnum malfunction management unit .
supply five through eight phase controller operation with a minimum num position backpanel configured for four pedestrian movements and no overlaps with a nema tsnum malfunction management unit .
for signal phasing configurations that require a larger capacity backpanel or conflict monitor supply a num position backpanel with a num channel nema tsnum conflict monitor or nema tsnum malfunction management unit .
furnish each cabinet main door with a sturdy permanently lubricated lock that is covered with a weatherproof tab .
key the project locks to the master key used by the agency that will maintain the equipment .
supply two keys with each lock .
also equip the small doorindoor with a lock that is keyed to the maintaining agencys master key covered with a weatherproof tab .
the door handle shall swing out away from the door edge not toward the center of the door .
any fasteners rivets bolts etc .
that penetrate the cabinet exterior shall be tackwelded or brazed on the inside surface to prevent punchthru if the fastener head is ground off from the outside .
the preferred method of cabinet construction uses no such fasteners but internal welds only .
furnish cabinet with drawings that show the following num .
intersection map .
the map shall include street names all lanes crosswalks and stop bars all vehicle and pedestrian phases all loops and detection zones vehicular and pedestrian signal heads and pedestrian pushbuttons .
all of these features shall be labeled .
include a legend that shows the type of vehicular and pedestrian heads and north .
num .
field wiring hookup chart for all signal heads .
the chart shall include signal head name signal head display indication and field terminal on back panel .
num .
conflict monitormmu channel assignments and functions switch positions and settings .
also show program card jumper locations diagrammatically if applicable .
if the conflict monitormmu is programmed via methods other than a program card detail this diagrammatically .
num .
legend with all wire gauges and insulator colors used in the cabinet .
apply this legend to all wiring shown in the drawings .
also include components such as movs and diodes .
num .
detector panel wiring .
detail all detector landings .
num .
all cable and wiring harness pin assignments .
num .
detector rack layout .
label detector number and associated phase .
num .
sdlc cable assignments .
num .
pedestrian pushbutton wiring .
num .
load switch assignments .
num .
flash programming buss and field terminals wiring .
num .
io board load switch and flash transfer relay wiring .
num .
any video radar preemption or other device wiring interface and cabling details .
num .
ups asbuilt schematic if applicable .
detail all connections to cabinet and controller .
num .
netlist detailing all connectivity of the cabinet .
it shall include all instances in the cabinet .
provide a description of all instances .
a .
type tsnum .
num .
cabinets .
furnish a cabinet size that provides ample space for housing the controller unit and all associated electrical devices furnished with it together with any other auxiliary devices that are specified .
furnish a cabinet with sufficient shelf space to accommodate all existing proposed and designated future equipment .
ensure that the space provided accommodates the appropriate controller unit frame as designated in nema tsnum section num .
construct the cabinets of cast aluminum or sheet aluminum drawn or formed with aluminum support and stiffening of members provided as necessary .
ensure that the exterior is smooth with no sharp edges .
weld all joints .
ensure that the cabinet is rigid and is designed to support all components .
ensure that the application of the following loads do not result in breakage deformation or loss of weatherproof qualities a numpound num n load applied to any numinch num mm square surface of the cabinet or door open or closed in any direction or a numpound num kn load applied vertically downward to any numinch num mm square of the top surface or to the top edge of the closed and latched door .
provide cabinet exterior surfaces of bare aluminum .
when the plans specify a cabinet color prime and finish all cabinet exteriors with two coats of highgrade enamel paint of the specified color .
ensure that the cabinet interior surfaces are the same as the exterior or may be painted flat white .
ensure that the cabinet contains at least one raintight louvered vent equipped with a replaceable filter .
install vents to allow for the release of excessive heat and any explosive gases that might enter the cabinet .
ensure that the cabinets are functional in design and have a door in the front providing access to substantially the full interior area .
attach a gasket of elastomeric material to the cabinet or door to form a weatherproof seal .
furnish door hinge pins of stainless steel or equivalent corrosion resistant material .
furnish a door stop to retain the door in at least a num degree open position .
include a small hinged and gasketed doorindoor police door on the outside of the main controller door .
ensure that the doorindoor does not allow entrance to the controller mechanism nor to exposed electrical terminals but provides access to a small switch panel and compartment police panel .
fit the cabinet with the necessary provisions for mounting with a bottom conduit connection provided for polemounted cabinets .
furnish suitable hardware and equipment for each cabinet mounting method including bolts for drilled and tapped holes on metal supports pole attachment clamps pedestal slipfitter and anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in concrete foundations .
furnish steel anchor bolts that are galvanized at least num inch num mm beyond the threads .
certified cabinet anchor bolts are not required .
directly place all equipment designed for shelf mounting on a shelf except for loop detector units amplifiers and similar devices designed for stacking on each other .
arrange components on shelves and devices on the door so that a numinch num mm minimum space separates them when the door is shut .
ensure that plugs wires controls or similar items do not compromise this space .
reserve a minimum numinch num mm clear area on the bottom of the cabinet for the routing of cables .
do not locate panel mounted equipment in the bottom num inches num mm of the cabinet .
do not locate shelves or components within num inches num mm of the bottom of foundation mounted cabinets .
arrange all equipment for easy withdrawal and replacement without the necessity of disturbing adjacent equipment .
permanently locate devices within the cabinet to allow free circulation of air and that do not restrict air flow from fan ducts or vents .
ensure that the auxiliary equipment operates within a weatherproof cabinet at ambient temperatures between num and num f num and num c. when terminals and panel mounted devices with exposed electrical contact points are located next to shelf mounted equipment provide spacers shelf lips or other means to assure that component units can not be accidentally moved into contact with any exposed electrical terminal points .
ensure that load switches relays flashers fuses switches terminal blocks and other equipment mounted or plugged into the back or side panels are readily accessible .
ensure that switches controls and indicator lights are visible and easily operable without moving the components from their normal shelf positions .
furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the space immediately below the controller .
ensure the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension .
ensure the compartment top has a nonslip plastic laminate attached .
furnish led strip lighting for internal illumination .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num .
accessory equipment a. ventilating fan .
equip all cabinets with a forced air ventilating fan .
furnish a fan that provides a capacity of at least num cubic feet num mnum per minute .
furnish a fan that is thermostatically controlled and adjusted to start at cabinet temperatures above num f num c and to stop when the temperature has dropped below num f num c. b .
load switches .
furnish all cabinets with solid state triplesignal load switches complying with nema tsnum section num .
additionally ensure that all load switches have both input and output indicators .
c. conflict monitor .
furnish all cabinets with a separate solidstate conflict monitor device .
ensure that the cabinet wiring in the event of monitor disconnection transfers the signals to a flashing condition .
furnish conflict monitors that comply with nema tsnum section num .
additionally ensure that all conflict monitors are capable of causing the signals to flash as a result of the following events num all red lamps associated with a load switch are burned out num within one second when red and green or yellow and green color pairings are displayed on the same phase num the absence of a minimum yellow interval .
ensure that the monitor indicates the exact load switch output channel upon which the failure event occurred .
furnish conflict monitors that are capable of storing a minimum of nine fault events event logging feature .
furnish a monitor that utilizes a lcd display and has a rsnum port for connection to a laptop computer .
furnish software and connector cables to diagnose the conflict monitor .
d. flashers .
furnish solidstate flashers that comply with nema tsnum section num .
when signals have a normal stopandgo sequence that includes flashing either ensure that the controller unit generates that flashing display or provide flashers .
for this purpose provide separate flashers from those provided for emergency back up .
furnish flashers that are designed with two circuits of at least num amperes each .
equip each controller cabinet with terminals that are wired so that by an interchange of jumpers the flashing operation is arranged to display either flashing yellow or flashing red on the vehicular signals .
e. relays .
ensure that the relays required for proper operation of the specified equipment are furnished and completely wired .
furnish relays that are enclosed readily replaceable and designed for onemillion operations without failure or need for adjustment .
f. surge protection devices .
furnish surge protection on incoming power lines interconnect lines and detector leads .
the primary surge protection device spd shall be an edco shanum or approved equal .
a plugin base shall be used to hold the device .
all wiring connections shall be made to the base and appropriate cabinet clearances maintained to allow the spd module to be relaced by hand without the use of tools .
furnish loop detector leadin cable protection that consists of devices installed in each detector circuit where the leadin connects to the terminal block .
house each device in a case that consists of two stages a num electrode gas tube arrestor and a semiconductor circuit .
ensure that the arrestor shunts to ground a common mode transient with a num ampere peak and an num microsecond waveshape ionizing at num volts within num nanoseconds when subjected to a num volt per microsecond transient .
furnish a semiconductor circuit that clamps a differential transient to num volts within num nanoseconds of the appearance of the transient and a common mode transient to num volts within num nanoseconds of the ionization of the gas tube arrestor .
ensure that the second stage is able to withstand a peak current of num amperes .
furnish a device that has impedance characteristics compatible with the detector unit so as not to cause false calls or increase the loop impedance above the sensitivity of the detector unit .
furnish pedestrian pushbutton inputs with the same protection as specified for the loop detector leadin cables .
protect interconnect cable against transients by devices across each conductor of the cable and ground .
the devices may be either num or numterminal devices .
if numterminal devices are used connect two conductors and ground to the same device .
furnish a protection device that consists of a gas tube arrestor with a maximum ionization voltage of num volts on a num volt per microsecond transient or a maximum ionization voltage of num volts on a num volt per microsecond transient .
ensure that the maximum time from beginning of the transient to ionization is num microseconds on a num volt per microsecond transient .
ensure that the device is not ionized by normal voltage variations on a numvolt ac line .
furnish a device that is able to withstand a num ampere peak with an num microsecond waveshape .
g. main power breaker .
furnish an incoming ac power line that is controlled by a main circuit breaker rated at num volts and an auxiliary breaker with capacity and wiring as specified in nema tsnum section num and figure num .
if a power service disconnect switch is located before the controller cabinet the neutral ac and the grounding bar in the controller cabinet shall not be connected together as shown in nema tsnum figure num. h. radio interference filter .
furnish an incoming ac power line that contains a radio frequency interference rfi filter installed between the main circuit breaker and the solid state equipment .
also provide rfi filtering for the load switches and flasher unless the equipment furnished provides signal and flasher circuits switching at the zero voltage point of the power line sinusoid wave form .
i .
convenience outlet and light .
wire a convenience outlet into the cabinet for use by electrical maintenance equipment .
ensure that the outlet contains at least one standard duplex threewire nema num receptacle of the groundfault circuitinterrupting gfci type .
wire a second nongfci convenience outlet not fed thru the ups system if used .
furnish and mount a white led lamp in the upper portion of the cabinet .
furnish a door switch to control the convenience light .
j. manual control and pushbutton .
when required by the plans provide intersection controller units with means for substituting manual operation of interval timing for automatic interval timing .
ensure that manual operation provides the same interval sequence as when the controller unit is operating automatically .
obtain manual interval timing by a momentary pushbutton contact switch mounted on a numfoot num m minimum flexible weatherproof extension cord .
store that switch and cord behind the small doorindoor .
k. switches .
furnish completely wired switches that are required for proper operation of specified equipment .
clearly and permanently label switches as to function and setting position and ensure that they are accessible without the necessity of moving components .
num signal shutdown switch .
furnish a cabinet with a signal shutdown switch for turning off the power to the signals at the intersection .
ensure that this switch only affects the power to the signals and allows the controller to continue in operation .
locate the switch in the panel behind the small doorindoor police door .
num autoflash switch .
furnish a cabinet with a flash control switch for activating the flashing of vehicular signals in a preselected emergency flash display .
ensure that the operation of the flash control switch causes a flashing display even under conditions of controller unit malfunction or of its removal from the cabinet .
ensure that the operation of the switch overrides any operation commands from a local or remote time switch .
locate the switch in the panel behind the small doorindoor police door .
program the transfer to and from flashing operation when called remotely or by a local time switch to occur only at points in the cycle allowed by the omutcd .
num automaticmanual transfer switch .
furnish a cabinet with an automaticmanual transfer switch .
in the automatic position ensure that the controller unit automatically sequences the signal head displays .
in the manual position ensure that the signal phase or interval sequencing occurs only upon manual activation of the manual control pushbutton .
locate the switch in the doorindoor police door .
ensure that it is unnecessary when switching from manual to automatic operation or vice versa to do so at any certain time or to make any time adjustments .
num runstoptime switch .
furnish a cabinet with a runstoptime switch that activates the controller stoptime feature when in the stoptime position .
locate the runstoptime switch on a switch panel in the cabinet .
num controller shutdown switch .
furnish a cabinet with a controller shutdown switch that cuts off power to the controller unit conflict monitor and detector units .
ensure that power is not cut off to those components required to maintain flashing operation .
locate the controller shutdown switch on a switch panel in the cabinet .
num coordinatedfree switch .
furnish controllers operated in a coordinated system with a coordinatedfree switch .
ensure that this switch allows the choice of operating the controller under the supervision of a coordination device or operating the controller independently of coordination control .
locate the coordinatedfree switch on a switch panel in the cabinet .
num detector test switches .
furnish momentary contact switches that will enter a vehicular or pedestrian call for any actuated phase .
furnish a switch for each actuated phase vehicular and pedestrian detection input .
conveniently group and label the switches .
l. terminal blocks .
furnish cabinets that include terminal blocks mounted on panels on the walls of the cabinet .
ensure that the blocks are not obstructed by shelfmounted devices .
furnish sufficient terminal sets for each individual harness wire as well as for contacts of signal load switches flasher transfer relays flasher and other components .
also provide separate terminal sets for field wiring connections including power signal interconnection and detector leadin cables .
group terminal sets to separate higher voltage num vac from lower voltage and arrange them into logical groups .
protect terminal blocks from accidental contact during the installation and removal of shelfmounted equipment .
locate the blocks no closer than num inches num mm from the bottom of pole and pedestal mounted cabinets and no closer than num inches num mm from the bottom of foundation mounted cabinets .
ensure that the terminal points are ul listed as suitable to carry the rated loading .
ensure that the capacity and size of the terminals are as specified in nema tsnum section num .
ensure that the terminal points for signal field wiring for each circuit accommodates at least four num awg conductors with spade type terminals .
furnish terminal points for incoming power wiring that accepts either spade terminals or bare stranded wire and are suitable for either aluminum or copper conductors .
space terminal sets for easy wiring .
furnish at least six reserve terminal sets for controllers .
harnesses may terminate on the back of terminal blocks using throughpanel terminals .
clearly mark terminal sets for ready identification including throughpanel terminals that are identified on both sides .
ensure that the contact between adjacent terminal points are made by bus bar or by wire jumpers having spade type terminals securely attached to each end .
m. terminal buses .
furnish a cabinet with supply terminal buses fed from the line side of the incoming num vac power line after the phase wire has passed through the main power switch .
ensure that the requirements for use of radio interference filters are according to item num of this section with the buses supplying load switches and with flashers being filtered when required .
ensure that a signal bus relay controls power to the bus supplying power for the signal load switches . .
the following overrides nema requirements for signal bus relays .
a solid state relay shall be used for the signal bus relay .
the signal bus relay shall maintain output equal to or above the rating of the cabinet main overcurrent protection device over the nema tsnum environmental operating range of num to num degrees f num to num degrees c. furnish a common terminal bus for the connection of the neutral wire of the incoming num vac power line .
ensure that the common bus has sufficient terminal points to accommodate all potential cabinet wiring as well as field wiring .
use a separate common terminal insulated from the panel for the interconnect common .
furnish bus terminal points that comply with item num of this section for conductor accommodation attachment and identification .
n. grounding systembus bars .
furnish a cabinet that includes a grounding system as specified in nema tsnum section num with an adequate number minimum of three of ground terminal points .
o. wiring .
neatly organize and route the harnesses and wiring bundles to individual terminals .
ensure that the harness provides a wire for each pin or contact of the device .
connect each wire to a marked terminal position .
use labeled spade type terminals or plug connections on all harness wiring .
group and lash or restrain wire bundles in such a manner that they will not interfere with the access to components terminal blocks or buses or the legibility of terminal identification .
ensure that the harnesses are of sufficient length to reach any point within the cabinet .
ensure that the cables and harness bundles are easily traced through the cabinet to their terminations .
route all wiring terminated on printed circuit boards as commonly done for biu backpanel connectors at right angles to the pin array no wires shall pass over the connector pins .
wire the cabinet so that controller pin connections associated with a given phase number matches the phase number assigned to the specified traffic movement as shown on the plans .
furnish all wiring with stranded conductors .
ensure that the wiring is adequate for the voltage and load that represents the ultimate load of the devices connected .
ensure that the ampacity rating of the wires are as specified in nema tsnum section num .
ensure that the wiring is color coded as follows num solid white ac common .
num solid green or green with yellow stripes equipment ground .
num solid black ac line side power ac .
p. loop detector units .
furnish loop detector units that comply with the requirements of nema ts num section num with the following modifications num furnish loop detector units that are shelf mounted and powered from num volts .
num ensure that the unit uses solidstate isolated output devices .
num furnish conductors in the cable harness for loop input pins that are twisted three to five times per foot num mm .
num furnish detector unit electrical connection plugs or wiring harness that are designed such that any multichannel shelf mounted detector unit is readily replaced with single channel detector units .
furnish only units with the connector type required for single channel shelf mounted detector units or by wiring the controller back panel to single channel wiring harnesses which are in turn plug connected to an adapter harness that is mated to the multichannel connector of the detector unit .
num when shown on the plans supply delay and extension timing capability on the detector unit otherwise the controller unit software requirements of num will provide these features .
num ensure that the harness provides a wire for each pin or contact of the device .
num furnish loop detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
if vehicle detector types other than loop detectors are required by the plans provide these detectors by separate bid item .
furnish tsnum cabinets according to the departments tap .
b .
type tsnum .
num .
furnish tsnum cabinets that utilize a high speed data channel to connect the controller unit malfunction management unit rear panel terminals and facilities detectors and bus interface units and also comply with the general requirements of num .
furnish a prewired cabinet with malfunction management unit loop detector units and all accessory equipment as specified in nema tsnum except as follows a .
section num use detector racks for both type num anum and type num anum controller units .
b .
section num if a power service disconnect switch is located before the controller cabinet the neutral ac and the grounding bar in the controller cabinet shall be connected together .
c. section num provide an led type light .
d. section num provide the led lamp .
e. section num provide the door actuated light switch .
f. section num provide numchannel detector units without delayextension features type a. furnish momentary pushbuttons on the cabinet door or a detector rack panel for actuation of detector biu num channels num and the four optoisolated pedestrian detector inputs on biu num and biu num .
permanently label these pushbuttons as veh det num through veh det num and ped det num through ped det num. g. section num construct cabinets of sheet aluminum .
h. section num unless otherwise specified in the plans provide a size num cabinet for pole mounted cabinets size num for ground mounted cabinets .
supply larger cabinets if required to house the equipment to meet the plan requirements such as master controllers preemption devices num position backpanels or special detection units .
furnish all wire passages through and over metal edges with edge protection polymer trim .
i .
section num ensure that the police panel contains switches for autoflash signals onoff and automanual in the police panel .
furnish a pushbutton with a numfoot num m cord and panel connector not hard wired unless a strainrelieving panel feedthru bushing is provided .
j .
section num supply unpainted cabinets .
k. the following overrides the nema requirements for signal bus relays .
a solidstate relay shall be used for the signal bus relay .
this relay shall maintain output equal to or exceeding the requirements of the cabinet main overcurrent protective device over the nema tsnum environmental operating range of num to num degrees fahrenheit .
num .
furnish loop detector and pedestrian inputs that have lightningsurge protection as specified in num.a.num.f .
num .
include loop detector racks with the necessary number of twochannel loop detector units with the cabinet .
when shown on the plans supply delay and extension timing capability on the detector unit otherwise provide the controller unit software with these features .
if vehicle detector types other than loop detectors are required by the plans provide these detector units by separate bid item .
if the special bid detector units use standard tsnum detector racks furnish the racks as part of the prewired cabinet .
furnish loop detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
num .
furnish switches to control the controller unit and cabinet functions as specified in the plans .
num .
furnish load switches that have both input and output indicators .
num .
the primary surge protection device spd shall be an edco shanum or approved equal .
a plugin base shall be used to hold the device .
all wiring connections shall be made to the base and appropriate cabinet clearances maintained to allow the spd module to be replaced by hand without the use of tools .
cabinet power distribution shall conform to figure num nema tsnum num vnum .
in addition locates a non gfci nema num utility outlet on the right side power panel .
this outlet shall be powered independently of the ups by direct connection to incoming utility power through a numamp circuit breaker labeled utility outlet .
num .
include serial andor ethernet cables numfeet minimum length to interface with laptop computer .
include all interface software .
num .
include datakey module .
provide a datakey with each controller taped securely to the top of the controller chassis .
num .
include an sdlc expansion board with three available ports mounted on a cabinet side wall .
num .
include an sdlc inline surge suppressor edco srsbiunum or equivalent located at the controller sdlc port .
num .
furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the space immediately below the controller .
ensure the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension .
ensure the compartment top has a nonslip plastic laminate attached .
furnish tsnum cabinet according to the departments tap .
c. type num .
num .
general .
furnish model numl cabinets that meet the specifications traffic signal control equipment specifications and transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation .
ensure that the manufacturer of the cabinets is listed on the tap at the time of delivery to the project .
num .
cabinets .
a .
ensure that the cabinets are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted .
an anodic coating is not required .
supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each cabinet .
furnish numinch num mm diameter by num inches num m minimum length anchor bolts with an l bend on the unthreaded end .
b .
fit the cabinets with a pdanum power distribution assembly .
c. when shown on the plans provide the cabinet with door hinges that are right or left mounted when facing the front of the cabinet .
num .
terminals and wiring .
a. hardwire output files .
do not use printed circuit wiring in the output file except for the red monitor board .
b .
ensure that the vehicle and pedestrian detector field wiring inputs connect to side mounted terminal blocks .
install terminal blocks and associated wiring to the input file .
label the field wiring terminals of the side mounted terminal block by a permanent screening process to identify the input panel i or j the input file slot number num through num and the channel terminal d e j or k. an example is inume .
ensure that all terminals on these detector blocks are accessible without removing equipment from the eia mounting rack .
c. install red monitor cabling in the cabinets .
install a program board to enabledisable red monitoring .
ship the cabinets with the red monitor jumpers set in the enable position .
d. do not connect the pedestrian yellow load switch outputs to the conflict monitor cardedge connector .
e. supply each cabinet with a cable at least num feet num m long to connect a laptop computer with the controller .
ensure that the cable has a dbnum connector on one end and a connector on the other end to mate with the cnum on the back of the controller .
the cable will allow a laptop computer to uploaddownload data to the controller .
f. supply each cabinet with a category nume cable with numpnumc rjnum plug on each end minimum num feet in length .
the cable will allow a laptop computer to uploaddownload data to the controller .
g. on the output file wire pin no .
num of each switchpack connector to ac so that the output indicators on dual indicator switchpacks will display properly .
num .
accessories .
a .
fully equip the cabinets with two channel loop detector sensors flashers flash transfer relays power supply ac and dc isolators conflict monitor switchpacks with both input and output indicators and a dc isolator in slot num for flash sensestop time .
do not switch the input file channels from the standard layout in order to minimize the number of twochannel detector units utilized .
if vehicle detector types other than loop detectors are required by the plans provide these detectors under a separate bid item .
flash transfer relays shall use ac coils only the use of a series rectifier in combination with a dc coil is prohibited .
in addition to the requirements of transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation furnish detector unit with an led or lcd display indication of call strength ll or equivalent .
this display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight num discrete levels indicated .
furnish loop detector sensors according to the departments qpl .
b. furnish a rack mounted detector test panel with test switches .
test switches shall call vehicle phases num pedestrian phases num and evpe channels abcd as defined in the published odot plan insert sheet for default num cabinet input file assignments .
furnish switches with three position onoffmomentary on switches .
c. furnish a police panel in each cabinet that includes a removable pushbutton with num feet num m cord and three switches labeled autoflash signals onoff and automanual .
wire the pushbutton cord to the controller harness wiring by a molex plug connection and not through an ac isolator .
when placed in the manual position apply manual control enable to the controller and apply recall to all phases .
ensure that activation of the push button advances the controller except prohibit the manual advancement during the minimum green yellow and red timing intervals .
d. furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the rack below the controller .
ensure that the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension .
ensure that the compartment top has a nonslip plastic laminate attached .
top of shelf shall be at least num inches and no more than num inches above the workpad surface .
for cabinets with risers this may require relocating the drawer to a position below input file num. e. ensure that each cabinet has two white led lights installed at the top of the cabinet one near each door .
wire the lights to the door switches such that opening either door will turn on both lights .
num .
surge protection .
a. furnish surge protection on pedestrian and detector inputs .
furnish three terminal surge arrestors equivalent to edco models sranumlca sranumlcb or sranumlc .
b .
protect the cabinets incoming power lines with an edco shanum or approved equal surge protector in lieu of the caltrans specified surge protection .
a plugin base shall be used to hold the device .
all wiring connections shall be made to the base and appropriate cabinet clearances maintained to allow the spd module to be relaced by hand without the use of tools .
num .
conflict monitor .
ensure that the conflict monitor unit was tested and accepted according to supplement num. a .
materials and warranties .
furnish electrical parts switches and other elements of the installation that are of ample capacity to carry the required current without excessive heating or drop of potential .
use standard industrial quality components integrated circuit chips transistors diodes resistors capacitors etc .
wherever possible .
clearly identify these components with the original identification .
designate the other vital information such as voltage polarity emitter or collector terminals pin locations etc .
by an approved industrial procedure .
ensure that the major items or assemblies of equipment bear a nameplate indelible marking or brand that identifies it as to type model catalog number and manufacturer .
transfer that manufacturers guarantees or warranties to the department upon delivery and acceptance of the equipment .
ensure that all conflict monitors are warranted for a period of num months or for the manufacturers standard warranty period whichever is greater for parts and labor from date of shipment to the project or the odot signal shop .
ensure that each unit has a permanent label or stamp indicating the date of shipment and name of vendor supplying the unit andor logo .
b .
general requirements .
num minimum standards .
this specification establishes minimum standards for conflict monitoring devices designed for use in model num and num traffic signal controller cabinets supplied to the department .
num indicator lights .
furnish indicator lights that are waterclear not colored or diffused lenses ultra bright light emitting diodes led whose states are clearly readable in direct sunlight .
ensure that each conflict monitor channel provides separate red yellow and green leds .
a furnish a green ac power indicator light .
b arrange indicator lights in a vertical pattern with fault status lights as the upper indications and the output channel lights as the lower indications see num.c.num.c.num and num.c.num.c.num .
an acceptable alternative is to provide a single fault indication and a supplemental display that clearly indicates the fault type .
c ensure that a failure causes its respective indicator light to display .
num monitor power .
ensure that the monitor does not use the numvdc power supply being sensed to run any of its internal circuitry .
ensure that the watchdog stop time external reset and numvdc monitor input circuits are optically isolated from the monitor internal power supply and are conditioned to provide proper sense circuit operation throughout the operating range .
num power fail .
consider a line voltage less than num v ac num v ac as a power failure .
ensure that a power failure does not result in resetting the monitor .
ensure that once the monitor is triggered by detection of a fault that it remains in that state until a reset command is issued .
reset is issued only by the front panel control switch or by the external test reset input .
num power up .
furnish a monitor that is compatible with the model num controller unit .
when power is established num num vac the monitor will power up in the fault relay recovery mode when power is established initiate fault relay recovery .
for an interval of num num seconds the following will take place a the output relay contacts remain closed and the stop time output remains active .
b all fault monitoring functions remain suspended .
c the ac power indicator light flashes at a num hertz rate .
at the end of this time interval the monitor begins counting watchdog transitions from the controller and prepares to resume normal fault monitoring .
ensure that the resumption of normal fault monitoring occurs when either a the monitor has counted num transitions between the true and false state from the controller watchdog or b num num seconds has elapsed from the time of line recovery .
if the controller watchdog output does not become active ensure that the monitor goes into a latched fault condition .
num cabinet signals monitored .
furnish a monitor designed to monitor green yellow and red ac circuits at the field output terminals of traffic signal cabinets .
monitor shall be capable of monitoring flashing yellow arrow channels .
in addition monitor the cabinet numvdc supply and the model num controller watchdog timer output .
these signals are processed by the monitor circuitry and if a failure is determined to have occurred ensure that a relay output contact closure failed state places the cabinet and intersection into flashing operation .
num failed state output circuits .
a use an electromechanical relay to provide the failed state output circuit .
ensure that the relay contacts are normally closed failed state .
in a nonfailed state relay coil energized ensure that the contacts are open .
the function of this output circuit is to initiate flash operation within the cabinet and transfer field circuits from the switch pack outputs to the flash bus during a failed state .
b furnish relay contacts that are rated for a minimum of num amperes at num v ac and num operations .
ensure that the contact openingclosing time is num ms or less .
furnish contacts that present a minimum impedance of num ohms in the open state .
c ensure that the stop time output is active whenever the output relay contacts are in the failed state closed .
ensure that it is inactive whenever the output relay contacts are in the nonfailed open state .
num monitor unit reset .
furnish a front panel momentary spst pushbutton switch labeled reset to reset the monitor to a nonfailed state and restores normal monitoring operation .
position the switch on the front panel so that the switch can be operated while gripping the front panel handle .
ensure that the external test reset input line resets the monitor circuitry to a nonfailed state and restores normal monitoring operation .
optically isolate it from the internal circuitry .
ensure that a reset issuance by either source unit reset is triggered by only the leading edge of the input signal this will prevent a constant reset due to either a switch failure or a constant external input .
ensure that a constant reset input is ignored within num seconds of issuance .
num input impedance .
ensure that the input impedance for all monitored ac inputs are num kilohms num kilohms .
num connectors .
furnish pcb nump type monitor and conflict program card connectors .
ensure that all edge connectors use the bifurcated bellow type contact or equivalent .
num door ajar circuit .
connect pin num to pin num on the monitor pcb at the edge connector and ensure that it is capable of carrying one ampere according to caltrans specifications .
num handle .
ensure that the handle placement and design is such that no interference between the handle and a closed cabinet door exists .
num fuse holder .
furnish low profile fuse holders on the front panel .
c. functional requirements .
num general .
the monitor monitors the cabinet for conflicts and unsafe operation .
if an unsafe condition exists the monitor will enter into a failed state .
this places the cabinet into flash operation and applies stop time to the controller unit .
ensure that the monitor is designed to monitor red circuits yellow timing multiple outputs and lack of outputs on a switch selectable per channel basis .
specific conditions for failure follow a numvdc fail .
the cabinet num volts dc does not meet the specified thresholds .
b conflict .
when the green or yellow input to one or more channels is on and they are not programmed as permissive on the conflict program card .
c watchdog timer wdt error .
when the num controller unit watchdog output has ceased .
d conflict program card ajar .
illuminates if the conflict program card is removed or if it is not properly seated in the connector .
when it is not inserted into the monitor ensure that the warning indicator light is displayed .
e monitor failure .
a fault is detected within the operation of the monitor itself .
f multiple outputs .
simultaneous indications of green yellow or red field outputs on a single channel .
g red fail .
no active field outputs on a single channel greenyellowred .
h yellow error .
the absence of a minimum yellow field output during a green to red sequence .
minimum yellow shall be num seconds num ms. num operating range .
furnish a monitor unit that is fully operational using an num to num v ac power source .
ensure that the monitor suspends fault monitoring below num v ac num v ac closes the output relay and deenergizes the ac power indicator light .
num watchdog timing .
furnish watchdog timing circuitry to monitor the controller unit watchdog output .
ensure that the wdt circuitry senses state changes and the time between the last change .
ensure that an absence of change for num seconds places the monitor in a failed state .
num channels monitored .
furnish a monitor that senses and responds to conflicts and num vdc failures whenever the ac line voltage is within the num to num v ac operating range of the monitor except during fault relay operation .
num yellow inhibit .
furnish means to selectively inhibit the monitoring of a yellow channel input .
num power fail after fault .
in the event that the monitor senses a fault followed by a loss of operating voltage ensure that the initial failure status is retained in memory and is redisplayed after restoration of power .
a once the monitor is latched in a fault condition for any reason including the removal of the conflict program card ensure that it remains latched even through a power failrecovery until a reset is issued by the front panel reset switch or by the external test reset line .
b display the status of the green yellow and red inputs of all channels at the time the fault was latched .
ensure that a power loss does not affect the retention of this data .
an acceptable alternative is to save status of all channels in memory and only display the latched fault .
num insertionremoval of unit .
ensure that it is possible to insert and remove the monitor while the cabinet is energized without placing the cabinet into flash operation provided that the cabinet door remains open and the reset switch is held depressed while the unit is being inserted or removed .
any momentary disruption of field signal indications is less than num ms. num microprocessor use .
if a microprocessor is used in the monitor design ensure that its program is written so that a integrity tests are performed periodically on each memory cell of each memory device relevant to each device type .
b hardware external to the microprocessor circuits is employed to constantly sense proper microprocessor operation .
c the monitor reverts to a failed state if a fault is detected with the microprocessor or during integrity tests .
num front panel indicators .
ensure that the monitor has redyellowgreen indicators for channel inputs and indicators to provide status and failure detection information .
furnish a green ac power indicator .
ensure that all indicators are clearly readable in direct sunlight .
arrange and label the indicators as shown below a ac power .
illuminates when the incoming ac line voltage exceeds num numv ac and flashes during fault relay operation .
b vdc fail .
illuminates when the monitor has detected a numvdc failure .
c conflict .
illuminates when a conflicting signal condition is detected .
d wdt error .
illuminates when a watchdog error is detected .
do not provide a switch or similar device to disable wdt monitoring .
e pc ajar .
illuminates when the conflict program card is removed or is not properly seated in its connector .
f mon fail .
illuminates to indicate an internal monitor failure .
g red fail .
illuminates when the monitor detects that there is no active output on any of the field outputs that comprise a monitored channel .
ensure that the failed channels are displayed on the corresponding channel indicators .
if for any reason red fail is not enabled ensure that the red fail indicator light flashes at approximately numhertz .
h mult ind .
illuminates when the monitor detects simultaneous outputs on more than one of the field outputs that comprise a monitored channel greenyellowred .
ensure that the failed channels are displayed on the corresponding channel indicators .
i yellow .
illuminates when the monitor detects the absence of a minimum period of active yellow field output during a green to red sequence .
ensure that the failed channel is displayed on the corresponding channel indicator .
j num num num num .
furnish channel indicators that illuminate a failed state in conformance with num.c.num.c.num .
num monitor board edge connector .
furnish monitor board edge connectors that conform to caltrans specifications .
num monitoring of conflicting voltages .
ensure that inputs to any channel that exceed the specified conflict threshold see section num are sensed as on and illuminate their respective channel indicators .
ensure that the number of active channels in no way affects the conflict threshold .
ensure that the following voltage levels and times apply a conflict has occurred and will cause a failed state only when voltages appear at the field output terminals .
num num v rms for a duration num num ms. num conflict program card .
furnish conflict program cards that comply with caltrans specifications .
d. fault relay operation .
num line drop out .
furnish a monitor that determines that a line drop out has occurred when the ac line voltage is num num vac for num num ms .
within this time frame ensure that the monitor suspends all fault monitoring functions closes the output relay contacts enables stop time output and the ac power indicator on the front panel flashes at a rate of num hertz num percent to indicate line drop out status .
ensure that the monitor remains in the fault relay mode until a line recovery has occurred .
num line recovery .
ensure that the monitor that determines that a line recovery has occurred when the ac line voltage is num num vac for num num ms. num fault relay recovery .
when line recovery is established initiate the fault relay recovery .
for an interval of num num seconds the following will take place a the output relay contacts remain closed and the stop time output remains active .
b all fault monitoring functions remain suspended .
c the ac power indicator light flashes at a rate of num hertz num percent .
at the end of this time interval the monitor begins counting watchdog transitions from the controller and prepares to resume normal fault monitoring .
num resumption of normal monitoring .
ensure that the resumption of normal fault monitoring occurs when either a the monitor has counted five transitions between the true and false state from the controller watchdog or b num num seconds has elapsed from the time of line recovery .
if the controller watchdog output does not become active the monitor shall go into a latched fault condition .
e. red monitoring connector .
num connector .
mount a connector nummnum with two num polarizing keys or equivalent on the monitor front panel .
the pin assignments of the pnum connector and terminal assembly are defined in this specification .
ensure that it is possible to plug and unplug the red monitoring connector pnum without placing the cabinet into flash operation .
pnum connector pin assignments pin function pin function num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num undefined num channel num red num special function num num channel num red num special function num num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num red enable ensure that keying is between pins num and num .
the odd numbered pins are on one side and the even pins are on the other .
key the pnum connector and the cmu connector physically alike to prevent the red monitoring cable from being inserted into the pnum num degrees out of alignment .
num red enable input .
ensure that pin num of the red monitoring connector provides the red enable input to the monitor .
when the red monitoring connector is disconnected or red enable is not present ensure that the monitor checks for conflicting combinations of greens and yellows watchdog timer numvdc conflict program card ajar and monitor fail .
when enabled ensure that the extended monitor functions become active including red fail multiple output and yellow fail .
num special function num and num inputs .
a pin num special function num furnish an ac input to the monitor which will disable only the red fail monitoring functions while it is active e.g .
during railroad preempt .
b pin num special function num reserved for future use .
furnish a means to select either a presence of or lack of ac to enable these inputs .
f. electrical requirements .
num operation range .
furnish a monitor that is fully operational from an num to num v ac power source .
num isolation .
isolate the chassis ground and ac from one another .
num monitored ac inputs .
the following voltage and time thresholds apply to all monitored ac inputs .
a green and yellow inputs .
any inputs num v rms are considered off .
any inputs num v rms are considered on .
both sinusoidal and halfwave inputs of the specified rms values are to meet these thresholds .
b red red enable and special function inputs .
any inputs num v rms are considered off .
any inputs num v rms are considered on .
red inputs both sinusoidal and halfwave of the specified rms values are to meet these thresholds .
red enable and special function inputs are to meet these thresholds for sinusoidal waveforms only .
c timing of conflicting inputs or multiple inputs .
inputs on num ms are not considered a fault .
inputs on num ms are considered a fault .
d timing of red fail .
lack of output num ms is not considered a fault .
lack of output num ms is considered a fault .
num monitored dc inputs .
a numvdc input .
input num vdc is considered low vdc input .
input num vdc is not considered low vdc input .
b numvdc timing .
low vdc input num ms is not considered a fault .
low vdc input num ms is considered a fault .
c watchdog monitor input .
input num vdc is considered a low state .
input num vdc or open is considered a high state .
d watchdog error timing .
lack of valid input state changes for num ms is not a fault .
lack of valid input state changes for num ms is a fault .
g. communications and software .
num install an rsnum port for laptop communications on the front panel of the monitor .
if specified in the plans an ip port shall be used in place of rsnum .
num furnish a monitor with compatible communications software for installation on a laptop computer capable of interfacing with the communication port on the front panel .
furnish the software on a num num inch num mm floppy disk with each monitor .
label each disk with revision number and date .
num unless specified otherwise in the plans furnish a monitor that is capable of being programmed and setup for intersection operation without the use of a laptop computer and communication software .
num furnish a monitor communications software that is capable of showing andor programming the status of all programmable setup parameters of the unit .
furnish a communications software that is capable of displaying the following data a fault type b field status must update status continuously c ac line voltage must update status continuously d status of red enable e previous fault data f program card matrix g yellow disable jumpers if applicable h switch settings per channel as applicable i option switches j current time k temperature must update status continuously l event logs num furnish a monitor that is capable of storing events into memory .
typical events are fault events ac line events reset events etc .
when a fault event is stored into memory the monitor will store the fault condition type channel status date time temperature and line voltage .
ensure that the log history stores a minimum of num total events .
h. diode matrix programming key and software .
furnish a monitor that loads the diode matrix or programming key programming into a nonvolatile memory device .
when the diode matrix or programming key is loaded into memory the memory will regularly compare with diode card or programming key and fault condition will occur if memory does not match the diode card matrix .
d. type numl .
num .
general .
furnish model numl cabinets that meet the specifications traffic signal control equipment specifications and transportation electrical equipment specifications california department of transportation .
ensure that the manufacturer of the cabinets is listed on the caltrans qpl at the time of the project award .
num .
cabinets .
furnish cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted .
an anodic coating is not required .
supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each cabinet .
furnish numinch num mm diameter by num inches num m minimum length anchor bolts with an l bend on the unthreaded end .
num .
terminals and wiring .
ensure that the vehicle detector field wiring inputs connect to side mounted terminal blocks .
install terminal blocks and associated wiring to the input file .
label the field wiring terminals of the side mounted terminal block by a permanent screening process to identify the input panel i the input file slot number num through num and the channel terminal d e j or k. an example is inume .
ensure that all terminals on these detector blocks are accessible without removing equipment from the eia mounting rack .
num .
accessories .
a .
fully equip the cabinets with two channel loop detector sensors transfer relay power supply conflict monitor and switchpacks .
when ramp meter warning signs with flashers are used include a nema or caltrans type flasher wired for control from the controller .
b. furnish a police panel in each cabinet with the caltrans required switches .
no pushbutton with cord is provided .
c. furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the rack below the controller .
ensure that the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension .
ensure that the compartment top has a nonslip plastic laminate attached .
d. ensure that each cabinet has two fluorescent lights installed at the top of the cabinet one near each door .
wire the lights to the door switches such that opening either door will turn on both lights .
num .
lightningsurge protection .
comply with the requirements of num.c.num .
num .
conflict monitor .
furnish a model num conflict monitor unit .
e. type numl .
num .
general .
furnish model numl cabinets that meet the basic cabinet specifications traffic signal control equipment specifications california department of transportation latest edition .
ensure that the manufacturer of these model numl cabinets is listed on the tap .
num .
cabinets .
a. furnish cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted .
an anodic coating is not required .
b .
the caltrans model numl cabinet specification is only modified so that the cabinet supplied is the stretch type that provides approximately num inches of num mm additional cabinet height .
c. supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each base mounted cabinet .
furnish num inch num mm diameter by num inches num m minimum length anchor bolts with an l bend on the unthreaded end .
d. furnish pole mounted cabinets with two pole mounting brackets attached and bottom plates installed .
ensure that both of the cabinet sidewalls are reinforced for pole brackets however also ensure that the cabinet is shipped with the brackets installed on the door hinge side of the cabinet .
when a pole mounted cabinet is ordered ensure that the door hinges are specified as right or left mounted as looking into the front of the cabinet .
ensure that the brackets are designed for banding to a pole .
e. fit cabinets with a pdanum power distribution assembly .
num .
terminals and wiring .
comply with the requirements of num.c.num .
num .
accessories .
comply with the requirements of num.c.num .
num .
lightningsurge protection .
comply with the requirements of num.c.num .
num .
conflict monitor .
comply with the requirements of num.c.num .
furnish numl cabinet materials according to the departments qpl .
num cabinet risers .
furnish the type size and shape of cabinet riser that is compatible with the type of controller cabinets specified for the project .
a .
cabinet riser for nema cabinet .
furnish an aluminum riser that will raise the nema cabinet approximately num inches num m above the concrete foundation .
ensure that the bottom of the riser bolts to the standard cabinet foundation anchor bolts not included with the riser and the top of the riser bolts to the bottom of the cabinet .
furnish attachment hardware for connecting the riser to the cabinet .
construct the riser in a minimum of two pieces such that an existing cabinet can be raised off the foundation without disconnecting the field wiring and the riser can be inserted below the cabinet .
furnish hardware for rigidly connecting the riser sections together .
fabricate the riser from numinch num mm sheet aluminum with flanges on the top and bottom to provide rigidity .
furnish mounting flanges as necessary to connect with the controller cabinet and foundation anchor bolts .
ensure that the outside surface of the riser has a smooth uniform natural finish unless controller cabinet painting is shown on the plans .
if painting is required prepare and paint the riser to match the cabinet .
b .
cabinet riser for type num num or type num cabinet .
furnish an aluminum riser that will raise the model num num or num cabinet approximately num inches num m above the concrete foundation .
ensure that the bottom of the riser bolts to the standard cabinet foundation anchor bolts not included with the riser and the top of the riser bolts to the bottom of the cabinet .
furnish attachment hardware for connecting the riser to the cabinet .
manufacture the unit to caltrans specifications .
ensure that the outside surface of the riser has a smooth uniform natural finish unless controller cabinet painting is shown on the plans .
if painting is required prepare and paint the riser to match the cabinet .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num flasher controller .
furnish solidstate flasher that complies with nema tsnum section num and have two circuits each rated at num amperes .
furnish a cabinet that conforms to applicable requirements of num.a except that the following items are not required a small doorindoor police door shelves and a fan .
ensure that the cabinet size is not less than num inches num mm high by num inches num mm wide by num inches num mm deep .
furnish cabinets that are designed for pole mounting with a num inch num mm or larger conduit opening in the bottom .
ensure that the auxiliary equipment includes onoff power switch with integral numampere circuit breaker lightning protection devices on incoming power lines interference filters terminal blocks and a ground bus bar .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num controller master traffic responsive .
a .
description .
the traffic responsive master controller is one component of a distributive processing traffic responsive control and monitoring closed loop system .
the master controllers principal operational task is to select and implement traffic signal timing plans in response to both actual traffic conditions or time based events .
the master controller monitors in real time local intersection activity and overall system performance reporting failures and status conditions to the remote monitoring station .
the master controller is typically located in a local intersection cabinet however in special circumstances it may be located at a remote monitoring station site .
the master controller is capable of uploadingdownloading information to local intersection controllers and the remote monitoring station .
b. functional requirements .
num .
design .
furnish a solid state digital microprocessor master controller design .
furnish a controller that uses menu driven prompts unless of type num design .
if the master controller is used with type nume or type num controllers provide software unless otherwise shown on the plans .
furnish a master controller that has a rsnum port for connection to a laptop computer or printer .
furnish software and connector cables for communication with a laptop .
num .
local controllers .
ensure that each master controller is able to supervise and communicate with at least num local intersection controllers .
num .
system detectors .
ensure that each master controller is able to analyze traffic sensor data from at least num system detectors .
distribute system detectors up to eight per intersection but do not exceed the total system sensor capacity .
ensure that the detectors are assignable to each of the computational channels in each group with the channels representing cycle selection directionality offset nonarterial flow split and special congestion indicators of queue or occupancy .
furnish a master controller that is capable of monitoring and detecting system detector failure and removing failed detectors from volume and occupancy calculations .
upon resumption of satisfactory sensor operation sensors shall automatically resume input to volume and occupancy calculations .
num .
timing patterns .
ensure that each master controller provides a minimum of num selectable patterns .
ensure that each pattern shall consist of a combination of cycle offset and split numbers for each intersection in the system .
furnish a master controller that is capable of implementing a free mode whereby all intersection controllers will operate without system coordination and a flash mode whereby all intersection controllers will operate in a flashing operation .
num .
operational modes .
ensure that each master controller is able to operate in the following modes of operational control a .
traffic responsive mode whereby pattern selection is based on dynamic traffic conditions as measured by system sensors located in the control area .
as a minimum base the pattern selection on the quantitative traffic flow parameters of volume occupancy and directionality of the arterial traffic .
base transfer of patterns on programmable threshold values .
furnish system sensors that are capable of selective weighting .
b .
time of dayday of week time base mode whereby pattern selection is based on a preprogrammed event scheduler with automatic adjustments for seasonal daylight savings time changes .
ensure that this mode of operation is able to call or override traffic responsive mode .
c. manual override mode whereby pattern selection is made by operator control at the remote monitoring station or master controller site .
ensure that the system coordination control for each master controller is selected on a priority basis .
the priority from highest to lowest is as follows a. manual control entry or remote command b .
time base control c. traffic responsive control num .
reports .
ensure that each master controller monitors and formats intersection and system information for immediate output to the remote monitoring station or for storage for a minimum period of num hours .
as a minimum ensure that the following types of reports are generated a .
a local intersection activity log showing the time date and activity of all monitored local intersection failure conditions .
b .
a system sensor failure log that includes time sensor location and type of failure .
c. a system log with pattern changes .
d. a system sensor data log that includes volume and occupancy for all system sensors .
num .
alarms .
ensure that each master controller continuously monitors intersection and system information for various systems and user defined critical conditions .
upon detection of an alarm condition ensure that the master controller attempts to transmit alarm information to the remote monitoring station or a preprogrammed telephone number .
in case of failure to connect to the central software the master will continue to periodically retry reporting to the remote monitoring station .
num .
communications .
furnish a master controller that supports twoway dialup communications to a remote monitoring station computer for control monitoring data collection and for timing pattern updating purposes .
through continuous num daysweek num hoursday system monitoring ensure that the master controller is able to automatically dialup the remote monitoring station computer upon detection of user defined critical alarm conditions .
furnish a master controller that includes any communication devices or modems necessary to interface with the local intersection controllers within its control area .
num .
security .
furnish a master controller that provides for a user specified security code before any data is altered .
in order to view any parameter ensure that a security code entry is not required .
furnish a master controller that has the ability to disable security code requirements allowing for perpetual access without requiring hardware changes .
num remote monitoring station .
a .
description .
the remote monitoring station describes a distributive processing traffic responsive control and monitoring closed loop system .
the system monitors in real time local intersection activities and overall system performance reporting failures and status conditions both automatically and by operator request .
in order to meet current and future traffic control needs the system also provides extensive control monitoring data collection reporting and analysis functions .
for complete user flexibility the system provides full access of each local system intersection controller from the remote monitoring station site .
full access includes the capability to upload all time settings operation parameters and status information as well as the capability to download all time settings and operation parameters .
b .
system architecture .
the system consists of four principal elements num .
local intersection controller see num num .
communication links num .
traffic responsive master controller see num num .
a remote monitoring station consisting of computer equipment and software c. local intersection controllers .
furnish controller units conforming to num for the type of controller shown on the plans .
furnish a controller that has internal communication capability compatible with the type of interconnect cable shown on the plans .
furnish a local system controller that is capable of processing controller and detector data and provide all necessary intersection control functions .
d. communications .
ensure that communication between the remote monitoring station and the master controller is provided .
furnish communications at the remote monitoring station site by the maintaining agency unless otherwise shown on the plans .
include error checking in the software to assure transmission and reception of valid data between the local controller master controller and the remote monitoring station .
e. equipment .
ensure that the equipment provided at each remote monitoring station location is as shown on the plans and as a minimum consists of the following items num .
computer with monitor num .
software num .
communications num .
accessory items f. system functional requirements .
the system software provides a simplified user friendly color menu format at the remote monitoring station .
ensure that no special computer programming skills are required for the user to fully access and operate this control and monitoring system .
num .
graphical representation .
furnish system software that enables the operator to display in color the vehicular signals pedestrian signals and detector actuations in a real time mode .
ensure that the user is able to construct an intersection layout graphically by using predetermined intersection shapes .
num .
system capacity .
furnish a remote monitoring station software that has the capacity to monitor and control at least num traffic responsive masters .
ensure that the central software is also capable of monitoring and controlling isolated system controllers .
furnish a system software that has the capability to manually select any timing plan free mode or flash mode .
ensure that the system software has the capability of accepting formatting and processing data from at least num system detectors from each master controller .
num .
data transfer .
ensure that it is possible to uploaddownload the signal timing database including coordination and preemption settings between the remote monitoring station and the master controller or local intersection .
furnish a remote monitoring station that provides a means to compare a currently uploaded timing database with a previously developed database stored in the remote monitoring station memory .
ensure that it reports differences in the databases .
during either uploading or downloading operations ensure that the normal traffic control operations are not suspended .
num .
security .
furnish a remote monitoring station that provides for a user specified security code before any data is altered .
maintain controller access procedures from the remote monitoring station allowing the user full security control of all system components from a remote location .
num .
isolated intersection management .
furnish a remote monitoring station software that includes the capability of accessing system controllers at remote intersection locations .
ensure that this capability includes total access to controller timing parameters alarm conditions detector data and intersection status conditions in real time without the use of a master controller .
ensure that this feature utilizes the local intersection controller with a dialup modem and telephone service .
num uninterruptible power supplyups .
a .
operation .
in addition to the material requirements below furnish a ups system with a minimum two and one half num hours of full runtime operation for an ledonly intersection with num watts of active output power .
furnish a ups compatible with all of the following traffic signal equipment nema tsnum and tsnum controllers and cabinets model num num cabinets type num num controllers and electrical service pedestals .
the maximum transfer time allowed from disruption of normal utility line voltage to stabilized inverter line voltage from batteries shall be num milliseconds or less .
the same maximum allowable transfer time shall also apply when switching from inverter line voltage to utility line voltage .
include a means to switch the intersection from fulloperation to flashing operation after numhours of runtime .
this is to conserve battery operation during an extended utility power outage .
include standard form c relay contacts to trigger an alarm within the controller assembly informing a technician the system is operating on battery backup .
operating temperature for both the invertercharger power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be num f to num f num c to num c. both the power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be rated at numvacnum amps minimum .
the ups shall bypass the utility line power whenever the utility line voltage is outside the following voltage range numvac to num vac num vac .
when utilizing battery power the ups output voltage shall be between num vac and num vac pure sine wave output numhz numhz .
when the utility line power has been restored between num vac and num vac for more than num seconds the ups shall dropout of battery backup mode and return to utility line mode .
in the event of invertercharger failure battery failure or complete battery discharge the power transfer relay shall revert to the nc and energized state where utility line power is connected to the cabinet .
recharge time for the battery from protective lowcutoff to num or more of full battery charge capacity shall not exceed num hours .
include all necessary wiring and hardware for mounting shelf angles rack etc .
furnish a ups with available buckboost mode operation with a minimum input voltage range of num to num vrms .
the unit display shall indicate when buckboost mode is engaged .
default buckboost setpoints shall be num vrms and num vrms unless specified otherwise in the plans .
furnish a ups with an ethernet port for remote monitoring and control .
provide interface software unless the ethernet port has builtin web browser compatibility .
remote communication shall have the ability to make setting changes review status retrieve alarm and event logging that is time and date stamped for up to num events .
the logs shall be printable .
ensure the ups cabinet has a mastic tape neoprene foam or silicone weatherresistant seal between the cabinet bottom flange and the concrete foundation .
minimum tape thickness shall be numinch num mm and the tape shall be continuous with no gaps between tape pieces or between cabinet and foundation .
sealing tape shall completely cover the bottom cabinet flange and shall be rated for a temperature range of at least num f to num f. the ups output notifications for on battery battery num hour timer and low battery shall be wired into the traffic signal back panel to provide special status alarms for each output into the signal controller .
this item shall include a red led status indicator lamp to allow maintenance personnel and law enforcement to quickly assess whether a traffic signal cabinet is being powered by a ups .
the led housing shall be nema numx ipnum or irnum rated for outdoor use and be tampershatter resistant .
it shall be a domed enclosure contained a red lens with led that is visible from num foot minimum .
the enclosure and led lamp unit should be placed and centered on the top surface of the ups cabinet and sealed from water intrusion .
it should be wired using minimum num ga stranded insulated hookup wire to the status relay outputs of the ups .
the wires shall be terminated by lugs at the display end and permanently labeled backup power status display with wire polarity indicated .
the red led shall only illuminate to indicate the cabinet is operating under ups backup power the backup operating condition .
this item also includes programming the ups status relay outputs to produce the lamp status displays .
these status displays will be solid num duty cycle not flashing displays .
the operating voltage of the led lamp shall be numv ac unless otherwise indicated .
b .
maintenance displays controls and diagnostics .
furnish a ups with a backlit lcd display that includes an event counter hour meter line and battery voltagespercentages and fault status .
the lcd display shall have touch keys for changing display statuses and to reset counters hour meter date and time .
furnish a ups with lightning surge protection compliant with ieeeansi c.num .
furnish two num sets of equipment lists operation and maintenance manuals and boardlevel schematic and wiring diagrams of the ups and the battery data sheets .
manual shall conform to caltrans transportation electrical equipment specifications num chapter num section num .
c. battery system .
supply a minimum of four num batteries with the ups system .
each battery shall be numvdc and be rated at a minimum of num ahrs numhour discharge rate to num voltscell at num degrees fahrenheit num degrees celsius to achieve the num hour run time requirement .
furnish batteries easily replaced and commercially available off the shelf .
furnish deep cycle sealed prismatic leadcalcium based agmvrla absorbed glass mat valve regulated lead acid batteries .
furnish batteries certified in writing by the manufacturer to operate over a temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c. place all batteries on battery heater mats in the enclosure .
the battery heater mats are designed to extend the life of the batteries .
an integral system shall prevent the battery from destructive discharge and overcharge .
batteries shall not be recharged when battery temperature exceeds numfnumf numcnumc .
d. enclosure .
furnish an enclosure mountable to a standard model num nema tsnum and tsnum traffic signal cabinet and be constructed of natural unpainted aluminum .
furnish cabinet size adequate to house all the ups equipment including the controller unit manual bypass switch and the num batteries .
key the enclosure to the state master num lock and include num keys .
furnish a base seal for use between the enclosure to the concrete foundation or riser of continuous tape gasket material minimum numinch num mm thickness .
completely seal the interface to the adjacent controller cabinet with silicone caulk .
furnish an enclosure with a vent fan and thermostat as per caltrans transportation electrical equipment specifications chapter num section numhousings .
e. warranty .
provide a two num year factoryrepair warranty for parts and labor on the ups from date of acceptance by the state .
warrant batteries for full replacement for two num years from date of purchase .
furnish materials according to the departments tap .
num centrally controlled arterial traffic signal system .
furnish materials according to the departments traffic authorized products tap list .
num pavement marking material num general .
permanent pavement marking materials that meet the requirements of this specification and that have passed the service test required by supplement num are included on the approved list maintained by the office of materials management omm .
omm may retest pavement marking materials prequalified by a service test to determine formulation compliance to prequalified material and compliance with physical properties specified herein .
certified test data and samples will be furnished by the manufacturer to omm .
failure of testing or certified test data to show formulation conforming to prequalified material or compliance with specified physical properties may be cause for removal of the material from the approved list .
ensure that the marking material is delivered in containers that are clearly marked to indicate the number of gallons liters weight or size of material material density weight per unit volume material color batch number or other similar manufacturers identification date of production and the company name and address .
num traffic paint .
furnish white and yellow readymixed traffic paint suitable for marking various types of pavement .
furnish paint that is a suitable binder for glass beads num type a on pavement exposed to traffic .
furnish paint that will not deteriorate in storage within one year after date of receipt to the extent that it can not be readily broken up with a paddle to a smooth uniform paint capable of easy application by spray .
furnish paint that does not bleed or discolor when sprayed on asphalt concrete surfaces .
type num paint is the fast dry waterbased num percent acrylic type .
type numa paint is fast dry waterbased num percent acrylic type used for cold weather applications .
ensure that type num and type numa paint conforms to the following requirements property test method requirements applies to both white and yellow unless noted total solids astm d num num minimum by weight num minimum by volume titanium dioxide rutile type ii astm d num num lbgal num gl minimum white num lbgal num gl minimum yellow pigment by weight astm d num num of qualifying sample weight per gallon astm d num num lbgal num gl of qualifying sample color supplement num appendix a viscosity krebs units astm d num num minimum and num maximum num f num c lab drying time astm d num num minutes max .
num f num c num rh num minutes max .
num f num c num rh num minutes max .
num f num c num rh prequalify materials according to supplement num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num polyester pavement marking .
ensure that the polyester pavement marking material supplied is a two part polyester system capable of being applied at ambient temperature down to num f num c. ensure that the material is capable of retaining reflective glass beads num type b after application .
ensure that the catalytic component of the system is the commercially available type recommended by the manufacturer of the polyester .
ensure that the ratio of the catalyst to resin is specified by the manufacturer .
ensure that the polyester conforms to the following requirements minimum maximum num .
consistency krebs units astm d num procedure a num num num .
field dry time no track minutes num furnish pavement marking material that will be in no tracking condition in num minutes .
the no tracking condition will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of num f num c and high temperature of num f num c. run tests at the manufacturers highest and lowest recommended application humidity .
the marking materials will be applied at the manufacturers recommended application temperature .
the no tracking time will be determined by passing over the line with a passenger car at a speed of num to num mph num to num kmph in a simulated passing maneuver .
a line showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when viewed at a distance of num ft num m will be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to this requirement for time to no track .
num .
prime pigment content percent by weight of paint white astm d num num yellow astm d num or department approved lab method num num .
pigment content percent by weight of paint astm d num white num yellow num num .
nonvolatile vehicle solids content percent by weight of paint fed std numc method num white num yellow num num .
fineness of dispersion astm d num micrometers num num .
bleeding ratio fed std ttpnumf section num white num yellow num num .
color a .
white daylight directional reflectance astm e num num b. yellow num .
refer to highway yellow color tolerance chart pr color no .
num june num u.s. dept .
of transportation fhwa yellow color difference num astm d num num i .
measure e l a b as cielab source c l num num a num num b num num num .
dry opacity astm d num at num wet fed std num no num process b method a white and yellow num num .
condition in container fed std num no num hand stirring by spatula minutes num prequalify materials according to supplement num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num thermoplastic pavement marking .
furnish thermoplastic pavement marking material formulated expressly for use as retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement .
furnish material that includes a mixture of alkyd resinsnum minimum by weight at least one of which is solid at room temperature and contains premixed glass beads num type c num minimum by weight with a num minimum index of refraction .
ensure that the ingredients are well mixed so that all parts are evenly dispersed throughout .
ensure that there are no foreign objects skins dirt or such ingredients that would cause staining discoloration or bleeding .
furnish suitable materials for application in molten form by extrusion method .
ensure that the material is capable of retaining reflective glass beads num type c after application .
a .
specific gravity .
ensure that the thermoplastic compound has a specific gravity of num to num at num f num c astm d num .
b. flowability .
meet percent residue requirements according to num .
aashto m num section num and num .
aashto m num section num c. drying time .
aashto m num section num .
d. field placement stability .
after proper application and drying time ensure that the material is not tacky and does not have an appreciable deformation or discoloration when subjected to typical vehicular traffic and in air or road temperatures between num and num f num and num c. ensure that when the material is properly applied that it forms markings of a constant crosssection with a uniform density and character .
ensure that the markings maintain their original shape and pavement position .
e. ring and ball softening point .
furnish a material that has a softening point of not less than num f num c when tested according to astm e num .
f. impact resistance .
aashto m num section num g. pigment content .
furnish yellow material containing a minimum of num percent by weight of primary yellow lead chromate pigment or a lead free pigment measured according to astm d num or department approved lab method .
furnish white material containing a minimum of num percent titanium dioxiderutile type num by weight of white pigment .
h. color .
minimum maximum a .
white daylight directional reflectance astm e num num b. yellow num .
refer to highway yellow color tolerance chart pr color no .
num june num u.s. dept .
of transportation fhwa yellow color difference num astm d num num measure e l a b as cielab source c l num num a num num b num num i. yellowness index aashto m num section num prequalify materials according to supplement num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num preformed pavement marking .
furnish the preformed material suitable for retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement .
furnish material that is free of cracks and that has edges that are straight true and unbroken .
ensure that the material is flexible formable and suitable for application with an adhesive without heating .
furnish material containing glass beads uniformly distributed throughout with a num minimum index of refraction .
ensure that the material has a uniform surface layer of firmly bonded glass beads to provide the initial minimum specific luminance values specified for the various types of material .
furnish material that resists deterioration by contact with highway deicing chemicals or because of the oil content of asphalt concrete pavement or from oil droppings and other effects of traffic .
a .
type anum material .
furnish type anum material conforming to astm d num level num classes num or num and that have a thickness of not less than num inch num mm including any precoated adhesive layer .
b .
type anum material .
furnish type anum material conforming to astm d num level num classes num or num and that have a thickness of not less than num inch num mm including any precoated adhesive layer .
c. type anum material .
furnish type anum material conforming to astm d num level num classes num or num skid resistance level a and that have a minimum thickness at the thinnest portion of the crosssection of not less than num inch num mm including any precoated adhesive layer .
prequalify materials according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num work zone pavement marking .
furnish work zone pavement marking material conforming to astm d num type i removable or type ii nonremovable with the following modifications a .
type i removable numinch num mm minimum thickness .
b .
type ii nonremovable numinch num mm minimum thickness .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num epoxy pavement marking material .
ensure that the material supplied is a num percent solids two part epoxy system capable of being applied at ambient temperature down to num f num c. furnish a slow cure material capable of retaining reflective glass beads num type d after application .
furnish epoxy conforming to the following requirements a. formulation .
furnish epoxy formulated as a long life pavement marking system capable of providing a minimum of num years of performance free of any peroxides and any trimethyolpropane triacrylate tmpta and other multifunctional monomers .
ensure that the epoxy is designed to provide simple volumetric mixing ratio of its components such as num .
b. epoxide number .
ensure that the epoxide number of the epoxy resin is the manufacturers target value num as determined by astm d num for both white and yellow part a on a pigment free basis .
c. amine number .
ensure that the amine number of the curing agent part b is the manufacturers target value num according to astm d num on a pigment free basis .
d. laboratory drying time .
ensure that the pavement marking material when mixed in the proper ratio and applied at the properly prescribed wet film thickness at num num f num num c and with the proper saturation of glass beads exhibit a no tracking time of no greater than num to num minutes when tested according to astm d num .
e. field time to notrack .
furnish pavement marking material that will be in no tracking condition between num to num minutes .
the no tracking condition will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of num fnum c and high temperature of num f num c. run tests at the manufacturers highest and lowest recommended application humidity .
the marking materials will be applied at the manufacturers recommended application temperature .
the no tracking time will be determined by passing over the line with a passenger car at a speed of num to num mph num to num kmph in a simulated passing maneuver .
a line showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when viewed at a distance of num ft num m will be considered as showing no tracking and conforming to this requirement for time to no track .
protect the line from tracking during the setting period by coning off or as shown on the plans .
f. field curing .
furnish epoxy pavement marking material capable of fully curing at a constant surface temperature of num f num c or above .
g. hardness .
furnish epoxy pavement marking materials when tested according to astm d num that have a shore d hardness of between num and num .
allow samples to cure at room temperature num num f num num c for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours before performing the indicated test .
h. certified test data .
provide a material manufacturers certified test data showing the material complies with the provisions of this specification .
the provisions of a certification of compliance do not waive a state inspection sampling or testing .
i. infrared spectra .
supply a copy of the infrared spectra of each component on each lot number j .
material performance qualifications .
ensure that the manufacturer has expertise and performance history including completed and passed service tests according to supplement num. verifiable installations ample production capacity proper facility compliance with epa regulations verifiable quality control program and has passed a minimum of num years of performance durability and retroreflectivity on concrete or asphalt surface in the state .
k. condition in container .
fed std num no .
num hand stirring by spatula .
num minutes maximum prequalify materials according to supplement num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num heatfused preformed plastic pavement marking material .
furnish heatfused preformed plastic pavement marking materials conforming to the following type a preheated tape and type b postheated tape type anum and bnum num mil thickness num mm type anum num mil thickness num mm type bnum num mil thickness num mm glass beads .num prequalify materials according to supplement num .
furnish materials according to the departments approved list .
num glass beads .
furnish certified test data for the arsenic and lead content of all glass bead samples sent to the department for testing to ensure that all glass beads furnished to the department contain no more than num parts per million of arsenic or lead as determined in accordance with environmental protection agency testing methods num numb or numc according to sec num standards .
section num of title num united states code r pavement markings .
a .
type a. furnish type a glass beads for traffic paint conforming to supplement num and to aashto m num type num without flotation properties but dual coated for moisture resistance and adhesion with the following exception num flotation test .
ensure that the glass beads for traffic paint are packaged in bags designated num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
b .
type b. furnish type b glass beads for polyester marking material conforming to supplement num and aashto m num type num with num num percent flotation coating and ensure that a num num percent moisture resistant coating is retained on each sieve with the following exception num flotation test .
ensure that the minimum percent floating equals num of flotation coated beads or num percent of total mixture .
ensure that the glass beads for polyester marking material are packaged in bags designated poly .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
c. type c. furnish type c glass beads for thermoplastic material conforming to supplement num and meeting the following specification .
sieve size percent retained no .
num num mm num maximum refractive index num to num no .
num num m num to num roundness num minimum no .
num num m num to num coating moisture resistant for dropon beads only no .
num num m num to num ensure the glass bead packaging is clearly marked thermo use materials certified according to supplement num .
d. type d. furnish type d glass beads for epoxy pavement marking conforming to supplement num .
ensure that the glass bead packaging clearly indicates epoxy size i or epoxy size ii .
ensure that the glass beads have the following gradation when tested according to supplement num .
size i size ii sieve size percent retained sieve size percent retained no .
num num mm num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num m num to num no .
num num m num to num pan num to num pan num to num reflective media ensure that the glass beads are smooth clear free from any air inclusions and scratches that might affect their functions as a retroreflective media and that have the characteristics listed below .
roundness percent by weight ensure that not more than num percent of the glass beads are irregular or fused spheroids and that at least num percent of the beads are true beads .
index of refraction ensure that the refractive index of the beads is a minimum of num as determined by the liquid immersion method at num f num c. ensure that the silica content of glass beads is not less than num percent .
coating furnish size i glass beads that are coated with a silanetype adherence coating to enhance its embedment in and adherence to the applied binder film .
ensure that the coated beads emit a yellowgreen fluorescence when tested by the dansyl chloride test procedure .
furnish size ii glass beads that are treated with a moistureproof coating .
ensure that both types of glass beads show no tendency to absorb moisture in storage and remain free of clusters and lumps .
ensure that they flow freely from the dispensing equipment at any time when surface and atmosphere conditions are satisfactory for marking operations .
determine the moistureresistance of the glass beads on the basis of aashto t num section num .
use materials certified according to supplement num .
num spray thermoplastic pavement marking .
furnish spray thermoplastic pavement marking material specially formulated to be used as retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement .
furnish material that includes a mixture of resins at least one of which is solid at room temperature and contains uncoated premixed glass beads num type c. ensure that the ingredients are well mixed so that all parts are evenly dispersed throughout .
ensure that there are no foreign objects skins dirt or such ingredients that would cause staining discoloration or bleeding .
furnish suitable materials for spray application in molten form .
ensure that the material is capable of retaining drop on reflective glass beads num type c after application .
a .
composition .
white yellow binder num min .
num min .
tionum pigment type ii rutile num min .
leadfree pigment yellow num na or leaded pigment yellow num na inter mixed glass beads num min .
by weight num min .
by weight filler num max .
num max .
amount of leadfree pigment is at the discretion of the manufacturer as long as all other compositional requirements are met furnish yellow material containing a minimum of num percent by weight of primary yellow lead chromate pigment measured as per astm d num or department approved lab method b. binder .
furnish alkydbased binder consisting of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one of which is solid at room temperature and high boiling plasticizers .
ensure at least one third of the binder composition is maleic modified glycerol ester of rosin and is no less than num percent by weight of the entire material formulation .
c. pigment .
furnish titanium dioxide pigment that is a rutile type with a minimum purity of num .
use leadfree or leaded pigment yellow num produced to meet the requirements of fed num color no .
num .
d. filler .
ensure filler to be incorporated with the resins is a white calcium carbonate silica or any approved substitute .
ensure that any filler which is insoluble in numn hydrochloric acid passes a num m no .
num sieve .
e. color .
furnish white spray thermoplastic that is pure white and free from any tint and has a minimum daylight reflectance y of num .
when tested according to astm d num and enum the yellowness index is not to exceed num .
visually match yellow spray thermoplastic with fed num color no .
num .
ensure daytime reflectance y is greater than num .
ensure white and yellow colors fall within the chromaticity coordinates of the color box in appendix a of supplement num .
g. specific gravity .
furnish spray thermoplastic material that has a specific gravity of num .
h. softening point .
after heating the marking compound for num hours num min .
at numf numf numc numc and testing in accordance with astm e num ensure material has a minimum softening point of numf numc as measured by the ring and ball method .
i .
bond strength .
after heating the marking compound for num hours num min .
at numf numf numc numc ensure tensile bond strength exceeds num psi num mpa when tested in accordance with astm d num .
j .
impact resistance .
after heating the marking compound for num hours num min .
at numf numf numc numc ensure impact resistance is a minimum of num inch pounds num kilogram meters when tested in accordance with astm d num .
ensure no cracks or bond loss occurs when a num inch num mm thick film drawdown is made at numf numf numc numc on an unprimed sandblasted portland cement concrete block .
test sample with a male indentor numinch nummm and no female die at room temperature .
k. indentation resistance .
when tested according to astm d num using a shore durometer type anum with a num pound num kg load ensure hardness is between num and num after num seconds of contact with the sample .
ensure durometer and sample is at numf numf numc numc .
prequalify materials according to supplement num .
use materials that follow the requirements of supplement num .
num water main and service branch material num acceptance .
follow the requirements listed in each num section .
num ductile iron pipe joints and fittings .
furnish ductile iron pipe conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum and to ansiawwa cnumanum for thickness design .
furnish pipe with a cement mortar lining conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum .
furnish gaskets conforming to ansiawwa for each length of pipe and suitable for the type of joint of the pipe .
ship gaskets in a separate container .
furnish pushon joints mechanical joints and boltless restrained joints conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum .
for restrained joints ensure that the restraint is a design approved by the owner of the utility and provides a positive lock designed to prevent joint separation .
steel locking segments molded into a gasket to grip the pipe do not meet the requirements for this joint .
ball and socket joints are suited for underwater installations .
the contractor may use ball and socket joints for other types of installations where an appreciable amount of joint deflection and a positive lock against joint separation are required .
manufacture fittings for ductile iron pipe according to ansiawwa cnumanum or ansiawwa cnumanum and ansiawwa cnumanum .
for fittings num inches num mm or larger use ductile iron only .
ensure that fittings are cement mortar lined according to ansiawwa cnumanum .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe joints and fittings .
furnish pvc pipe conforming to awwa c num awwa c num awwa c num or astm d num .
furnish pushon type pipe joints conforming to astm d num with a thickened bell and with a rubber gasket conforming to astm f num .
use pvc pe or pb pipe and couplings and solvent cements made from compounds that are tested and certified as suitable for potable water distribution products by the national sanitation foundation nsf testing laboratory or the canadian standards association testing laboratory or any other similarly accredited testing agency acceptable to the laboratory .
do not use pvc pe or pb pipe and couplings or solvent cements containing any ingredient in an amount that has been demonstrated to migrate into water in quantities considered to be toxic as tested according to sections num and num of nsf standard number num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num polyethylene pe service branches and fittings .
furnish pe service branches and fittings conforming to awwa cnum.furnish material with plain ends conforming to the potable waterline requirements specified in num .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe rpmp joints and fittings .
furnish rpmp conforming to astm d num or awwa c num .
design of underground and above ground glassfiberreinforced polymer mortar pipe and fittings shall meet design requirements of awwa m num fiberglass pipe design manual .
furnish doublebell pushon type fiberglass joints conforming to astm d num and with a rubber gasket conforming to astm f num .
furnish restrained joints and fittings conforming to astm d num or awwa c num .
provide a minimum pipe stiffness of num psi .
furnish certified test data as defined in num to the engineer .
num copper service branches and fittings .
furnish copper service branches conforming to astm b num astm b numm type k. assemble branches using flaretype compression fittings conforming to awwa c num .
ensure a minimum working pressure for the branches of num pounds per square inch num mpa .
use either coil type temper num annealed or drawn type temper h material .
furnish highquality copper brass fittings with awwa c num dimensions .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num steel pipe encasement .
furnish steel casing pipe conforming to astm a numa numm grade b or astm a num grade b that is galvanized on exterior and interior surfaces as specified in cms num .
furnish the manufacturers certification .
steel casing pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness as shown below pipe diameter wall thickness wall thickness in mm designation in mm num to num num to num standard num to num num to num num to num num to num standard num num num and larger num and larger extrastrong num num for steel casing pipe specified to be bored or jacked provide ungalvanized pipe with numinch minimum wall thickness .
num polyethylene encasement .
furnish nummil num m thick polyethylene encasement material conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum .
num gate valve and valve box .
furnish ductile iron gate valves conforming to awwa c num resilient seated .
gate valves shall open counterclockwise .
use valves suitable for pushon and mechanical joints for ductile iron pipe and for pushon joints for pvc pipe .
furnish cast iron valve boxes consisting of adjustable two or threepiece with cover and with a base corresponding to the size of the valve .
use heavyduty type valve boxes for locations within existing or proposed pavement driveway or other traveled areas .
ensure that valve boxes are coated with an asphaltic coating by the manufacturer .
the cover shall have the word water cast in it .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num inserting valve and valve box .
furnish inserting valves that operated like ordinary gate valves with the same gate and seating assembly as awwa c num gate valves .
furnish material that consist of a twopiece sleeve for assembly around the main the valve and a valve box conforming to num .
furnish the equipment necessary to drill the main wall and insert the valve according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num cuttingin sleeve valve and valve box .
furnish cuttingin valves with the same gate and seating assembly as awwa c num gate valves .
furnish material that consists of a cuttingin sleeve and valve suitable for assembling over the ends of a cutout length of existing pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations and a valve box conforming to num .
furnish sleeves and valve joints of the mechanical joint type .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num tapping sleeve valve and valve box .
furnish tapping valves with the same gate and seating assembly as awwa c num gate valves .
furnish material that consists of a twopiece sleeve for assembly around the main the valve and a valve box conforming to num .
furnish cast iron epoxycoated steel or stainless steel tapping sleeves .
furnish the equipment necessary to drill the main wall through the valve according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num tapping saddle and corporation stop .
furnish iron bronze brass or awwa c num stainless steel tapping saddles .
furnish band type or doublestrap type tapping saddles with international pipe standard ips tapping or awwa tapered thread inlet .
for use with saddles provide bronze alloy corporation stops with ips inlet thread of awwa tapered thread and with outlet thread compatible with connecting pipe without special adapters .
for direct tapping provide bronze alloy corporation stops with awwa tapered inlet thread and with outlet thread compatible with connecting pipe without special adapters .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num service stop and service box .
furnish bronze service stops with coupling threads conforming to awwa c num .
use service stops designed so that water pressure from the inlet side of the body provides additional sealing action .
furnish service stops that open counterclockwise .
use buffalo type service boxes .
furnish covers that have the word water cast in raised letters .
securely fasten covers with a bronze or brass bolt .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
num meter setting stop and chamber .
furnish meter setting yokes that allow the meter to be readily installed without disturbing piping .
furnish angle pattern meter stops with lock wings for the street side of the meter piping .
furnish check valves for the customer side of the meter piping .
furnish chambers composed of concrete vitrified clay pvc or pe .
furnish double walled tightly fitting lids .
num fire hydrant .
furnish cast iron drybarrel post type fire hydrants conforming to awwa c num with the following modifications furnish hydrants incorporating an approved groundline breakable flange and valve stem coupling .
furnish compression type hydrants with the valve opening against the pressure .
ensure that the valve end of the valve stem is designed to eliminate contact of dissimilar metals .
ensure that the valve stem is at least numinch num mm diameter or numinch num mm square steel between the hydrant operating nut and the valve except for the valve stem coupling located at the point corresponding to the breakable flange .
furnish a main valve port that is at least num numinch num mm diameter .
furnish a rubber faced valve .
ensure that the hydrant is designed so the nozzles may be oriented to point in any direction .
ensure that the hydrant connection to the pipe has at least a num inches num mm inside diameter .
furnish pushon or mechanical type joints conforming to ansiawwa cnumanum .
ensure that the hydrant has one centerfront pumper nozzle of numinch num mm internal diameter with male threads to match the fire apparatus of the maintaining agency .
furnish two hose or streamer nozzles of num numinch num mm internal diameter with male threads to match apparatus of the maintaining agency .
ensure that nozzle sections are designed to lock into the hydrant body using locking lugs or threads .
furnish nozzles with threaded cast iron caps having an integral nut of the same design as the hydrant operating nut .
contact the maintaining agency to determine the desired color and number of coats of enamel for the hydrants .
furnish materials according to the departments qpl .
