state of wyoming department of transportation cheyenne wyoming standard specifications for road and bridge construction num edition adopted by the transportation commission of wyoming march num num for copies of these standard specifications write or call wyoming department of transportation attn financial services program num bishop boulevard cheyenne wyoming num num num state of wyoming dave freudenthal governor transportation commission of wyoming charlie monk chairman cactus covello jr. vice chairman susan dziardziel sandi mccormick jim latta ted ertman jim hladky sandra scott secretary wyoming department of transportation john cox director acknowledgments the wyoming department of transportation wydot expresses its appreciation to its employees the federal highway administration fhwa and the wyoming contractors association wca for their cooperation and assistance in producing the standard specifications for road and bridge construction .
the department gratefully acknowledges the principal authors from the construction office and the valuable review and input from wydots bridge geology highway development contracts estimates environmental services maintenance traffic materials and district construction and maintenance programs the state of wyomings attorney generals office and department of administration and information risk management fhwa and wca and editing layout and graphics services provided by wydots management services program and lori hart of las consulting .
i table of contents section title page table of contents division num general provisions section num definitions and terms num num activevoiceandimperativemood num num organizationofspecifications num num measurementunitsinchpoundu.s.customaryversus internationalsystemsiormetric num num abbreviationssignsandsymbols num num definitions num section num bidding requirements and conditions num num prequalificationofbidders num num proposalpackage num num bidenvelopeandelectronicbidsystemdevice num num interpretationofquantitiesintheproposal num num examinationofdocumentsandworksite num num preparationofbids num num irregularbids num num deliveryofbids num num withdrawalorrevisionofbids num num combinationproposals num num publicopeningofbids num num disqualificationofbidders num section num award and execution of contract num num considerationofbids num num awardofcontract num num cancellationofaward num num returnofbidbonds num num performancebond num num executionandapprovalofcontract num num biddersfailuretoexecutecontract num num documentanddataretention num ii table of contents section title page section num scope of work num num intentofcontract num num contractamendments num num valueengineeringcontractorproposals num section num control of work num num authorityoftheengineer num num workingdrawings num num conformitywithcontract num num coordinationandprecedenceofdocumentsinthe contract num num superintendence num num cooperationbycontractor num num cooperationbetweencontractors num num equipmentstorage num num constructionstakeslinesandgrades num num extracontractualagreementsbycontractor num num authorityoftheinspector num num inspectionofwork num num loadrestrictions num num maintenanceoftheworkduringconstruction num num disputeresolution num section num control of material num num qualityrequirements num num inspectionandtestsatsourceofsupply num num sourcessitesandhaulroads num num vacant num num fieldlaboratory num num storageofmaterials num num handlingmaterials num num departmentfurnishedmaterial num num rightsinanduseofmaterialsfoundinthework num num requirementsforsteelandiron num num stockpilingaggregate num num contractortesting num iii table of contents section title page section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num applicablelaws num num permitslicensesandtaxes num num patenteddevicesmaterialsandprocesses num num contractorsinsurancerequirements num num employeehealthandsafety num num railwayhighwayprovisions num num useofexplosives num num protectionandrestorationofpropertymarkersand landscape num num accommodationsforirrigation num num responsibilityfordamageclaims num num trafficprovisionsandpublicsafety num num responsibilityforsafeguardingthework num num responsibilityforutilityproceduresandservices num section num prosecution and progress num num sublettingofcontract num num noticetoproceed num num prosecutionandprogress num num requirementsforworkersmethodsandequipment num num suspensionofwork num num extensiontothecontractcompletiondate num num openingsectionsoftheprojecttotraffic num num failuretocompleteworkbythecompletiondate num num terminationfordefault num num terminationonpublicsbehalf num section num measurement and payment num num measurementofquantities num num scopeofpaymentnum num compensationforalteredquantitiesnum num extraandforceaccountworknum num monthlyprogresspayment num num paymentformaterialonhand num num mobilization num num finalquantities num iv table of contents section title page num finalpaymentandexecutedforms num num royalties num section num wages and condition of employment num num scope num num equalemploymentopportunity num num preferenceforwyomingcitizens num num certifiedpayrolls num section num environmental requirements num num protectionoftheenvironment num num forestprotection num num erosionandpollutioncontrols num num airpollutioncontrol num num surfacewatersandwetlands num section num archaeologic paleontologic and historic sites num num discoveryofpotentialsites num num culturalclearances num section num acceptance num num acceptanceofaggregate num num acceptanceofasphaltmaterials num num unacceptableworkandmaterials num num finalacceptance num section num laboratory personnel and correlation num num general num num mixdesign num num fieldtestinglaboratoryandpersonnelrequirements num division num earthwork section num clearing and grubbing num section num removal num v table of contents section title page section num excavation and embankment num section num haul num section num haul road maintenance and restoration num section num excavation and backfill for culverts num section num topsoil num section num vacant num section num watering num section num equipment work num section num culvert cleaning num section num structure excavation and backfill num section num overburden num section num lime treated subgrade num section num storm water pollution prevention num section num seeding fertilizer and sodding num section num geotextiles num section num impermeable plastic membrane num section num rockfall mesh num section num scaling rock cuts num section num dust control agent num vi table of contents section title page division num aggregate materials section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num section num blended base and blended subbase num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num cement treated base num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num emulsion stabilized base num section num stockpiled aggregate num division num pavements section num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num section num vacant num section num plant mix pavement crack sealing num section num plant mix wearing course num section num vacant num section num plant mix pavement commercial mix num section num tack coat num vii table of contents section title page section num prime coat num section num chip and fog seals num section num microsurfacing num section num paving fabric num section num plant mix surface appurtenances num section num hydrated lime num section num portland cement concrete pavement num section num concrete pavement repair num section num dowel bar retrofit num section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num section num rumble strips num division num structures section num structural steel num section num precast concrete num section num bridge railing num section num bearing piles and sheet piling num section num concrete barrier num section num drilled shaft foundations num section num reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num viii table of contents section title page section num reinforced concrete slope paving num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num riprap and gabion erosion protection num section num expansion joints num section num structural concrete num section num reinforcing steel num section num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num section num paint repair num division num miscellaneous construction section num vacant num section num vacant num section num culverts and storm drains num section num vacant num section num underdrains num section num guardrail and median barrier num section num fences num section num minor concrete paving num section num curb and gutter num section num metal drain inlets num ix table of contents section title page section num highway monuments num section num siphons num section num latex emulsion paint for concrete num section num erosion control concrete num section num cattle guards num section num snow fence num section num cutoff walls and head walls num section num precast reinforced concrete stock passes num section num trash guards num section num adjustment of valve boxes and fire hydrants .. num section num vacant num section num structural plate pipe num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num section num vacant num section num epoxy resin injection num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num vacant num section num slotted drains num x table of contents section title page division num traffic control and roadway lighting section num electrical devices num section num signs delineators and reference markers num section num temporary traffic control num division num materials num manufacturedproductcertifications num num pointofsampling num section num cement and admixtures num num portlandcement num num flyash num num blendedhydrauliccement num num admixtures num num syntheticfibers num section num curing materials num num curingmaterials num num evaporationretardant num section num aggregate num num general num num aggregateforconcrete num num aggregateformortar num num aggregateforsubbaseandbase num num aggregateforflexiblepavement num num aggregateforplantmixwearingcourse num num aggregateformicrosurfacing num num aggregateforchipseal num num aggregateforblotter num num aggregateforbedcoursematerial num num aggregateforclassbbedding num xi table of contents section title page num gravelfordrains num num aggregateformaintenancestockpiles num num aggregateforperviousbackfillmaterial num num aggregateforriprap num num aggregateforflowablebackfill num section num asphalt materials num num performancegradedasphaltbinder num num liquidcutbackasphalt num num emulsifiedasphalt num num dustcontrolagent num num asphaltmasticforfieldcoating num section num geotextiles membrane and fabrics num num general num num geotextileandimpermeableplasticmembrane num num pavingfabric num section num erosion control and reclamation num num seedandfertilizer num num mulchstraworhay num num sod num num erosioncontrolblanket num num erosioncontrolagent num num erosioncontrolnetting num num mulchtack num num burlapbagcurbs num section num joint materials num num siliconejointsealant num num hotpouredelasticsealant num num elasticjointsealant num num preformedexpansionjointfiller num num preformedelastomericcompressionjointseals num num compressedjointmaterial num num backerrod num num waterstop num xii table of contents section title page section num pipe num num reinforcedconcretepipe num num reinforcedconcretestockpasses num num reinforcedconcretesiphonpipe num num plasticpipeforunderdrain num num corrugatedsteelpipeandpipearches num num corrugatedaluminumalloypipe num num corrugatedmetalunits num num structuralplatepipe num num aluminumalloystructuralplatepipe num num corrugatedsteelsiphonpipe num num weldedsteelsiphonpipe num num ductileironwaterpipe num num nestablemetalpipe num num pipejointmortar num num preformedflexiblejointsealants num num steelmiteredendsections num num slidegates num section num paint num num general num num testingandsamplingrequirements num num ingredients num num systemaalkydbridgepaintsystem num num systembzincrichepoxyandlatexbridgepaint system num num aluminumpaint num num whitepaint num num latexemulsionpaint num num epoxymasticpaint num section num concrete repair num num concretepatchingmaterial num num bondbreakingcompound num num caulkingfiller num num foamcoreboard num num dowelbarretrofitconcrete num num epoxyresin num xiii table of contents section title page section num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num num reinforcingsteel num num dowelbarsandtiebars num num wireropeorwirecable num num steelwirestrand num num prestressingsteel num num wireenclosedriprapgabionsandrevetmattresses .
num section num fence and cattle guards num num generalfencerequirements num num barbedwire num num twistedbarblesswire num num wovenwire num num industrialfence num num galvanizedsteelgates num num cattleguardunits num num nailsandspikes num num fenceposts num section num guardrail and barrier num num corrugatedmetalbeamrail num num guardrailhardware num num boxbeambarrier num num corrugatedbeamguardrailselfoxidizing num num wyomingboxbeamendterminalforguardrails num num guardrailposts num section num water num num water num section num structural metals and metal castings num num structuralsteel num num highstrengthboltsandfasteners num num sheetmetal num num automaticallyendweldedstuds num num steelpipe num num boltsandfasteners num xiv table of contents section title page num steelpiles num num sheetpiling num num bridgerailing num num bronzebearingplates num num steelpinsandrollers num num steelcastings num num grayironcastings num num galvanizedcoating num num preformedfabricpads num num elastomericbearingpads num num weldingmaterials num num highstrengthanchorbolts num num anchorboltsotherthanhighstrength num num framesgratesandcovers num section num signs and traffic devices num num sheetaluminumforsignpanels num num aluminumalloychannelsandtubing num num retroreflectors num num retroreflectivesheeting num num metaldelineatorposts num num roadwaysignsupports num num overheadsignsupports num num boltsandfasteners num num plywoodsignpanelsandbarricades num num treatedtimbersignposts num section num structural timber and lumber num num structuraltimberandlumber num section num mailbox posts and mounting hardware num num mailboxpostandmountinghardware num section num grout num num grout num num epoxyresingrout num xv table of contents section title page section num hydrated lime num num general num num soilstabilization num num antistrippingadditiveforplantmixpavement num section num geocell num num geocell num section num rockfall mesh num num wiremesh num num lacingandfasteners num num anchors num num grout num num topsupportwirerope num num hardware num index num division num general provisions num section num definitions and terms num active voice and imperative mood the wyoming department of transportation has rewritten this edition of standard specifications for road and bridge construction with an emphasis on the active voice .
in a sentence written in the active voice someone acts on something .
for example the engineer will take a sample .
a similar sentence in the passive voicea sample will be takenwould be unclear about who was responsible for taking the sample .
this edition of standard specifications also makes use of the imperative mood .
the imperative mood is used when the party issuing an instruction and the party receiving it are already understood .
in standard specifications the department is stating its requirements or directions for work to the contractor such statements have the same force as if they contained the word shall .
in an imperative sentence such as pour the concrete the department is indicating that it requires the contractor to pour the concrete .
before the award of a contract imperative statements are directed to the bidder .
after a contract has been awarded imperatives are directed to the contractor .
the department will identify parties other than the bidder or contractor to whom it gives a responsibility in standard specifications .
in phrasings where the responsible party has already been clearly identified or in factual statements when it is not important to do so the department may use the passive voice .
num organization of specifications num general with the exception of division num general provisions division num materials and section num electrical devices the sections of standard specifications are written in a fivepart format .
each section contains the following primary subsections xxx.num description xxx.num materials xxx.num equipment xxx.num construction xxx.num measurement and payment num num num num definitions and terms num num the subsections contain varying numbers of titled subsubsections composed of higher and lower levels as in an outline .
for example the equipment portion of section num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements includes the following num equipment num milling num crushing num mixing plant num general num .
cold feed control system .
. . num .
control unit .
. . num batch plants num drum plants num hauling equipment num hierarchy of organization the requirements of a subsection apply to subordinate subsections .
in addition and as shown at subsection num mixing plant in the example many subsections begin with a lowerlevel subsection called general .
the requirements of general subsections apply to the associated samelevel subsections that follow .
for example the requirements of subsection num mixing plant general which includes requirements about cold feed control and control units apply to subsections num batch plants and num drum plants .
they do not apply to the higherlevel subsection num hauling equipment .
num titles or headings and references the titles or headings of sections and subsections are for convenience and do not bear on the meaning of the text .
technical specifications and other documents referenced in the contract refers to the edition in effect at the time of award of the contract unless otherwise specified .
lower levels of subsection num mixing plant num num num num definitions and terms num num num measurement units inchpound u.s .
customary versus international system si or metric standard specifications shows sizes and measurements in both inchpound u.s .
customary and international si or metric system units .
inchpound units appear first followed by a metric counterpart inside square brackets .
when reading standard specifications use the system of measurements used by the department for the bid items on its proposal form enum .
do not mathematically convert the units from one system of measure to another the department does not intend its measurement values to be equivalent and does not consider values interchangeable .
num abbreviations signs and symbols acronyms and abbreviations in standard specifications represent the full text shown in table num acronyms and abbreviations used .
table num acronyms and abbreviations used num num definitions and terms num acronym or short form full name or meaning aadt annual average daily traffic ac alternating current a.m. ante meridiem before noon aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute ada americans with disabilities act agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aisi american iron and steel institute num num num definitions and terms table num acronyms and abbreviations used continued acronym or short form full name or meaning aitc american institute of timber construction ansi american national standards institute aosa association of official seed analysts arema american railway engineering and maintenance ofway association artba american road and transportation builders association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association awg american wire gauge awpa american woodpreservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association blm bureau of land management cfr code of federal regulations cmp corrugated metal pipe cms changeable message sign cpm critical path method crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute cr corrosion resistance csp corrugated steel pipe dbe disadvantaged business enterprise num table num acronyms and abbreviations used continued num definitions and terms acronym or short form full name or meaning dms dynamic message sign dsr dynamic shear rheometer ebl eastbound lane ebs electronic bidding system eei edison electric institute eia electronic industries alliance epa environmental protection agency esal equivalent single axle load f nc specified compressive strength of concrete fcc federal communications commission fe flared end fhwa federal highway administration ftms federal test method standard hercp horizontal elliptical reinforced concrete pipe hid high intensity discharge icea insulated cable engineers association id inside diameter ieee institute of electrical and electronics engineers iesna illuminating engineering society of north america imsa international municipal signal association issa international slurry surfacing association ite institute of transportation engineers its intelligent transportation system num num definitions and terms table num acronyms and abbreviations used continued acronym or short form full name or meaning jmf job mix formula lar los angeles abrasion resistance or la abrasion led light emitting diode ll liquid limit mil military specification ms military standard mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nbl northbound lane nchrp national cooperative highway research project nec national electrical code as approved by ansi and nfpa nema national electric manufacturers association nfpa national fire protection association nist national institute of standards and technology no .
number nos .
numbers noaa national oceanic and atmospheric administration np nonplastic npdes national pollution discharge elimination system od outside diameter ohw ordinary high water osha occupational safety and health administration p.m. post meridiem after noon pams polyalphamethyl styrene num table num acronyms and abbreviations used continued num definitions and terms acronym or short form full name or meaning pav pressure aging vessel pci precastprestressed concrete institute pe polyethylene pgab performance graded asphalt binder pls pure live seed ptc positive temperature coefficient pvc polyvinyl chloride rap reclaimed asphalt pavement rc reinforced concrete rcp reinforced concrete pipe rpccp reclaimed portland cement concrete pavement rsc rigid galvanized steel conduit rtfo rolling thin film oven sae society of automotive engineers sbl southbound lane se service entrance si international system of units metric system sme steel mitered end sspc society for protective coatings tappi technical association of the pulp and paper industry tbc timebased coordination tcd traffic control device u.s. united states ubc uniform building code num num definitions and terms table num acronyms and abbreviations used continued acronym or short form full name or meaning uf wire insulationunderground feeder ul underwriters laboratories inc. uv ultraviolet use wire insulationunderground service entrance vh vertical units to horizontal units ratio vac voltagealternating current vecp value engineering contractor proposal vma voids in mineral aggregate voc volatile organic compounds wbl westbound lane wca wyoming contractors association wclib west coast lumber inspection bureau wda wyoming department of agriculture wdeq wyoming department of environmental quality wpsc wyoming public service commission wpwc wyoming public works council w.s .
wyoming statute wshpo wyoming state historic preservation office wwpa western wood products association wybet wyoming box beam end terminal wydot wyoming department of transportation xhhw wire insulationmoisture and heat resistant wet and dry locations crosslinked polyethylene num table num unit symbols for bid and pay items provides a list of symbols for units used in quantifying bid and pay items .
for specifying sizes dimensions and similar physical properties the department will use the symbols for units of measure as shown in table num measurement symbols .
table num measurement symbols num num definitions and terms inchpound units u.s .
customary system kind of quantity or measurement si international system unitsmetric symbol unit name unit name symbol mil mil num inch length micrometer µm in inch millimeter mm ft foot yd yard meter m mi mile kilometer km innum square inch area ftnum square foot ydnum square yard square meter mnum minum square mile square kilometer kmnum acre acre fl oz fluid ounce volume milliliter ml pt pint qt quart gal gallon liter l innum cubic inch cubic meter mnum ftnum cubic foot ydnum cubic yard num num definitions and terms table num measurement symbols continued inchpound units u.s .
customary system kind of quantity or measurement si international system unitsmetric symbol unit name unit name symbol oz ounce weight mass gram g lb pound kilogram kg ton ton short num lb metric ton t f degree fahrenheit temperature degree celsius c s second time second s min minute minute min h hour hour h d day day d mph miles per hour speed kilometers per hour kmh psi pounds per square inch pressure pascal pa kilopascal kpa megapascal mpa num table num measurement symbols continued num definitions and terms inchpound units u.s .
customary system kind of quantity or measurement si international system unitsmetric symbol unit name unit name symbol w watt power energy and electrical watt w kw kilowatt kilowatt kw a ampere ampere a v volt volt v va voltampere voltampere va s ohm ohm s hz hertz hertz hz j joule joule j lm lumen lumen lm fc footcandle lux lx candela cd hp horsepower lbf poundforce force newton n kip numpounds force kilonewton kn viscosity dynamic pascal second pas ku krebs unit centipoise cp poise p num table num measurement symbols continued num num definitions and terms standard specifications uses mathematical and other signs and symbols with meanings in accordance with table num mathematical and other signs and symbols used .
inchpound units u.s .
customary system kind of quantity or measurement si international system unitsmetric symbol unit name unit name symbol cst centistokes viscosity kinematic meter squared per second mnums st stokes gpm gallons per minute flow liters per second ls num table num mathematical and other signs and symbols used num definitions and terms symbol meaning plus minus plus or minus equal to less than less than or equal to greater than greater than or equal to multiplied by dimensional indicator arithmetic mean or average per percent µ num micro degree as a unit of angular measurement ω ohm ratio proportionality u.s. dollar num num definitions and terms num definitions accept acceptance .
unless otherwise explicitly stated these words refer to the resident engineers acceptance of work or materials for the purpose of initiating a monthly progress payment or payments to the contractor .
authority to grant final acceptance of the completed project and to transfer responsibility for the work to the department belongs to the district engineer in accordance with subsection num final acceptance .
addendum .
see contract .
adverse weather day .
a day that num .
weather precludes five or more hours of work on the controlling activity or activities num .
the contractor has a workforce on the project attempting to work on the controlling activity or activities and num .
would otherwise be a working day .
advertisement .
the public announcement inviting bids for work or furnishing materials .
also called an invitation for bids the advertisement describes briefly the work or materials and gives information on the availability of bid packages and the time and place of the opening of bids .
agreement .
see contract .
annual average daily traffic .
the average mean daily traffic averaged over a full year as computed by the department .
award .
the acceptance of a bid by the commission .
award date .
the date as shown on the first line of the contract form enuma on which the commission accepts the contractors bid to undertake the project .
base course .
see pavement structure .
num bid .
the executed and submitted offer of a bidder to perform the work specified in a department proposal form enum at the prices quoted .
bid bond .
the security executed by the bidder and surety or sureties and given to the department in the amount of num percent of the bid to guaranty execution of the contract .
bidder .
a person or business submitting a bid in response to a department proposal form enum .
bid envelope .
the preaddressed individually labeled envelopes prepared by the department .
available only to prequalified bidders approved to bid on a specific advertised project and solely for the purpose of submitting a bid .
bridge .
a structure and supports spanning and providing passage over a gap or obstacle and having a length greater than num ft num m as measured along the centerline between the abutments front faces or the extreme ends of openings for multiple culverts and including the widths of intervening piers or division walls .
calendar day .
a day on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
clear zone .
a traversable and hazardfree portion of the roadside of the width specified .
commercial source .
an established lawful business operating at the time of bid opening as a source to the general public of materials or products relevant to the project .
commission .
transportation commission of wyoming as constituted for the governance of the department of transportation under the laws of the state of wyoming .
construction limits .
locations designated by and in which the department will allow construction activity or disturbance and includes the following as approved by the engineer num .
from the beginning to the ending stations of the project between the slope stakes num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms num .
area within the defined boundaries of a construction permits num .
material sources num .
designated haul roads num .
plant sites num .
staging areas num .
stockpiling sites and num .
other locations approved by the engineer .
construction permit .
a permit giving the department the restricted right to use property for construction purposes outside the highway rightofway .
contract .
the collection of documents that together form the agreement between the contractor and the commission or department and sets forth the obligations of each party .
the contract includes num .
the proposal package .
a group of documents made available to a bidder .
these become part of the contract upon award of the project and execution of the contract form enuma and include the following num .
proposal form enum as returned and submitted by the contractor and containing the contractors bid .
the proposal includes or states num .
the location and description of the project num .
the bid items and estimated quantities listed together on the schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited num .
the completion date num .
the amount of the bid bond num num .
the date time and place of the opening of bids num .
certification of registration with the wyoming secretary of state num .
certification of suspension or debarment num .
certification of free competitive bidding for federal projects or noncollusive bidding for state projects num .
certification of previous eeo performance for federal projects num .
certification of lobbying activities for federal aid contracts for federal projects num .
certification of disadvantaged business enterprise participation for federal projects and num .
certification of nondiscrimination .
num .
performance bond form enum .
the departments approved form of security provided by the contractor and the contractors surety or sureties and guaranteeing performance of the work specified and the payment of all related debts .
num .
agreements .
binding documents between the department and third parties that pertain to the use of water materials or other resources and apply to the project .
num .
supplementary documents .
any document in the bid package generically titled supplementary document for a specific purpose .
num .
contract provisions .
provisions required on federal aid contracts .
num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms num .
specifications .
the collection of provisions and requirements for performing the work in a contract including num .
special provisions .
revisions to the standard and supplementary specifications that apply to a single project .
num .
supplementary specifications .
revisions to the standard specifications .
num .
standard specifications .
the current edition of this book standard specifications .
standard specifications are approved for general repeated use .
num .
plans .
the approved drawings or exact reproductions showing the locations character dimensions and details of the project .
as appropriate plans include num .
plan and profile sheets .
sheets showing the alignment of the centerline the profile of the existing and proposed terrain on that centerline and other project information .
num .
typical sections .
a section showing the slope criteria for the roadway cutandfill slopes the crown or crossslope of the finished roadway the lanes and shoulder widths the thicknesses and tapers for the surfacing courses the position of the profile grade line and the clear zone .
num .
summary sheets .
sheets indicating the general notes materials and rates information and quantities and locations for pay items included in the contract .
num .
project specific supplemental details and sheets .
details that supplement the plan and profile sheets and provide material earthwork or other project specific information .
num num .
general crosssections and earthwork .
sections that indicate the existing and proposed terrain at intervals along the centerline and are used to determine the excavation and embankment requirements .
the areas developed from the crosssection and the length of the intervals between sections are used to calculate earthwork volumes .
num .
soils profile .
a plot of the proposed gradeline and existing groundline with test holes samples and laboratory data including related recommendations from the geology and materials programs or consultants and the field engineer .
num .
standard plans .
drawings of objects features details or similar elements used commonly by the department .
applicable standard plans are included in the bid package for a project .
num .
electronic cadd files .
files in native microstation and geopak format used by the department .
files may be version specific .
the department will not perform conversions to other formats and will not provide microstation and geopak support .
as appropriate electronic cadd files may include num .
project coordinate geometry cogo database .gpk .
num .
design mainline cross sections _xsd.dgn .
num .
addenda .
contract revisions issued after advertisement and before the opening of bids .
num .
contract form enuma .
the signed or executed document that legally binds the contractor and commission or department .
num .
notice to proceed .
written authorization from the department num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms to the contractor to start work on the project .
num .
working drawings .
drawings diagrams illustrations schedules calculations or other supplemental forms of information for physical items permanently incorporated in the project that the department requires the contractor to submit for approval .
num .
contract amendment form enum .
a written change to the contract .
contract amendment form enum .
see contract .
contract amount .
the original amount bid by the contractor shown as the bid total on the schedule of items in the proposal form enum .
contract completion date .
the calendar date specified on the contract form enuma for completing the work .
contract time .
begins num calendar days after the award date and consists of the number of calendar days up to and including the contract completion date .
contractor a .
any person or business holding prequalification status and bidding or eligible to bid on a department proposal form enum .
contractor the .
the person or business with whom the commission or department enters into agreement through a binding contract for performance of the specified work .
controlling activity .
see critical path .
critical activity .
see critical path .
critical path .
the longest continuous sequence of work for which the combined duration of the works individual scheduled activities produces the minimum overall project duration .
activities on the critical path control the projects completion and appear in two forms num .
critical activity .
any activity on the critical path .
num num .
controlling activity .
a critical activity that would normally be in progress at a given moment .
culvert .
a structure other than a bridge that creates a transverse opening under a roadway or embankment for drainage or similar purposes .
department .
the wyoming department of transportation as constituted under the laws of the state of wyoming .
director superintendent .
the director of the department .
electronic bidding system ebs .
the departments computerized system for the receipt and tabulation of bids .
engineer .
the chief engineer of the department acting directly or through any of several authorized representatives such as a district or resident engineer the project supervisor or various inspectors .
responsibility for engineering and administrative supervision of the project resides with the engineer .
extra work .
work within the intended scope of the contract but beyond or varying from that originally provided for and that the department later finds essential for satisfactory completion of the project .
extension in bid or pay items .
the arithmetic product of a bid or pay items quantity multiplied by the unit bid price .
force account .
a method of payment for work performed by the contractor at the engineers direction calculated in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
gauge .
u.s. standard gauge as defined in num u.s. code section num when referring to sheet iron and plate steel .
galvanized sheet gauge when referring to zinc coated sheets .
american wire gauge awg when referring to nonferrous wire .
most commonly used in specifying copper and aluminum conductors .
awg is sometimes known as brown and sharpe bs wire gauge .
geology program .
the departments geology program .
highway street road .
interchangeable general terms denoting a public num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms way used for vehicular travel .
includes the entire area within the rightofway .
holidays .
holidays recognized by the state of wyoming are numst day of january new years day numrd monday of january martin luther king jr.wyoming equality day numrd monday in february presidents day last monday in may memorial day numth day of july independence day numst monday in september labor day numth day in november veterans day numth thursday in november thanksgiving day numth day in december christmas day other days declared by the governor for holidays that fall on a saturday both the saturday and the preceding friday are considered legal holidays .
for a holiday that falls on a sunday both the sunday and the following monday are considered legal holidays .
inspector .
a representative of the engineer authorized to make detailed inspections of the materials provided and the work performed .
international system of units si .
the metric system of measurement .
laboratory .
the departments materials program laboratory in cheyenne or any other testing laboratory designated by the engineer to test soils work and materials .
lift .
a single continuous layer of soils aggregate or plant mix pavement to which the same compactive effort is applied during placement .
liquidated damages .
monetary damages paid at a specified rate by the contractor to the department for work not completed by completion dates or within specified time frames .
lump sum pay item .
a nondivisible whole unit comprising everything num necessary to complete the item as specified and which the department will measure and pay for as a whole .
major pay item .
a pay item for which the original contract cost is both num .
greater than num percent of the contract amount and num .
greater than num .
materials .
all components required for construction of the project .
materials program .
the departments materials program .
materials testing manual .
the edition of the departments materials testing manual in effect at the time of the public opening of bids .
issued by the department and providing such information as the rationale scope and methods for assessing the conformance of work and materials to contract requirements .
median .
the interior of a divided highway or street including the inside shoulders .
monthly progress payment .
scheduled partial payments made by the department to the contractor as the work progresses .
payments are based on the engineers estimate of the value of the work performed during the pay period .
neat lines .
the horizontal and vertical lines established in the contract to describe the locations shapes and borders of planned activities such as excavation or backfilling .
when specified neat lines also define limits for calculating pay item quantities .
notice to proceed .
see contract .
overburden .
the surface layer atop material suitable for road or bridge construction excluding topsoil .
own organization .
the workers employed and paid directly by the contractor and equipment owned or rented by the contractor with num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms or without operators does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor assignee or agent of the contractor .
pavement structure .
the layers of specified materials placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed including any combination of num .
subbase .
the layers placed on the subgrade to support the base course .
num .
base course .
the layers placed on the subbase or subgrade to support the surface course .
num .
surface course .
the uppermost layers designed to resist skidding traffic abrasion and weathering .
pay item .
a described item of work for which a unit price is included in the contract .
performance bond .
see contract .
plans .
see contract .
professional engineer .
a person registered and authorized to practice in one or more branches of engineering by the wyoming state board of registration for professional engineers and professional land surveyors .
when the expertise of a particular branch of engineering is specified civil engineering for example the department requires registration in that discipline .
professional land surveyor .
a person registered and authorized to practice land surveying by the wyoming state board of registration for professional engineers and professional land surveyors .
profile grade .
the trace either elevation or gradient according to context of a vertical plane intersecting a roadway surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
proposal form enum .
see contract .
num proposal package .
see contract .
responsive bid .
a bid that meets all requirements of the proposal package .
rightofway .
a general term denoting land property or interest acquired for or devoted to highway purposes .
road .
see highway street road .
roadbed .
the graded portion of highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure .
roadside .
a general term denoting the area between the outside shoulder edge and the rightofway limits .
roadway .
the portion of a highway within the construction limits .
royalty .
payment to a rights holder for permission to withdraw use or exploit a natural resource .
shoulder .
the portion of the roadway next to the traveled way .
provided for stopped vehicles emergency use and lateral support of the base and surface courses .
sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for use by pedestrians .
special provisions .
see contract .
specialty item .
a uniquely designated pay item requiring specialized knowledge craftsmanship or equipment not usually available within the organizations of prequalified contractors .
usually not a major pay item specialty items are excluded from computations to determine allowable subcontracting percentages .
specified or as specified .
used to refer to a requirement of the contract .
as specified can be read to mean as specified in the contract which in turn means any document defined as belonging to the contract .
num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms specifications .
see contract .
split sample .
two or three samples that represent the same material .
obtain these samples by reducing one large sample or by taking adjacent samples .
standard plans .
see contract .
standard specifications .
see contract .
state .
the state of wyoming acting through an authorized representative .
station .
num linear feet num kilometer measured horizontally .
street .
see highway street road .
stripping material .
see overburden .
subbase .
see pavement structure .
subcontractor .
a person or business to whom the contractor sublets part of the contract .
subgrade .
the top of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are built .
substantial completion .
the project is complete such that it can be safely and effectively used by the public without further delays disruption or other impediments and only clean up and work of a minor nature as agreed to by the engineer remains to be finished .
substructure .
the lower portions of a bridge generally below the bearings or skewbacks of arches which transmit the total weight mass of the bridge applied live loads vehicular pedestrian or both and other forces to the supporting bedrock or soil foundation .
superintendent .
the contractors representative in charge of the work .
superstructure .
the portion of a bridge above the substructure .
num supplementary document .
see contract .
supplementary specification .
see contract .
surety .
a person or business bound with the contractor to ensure the satisfactory fulfillment of the contract and of the contractors financial and legal obligations .
surface course .
see pavement structure .
survey manual .
the edition of the departments survey manual in effect at the time of the public opening of bids .
establishes survey methods and accuracy requirements .
traveled way .
the portion of the highway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
unit bid price .
the price bid for one unit of a bid item on a submitted proposal form enum including reasonable estimated costs for labor materials and equipment plus reasonable proportionate shares of anticipated profit overhead and indirect costs .
value engineering contractor proposal vecp .
a creative proposal initiated by the contractor to amend the contract so as to use an alternate method design material or similar element and thereby reduce the projects cost or improve its outcome for both the departments and contractors benefit .
volumetric measurements .
measurements made by the department for calculating quantities of items paid by volume .
the department may use any of the following methods num .
average end area num .
neat lines num .
digital terrain modeling including surface to surface measurement or num .
other method mutually agreed to between the engineer and num definitions and terms num num definitions and terms the contractor .
work .
the elements and activities necessary to complete a project including labor materials equipment and the interim products and stages attained in the course of reaching completion .
working day .
a calendar day on which conditions within the contractors control allow or would allow work on the controlling activities for at least five hours with a workforce consistent in size and type for the work to be performed .
saturdays are working days if the contractor chooses to work .
sundays and holidays are working days if the engineer allows the contractor to work .
days in december january february and march are not working days even if the engineer allows the contractor to work and the contractor so chooses .
working drawings .
see contract .
num section num bidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders information and forms to apply for prequalification are contained in the standard prequalification questionnaire and financial statement for bidders form pqnum which is available on the departments web site or from prequalification officer wyoming department of transportation state construction office num bishop boulevard cheyenne wy num phone num num return completed and notarized applications to the same address .
num proposal package on request the department will provide proposal packages and addenda for advertised projects .
the proposal package includes the documents as defined in subsection num definitions .
anyone may purchase a package without a bid envelope upon payment to the department of the amount stated in the invitation for bids .
num bid envelope and electronic bid system device the department will issue a bid envelope and an electronic bid system ebs device that enables submission of a bid to contractors prequalified for a given project .
the department will not issue a bid envelope or device to contractors who have not first submitted a current work affidavit form enum or whose prequalification status has expired .
the department may also refuse to issue a bid envelope and device to contractors for any of the following reasons num .
the work classification for which the bidder is prequalified does not include the types of work constituting the major portion of the contract .
num .
an outstanding commitment to uncompleted work that in the judgment of the department could prevent the timely completion of new work .
num bidding requirements and conditions num num num num num num num bidding requirements and conditions num .
failure to pay or satisfactorily settle any claim on record with the department .
num .
default under previous department contracts .
num .
nonpayment for a period longer than num calendar days of monies due the department .
num .
failure to perform at least num percent of the work with their own organization .
num interpretation of quantities in the proposal the bid item quantities included in the proposal package are approximate and prepared solely for the comparison of bids .
without invalidating bid prices the department may change quantities or eliminate pay items .
num examination of documents and work site num general before submitting a bid the department expects contractors to examine sites and routes related to the work as well as contract documents and those documents cited in the proposal package and addenda .
the department considers submission of a bid conclusive evidence that the bidder has made such examination and is aware of and satisfied as to site conditions and project requirements .
the department is not bound by oral interpretations of this information by its employees .
num subsurface conditions the department makes no guarantees regarding the character or extent of utilities water levels soil rock or other subsurface conditions the bidder may encounter during the work .
the department interpolates test data from completed borings in its reports and representations of subsurface conditions and does not guarantee the accuracy of these interpolations nor does the department guarantee the accuracy of the test data itself except at the exact points where samples were taken .
num num num num the department requires bidders to make their own evaluation of subsurface conditions and to determine how these conditions may affect the methods and cost of construction .
the department will not consider claims for damages or other compensation should the scope or progress of the work differ from those anticipated by the contractor .
material quality within sources naturally varies so expect this .
num bid item numbers the department identifies each bid item listed on the proposal form enum by a joint numeric code and descriptive name .
the first three digits in the numeric code indicate the principal section in standard specifications or the principal division in special provisions or supplementary specifications containing requirements for the items use provision or installation .
num nominal dimensions in the proposal form enum the department specifies standard manufactured items such as fence wire timber pipe etc .
by the nominal units of measure or means of identification conventional within an industry .
num preparation of bids num general the department will accept for consideration only those bids for whichbefore the advertised time of bid openingit has received a bid envelope containing the following num .
the completed proposal form enum on both the ebs device and ebsgenerated paper printout .
num .
a notarized signature on the paper printout from one of the following num .
the owner of the company num .
an officer of the company as recorded on the standard prequalification questionnaire and financial statement for bidders form pqnum or num num num num bidding requirements and conditions num num num num bidding requirements and conditions num .
someone for whom in writing authorization has been requested by an officer of the company and approved by the departments contracts and estimates engineer .
num .
electronic bid bond documentation .
num electronic bid system num general the department uses an electronic bid system ebs and requires bidders to prepare and submit bids using this same software .
the ebs can be downloaded from the wydot web site .
num multiple proposals on a device the bid device will contain proposals for every project in a letting .
a contractor may bid on every project for which he or she has received a bid envelope .
the department will provide a labeled device envelope .
the label is used to indicate the name of the bidder and the call orders for which bids are being submitted .
the department will charge a fee of num to bidders who submit a bid envelope and ebsgenerated paper bid but no bid device with the corresponding electronic proposal form enum and bid data .
the department requires contractors submitting multiple bids at a letting to submit their multiple electronic proposals on a single device .
num addenda the department will send an email message for updating the bid documents whenever it issues an addendum modifying the proposal form enum .
if multiple addenda are sent for a project the department is not responsible for ensuring that the updates are applied in order .
acknowledge all addenda within the ebs program .
num format for paper printouts in addition to storing data on a device the ebs software will generate the proposal form enum with the contractors bid incorporated in the printout .
print and submit the printout on standard office paper num in num in num mm num mm width by height .
use black ink dark enough to allow reproduction .
num num num num num discrepancy between device data and printout bid information on the printed proposal form enum takes precedence over that on the bid device in the event of a discrepancy .
a bid may be changed on the paper printout if initialed in ink by an authorized representative .
num handwritten bid submissions the department will not accept a handwritten bid .
num irregular bids the department will not consider or publicly read bids with an improper or missing signature or notarization on the proposal form enum or bids that lack printed numerical values .
the department will publicly read at the bid opening but may reject bids with any of the following irregularities num .
ambiguity as to any part of a bid .
num .
a missing unit bid price or extension .
num .
alteration deletion loss or substitution of any page or part of the proposal form enum or the addition or attachment of conditional provisions .
num .
an erasure or change in a unit bid price not initialed in ink by the bidder .
num .
the presence of any unit bid price that generates reasonable doubt that award to that bidder would result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
num .
a nonmatching check digit on any page of the proposal form enum .
num .
an improper electronic bid bond or lack of a cashiers check payable to the transportation commission of wyoming and in the amount of num percent of the bid .
num num num num num bidding requirements and conditions num num bidding requirements and conditions num delivery of bids the department will only accept for consideration bids submitted in the departmentissued bid envelope affixed with the original label indicating to whom the envelope was issued and for what project .
however delivered the bid opening official will stamp bids with the time and date of receipt as indicated by the departments designated official clock .
the department will only accept for consideration those bids received before the time and at the place advertised in the invitation for bids .
bids not meeting these criteria will be returned unopened .
num withdrawal or revision of bids at no time will the department or its employees revise a bid for a contractor .
provided the request is made in writing and received before the advertised time of bid opening bidders may withdraw or revise an already submitted bid .
bidders may not withdraw submitted bids between the advertised time of opening and the completed reading of bids for the first project in the letting .
after the completed reading for each project bidders may in writing withdraw unread bids for other projects .
withdrawal of a bid is irrevocable regardless of the reason for the withdrawal .
num combination proposals the department may issue proposals and will consider bids for projects in combination or separately .
on such projects the department reserves the right to make awards in combination or separately to its advantage .
the department will not consider combination or separate bids on proposals not so specified .
num public opening of bids the department will open and publicly read bids at the time and place stated in the advertisement .
num disqualification of bidders the commission may reject bids disqualify bidders from future bidding until reinstated or both upon evidence of any the following num num num num num num num num num .
submission from the same person firm or corporation under the same or different names of multiple bids for the same work or evidence that one bidder has a financial interest in the firm of another bidder for the same work .
num .
collusion among bidders .
num .
declaration of the bidders default on a department contract .
num .
determination that the bidder has made fraudulent statements on the standard prequalification questionnaire and financial statement for bidders form pqnum .
num .
past or present disbarment disqualification or restriction from bidding by another government agency .
num .
an attempt successful or not to influence department policy through gratuities or gifts to or the employment of department personnel .
num .
demonstrated inability to meet contract requirements .
num bidding requirements and conditions num num award and execution of contract section num award and execution of contract num consideration of bids after the public reading the commission will compare bids on the basis of each bids summed extensions .
results will be immediately available to the public .
the commission will give precedence to the unit bid price in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions .
the commission reserves the right to reject any or all bids to waive bid irregularities or to readvertise for new bids .
num award of contract num general within num calendar days of the bid opening the commission will do one of the following num .
award the contract to the qualified bidder making the lowest responsive bid that complies with all requirements num .
award the contract conditionally when there are conditions requiring clearance before an outright award can be made or num .
reject all bids .
bids may be withdrawn without penalty if the department does not act within num calendar days of the bid opening .
num conditional awards if an award is conditional and the bidder is responsible for clearance the award date is the date of the conditional award .
if an award is conditional and the department is responsible for clearance the award date is the date the condition is cleared and the award is made .
if the department does not obtain clearance within num calendar days of the conditional award the bidder may withdraw the bid without penalty .
num num num num num num num num notification by letter mailed to the address on the submitted bid the commission will notify the apparent low bidder of one of the following num .
award of the contract num .
conditional award of the contract with a statement of conditions num .
rejection of the bid as unresponsive or num .
rejection of all bids .
num cancellation of award the commission reserves the right to cancel an award before execution of the contract without liability .
num return of bid bonds the department will return all bid bonds after its receipt of a satisfactory performance bond and execution of the contract .
num performance bond num general when the contract is executed the department will require the successful bidder to provide a performance bond in a sum equal to the full amount of the contract .
obtain the bond on the departmentprovided performance bond form enum .
num measurement and payment include the cost of the performance bond in the mobilization item .
at the preconstruction conference provide the engineer with a statement from the surety indicating the cost of the bond based on the rate schedule and contract amount and a rate schedule from the surety indicating how the performance bond will be adjusted based on the final contract cost .
using the suretys rate schedule the department will adjust the cost of the pay item for the performance bond when the difference between the final contract num num num award and execution of contract num num num num num num num num num award and execution of contract amount and the bid total from the submitted proposal form enum represents a percentage change greater than shown in table num performance bond adjustment .
table num performance bond adjustment bid total change in final contract amount without adjustment in bond cost num num num to num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest mobilization ls ls ls the department will pay for performance bond as follows the engineer will make performance bond adjustments using item num adjustment of performance bond .
num execution and approval of contract the department will send the successful bidder three copies each of the contract form enuma and the performance bond form enum .
sign and return each copy of each document .
file a certificate of insurance with the departments contracts and estimates program verifying that insurance coverage has been obtained for commercial general liability insurance umbrellaexcess liability insurance business automobile liability insurance and payment of premium and notice of revocation in accordance with subsection num contractors insurance requirements .
the department will not execute the contract until it has received num num num the certificate and approved the insurance .
approval does not limit or affect the contractors liability .
bidders may withdraw their bid without penalty if the department fails to execute the contract within num calendar days of receiving the signed documents and certificates of insurance .
contracts are not effective until executed by all parties .
num bidders failure to execute contract if the bidder fails to sign and return all copies of all required documents within num calendar days of the award date the department may cancel the award .
such failure is also cause for forfeiture of the bid bond for liquidation of damages sustained by the department .
the department may then award the contract to the qualified bidder making the next lowest responsive bid or readvertise the project .
num document and data retention keep from the time of bid preparation through final acceptance of the project and for at least three years afterwards records of all information involving project costs and related business documents .
such data and documents include but are not limited to records pertaining to bid preparation overhead payroll payments to suppliers and subcontractors equipment lease agreements and lease agreement payments .
maintain the records in an organized manner conducive to review and audit by the department .
if a contract dispute arises and remains unresolved for more than three years after final acceptance keep the records until the dispute is resolved .
actual cost documentation is required to substantiate all claims .
the department will not accept estimates averages etc .
num num num num award and execution of contract num num num num num num num scope of work section num scope of work num intent of contract the intent of the contract is to state the roles and obligations of the department and the contractor .
num voluntary partnering the department seeks to encourage a cooperative partnership with the contractor and its principal subcontractors and suppliers .
this partnership should draw on the strengths of each organization to identify and achieve mutual goals .
its objectives are effective and efficient contract performance .
partnerships are voluntary with each participant considered the equal of the other .
participants will agree to and share equally the costs associated with partnering meetings .
before the preconstruction conference specified in subsection num preconstruction conference the contractors management personnel and the engineer should plan and hold a workshop to initiate the partnership and agree on a charter .
the engineer the contractors on site project manager and key project personnel from all parties including subcontractors and suppliers are encouraged to attend .
followup workshops may be held as agreed to by the contractor and the department .
the establishment of a partnership charter does not change the legal relationship of the parties or relieve either from any terms of the contract .
num contract amendments num general the department reserves the right to amend the contract at any time .
amendments do not invalidate the contract or release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as amended .
the department will implement contract amendments by issuing a contract amendment form enum .
do not begin any amended work until the engineer provides authorization or the contract amendment is signed .
num num the department will consider requests from the contractor for an amendment to the contract amount or time only when the engineer is notified in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification .
the department will pay for amendments at contract unit bid prices unless the contractors cost of production or the character of the work is materially changed in which case the department may adjust the contract as specified in subsection num extra and force account work .
the department will not pay for lost or anticipated profits resulting from an amendment to the contract .
num differing site conditions before the conditions are disturbed or the affected work performed or continued notify the engineer in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification if either of the following are encountered num .
latent physical conditions that differ materially from those indicated in the contract or num .
unusual physical conditions that differ materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract .
the department will not grant or consider contract amendments based on differing site conditions if it does not receive timely written notice in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification .
num engineerordered suspensions the engineer may suspend all or part of the work .
if a contract amendment appears warranted because of a suspension that is unreasonably long not anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry notify the engineer in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification .
the department will not grant or consider contract amendments based on an engineerordered suspension num .
without timely written notice in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification num num num num num num scope of work num num num num num num num scope of work num .
to the extent that the suspension is overlapped by or falls within a suspension or delay due to any other cause including delays caused by the contractor num .
for which an amendment is already addressed by another contract requirement or num .
that include profit .
num significant changes in the character of work the engineer may alter contract quantities the work or both as necessary to complete the project .
the department will make appropriate amendments to the contract if such alterations significantly change the character of the work .
before performing significantly changed work reach agreement with the department concerning the basis for the amendment as specified in subsection num extra and force account work and subsection num extension to the contract completion date .
if the department disagrees as to whether an alteration constitutes a significant change use the notification procedures specified in subsection num contractorengineer notification .
if alterations do not significantly change the character of the work specified in the contract the department will pay for the altered work at the contract unit price .
either of the following constitutes a significant change num .
when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that specified in the contract or num .
when the original quantity as specified in the proposal form enum of a major pay item is changed by more than num percent in which case the department will adjust unit prices in accordance with the following num .
in the case of an increase adjustment in the unit price applies only to the portion greater than num percent of the original quantity .
num .
in the case of a decrease to less than num percent of the original quantity adjustment applies only to the actual quantities used .
the department will not pay a total for the item that exceeds num percent of the original extension .
num num extra work when necessary or desirable to complete the project the engineer may direct the contractor to perform unforeseen work for which there is no pay item or unit price in the contract .
the department will pay for such work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work based on an approved contract amendment form enum .
num exception the department will not consider any condition at an available source of local materials whether furnished by the department or the contractor as meeting the requirements of subsections num differing site conditions or num significant changes in the character of work .
num contractorengineer notification num general the engineer will consider requests for contract amendments only when the notification procedures in this subsection are followed .
the engineer will not consider requests when these procedures are not followed the specified time limits may only be extended through a written jointly signed agreement between the contractor and the engineer .
throughout the engineer will endeavor to address the underlying issue prompting the notification in a timely and satisfactory manner .
num first notice by contractor notify the engineer verbally as soon as a contract amendment appears necessary .
do not start or continue an activity or item of work for which a contract amendment may be necessary without authorization from the engineer .
num written notice by contractor provide a written notice within five working days of the first notice .
include the following num .
a description of the situation num .
the time and date the situation was first identified num num num num num scope of work num num num num num scope of work num num .
the location of the situation if appropriate num .
a clear explanation of why the situation represents a change to the contract including accurate reference to the pertinent portions of the contract num .
a statement of the amendments deemed necessary in the contract prices delivery schedules phasing time etc .
because of its preliminary nature the department recognizes that this information may rely on estimates num .
an estimate of the time by which the engineer must respond to minimize cost delay or disruption and num .
anything else that will help achieve a timely resolution .
num written acknowledgment by engineer in writing the engineer will acknowledge receipt of the contractors written notice .
num final written response by engineer within ten working days of receiving the contractors written statement the engineer will provide a written response that includes one of the following num .
confirmation of the need for a contract amendment form enum .
num .
denial of the request for a contract amendment in which case the engineer will make clear through reference to the contract why the issue does not represent a change .
num .
a request for additional information in which case the engineer will state clearly what is needed and by when the engineer will issue a final response within ten working days of receiving the additional requested information .
num contractors recourse if the outcome of the request for a contract amendment is unacceptable or the engineers response untimely the contractor may pursue a dispute in accordance with subsection num dispute resolution .
num num value engineering contractor proposals num general the contractor may submit a written value engineering contractor proposal vecp for contract modifications that are likely to benefit the department .
the department encourages vecps for any aspect of a project but reserves the right to reject any submission with or without review .
the department will notify the contractor in writing of its decision to accept or reject a vecp in whole or in part .
this decision is final and not subject to appeal .
vecps apply only to an executed contract .
do not base bid prices on the anticipated approval of a vecp .
if a vecp is rejected complete the contract as bid and specified .
the department will notify the contractor promptly in writing if the response date indicated on a vecp as specified in subsection num submitting a vecp allows insufficient time for review .
the department bears no liability for monetary damages or delays based on a failure to respond by the date indicated on the vecp .
approved or rejected a vecp applies only to the contract referenced .
the department retains the right to use duplicate or disclose in whole or in part any information needed to implement a vecp .
the department also retains the right to use in whole or in part any accepted vecp on other contracts without obligation to the contractor .
the department bears no liability for costs or delays resulting from the rejection of a vecp including but not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits increased material or labor costs .
num preliminary vecp meeting meet with the engineer before formally submitting a vecp to discuss the proposed change and its potential benefits .
num conditions the department may reject any vecp that requires excessive time or cost for review .
the department will use the following conditions to determine if a vecp qualifies for consideration num num num scope of work num num num num num num num scope of work num .
the contract has been executed in accordance with section num award and execution of contract .
num .
the department will not consider vecps that impair essential functions or characteristics of a project including but not limited to service life economy of operation maintenance appearance and safety .
num .
cost reductions resulting from corrections to contract errors identified by the contractor do not qualify for submission as a vecp .
num .
the department will not consider a vecp that is not consistent with the departments design policies and criteria for the contract .
num .
the department will not consider a vecp containing experimental features .
num .
the department will not consider a vecp if the contract contains equivalent options .
num .
the department will only consider a vecp if the likely benefit is sufficient to warrant review and processing .
num .
the department will only consider vecps from the contractor .
the department invites and encourages vecps from sub contractors but will only consider those submitted through the contractor .
num submitting a vecp to submit a vecp give the engineer two copies of the following num .
a cover letter indicating the submission is a vecp .
num .
a description of the difference between the existing contract and the proposed change and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each .
where applicable include effects on service life economy of operations maintenance appearance and safety .
num .
separate cost estimates for the affected parts of the contract including the performance bond with and without the proposed changes .
break the estimates down by pay item numbers and indicate quantity increases or decreases and deleted pay items .
use current department num num pay item names and numbers to identify proposed work not covered by the existing contract .
in preparing the estimates include overhead and profit within each affected pay item .
num .
preliminary drawings and specifications describing the proposed changes .
include an itemization of details sheets design standards and specifications that would require changes or additions if the vecp were adopted .
num .
analyses in sufficient detail to identify and describe features of the contract that would require change if the vecp were adopted .
support design changes with engineeredelements by computations sealed by a professional engineer in the appropriate discipline .
provide a discussion of how these changes can be accomplished and assess their effect on other contract elements .
num .
the date by which a contract amendment form enum adopting the vecp must be executed to obtain the maximum benefit .
num .
a statement detailing the vecps effect on the contract completion date .
num .
a description of previous use or testing of the same or a similar vecp and the circumstances and results .
if submitted on another department project indicate the date project number and the action taken by the department .
num .
when asked in writing provide within ten calendar days of the date of request any additional information needed by the department .
the department will consider the contractors failure to do so as cause for rejection .
num payment the department will use a contract amendment form enum to incorporate changes resulting from an adopted vecp and to authorize payment .
payment will be determined and made as follows num num scope of work num num scope of work num .
as appropriate the department will change pay item quantities add new pay items eliminate pay items or change pay item unit prices as agreed .
num .
the department will pay the contractor num percent of the net savings realized calculated as the difference between the total contract amount with and without the vecp .
num section num control of work num authority of the engineer the engineer will decide all questions regarding the quality and acceptability of materials work rate of progress cooperation between contractors and interpretation and fulfillment of the contract .
the engineer may not pay for work done contrary to the contract or deemed unacceptable .
the engineer may change quantities or eliminate pay items as warranted by the project conditions .
the engineer does not have authority to amend the contract without implementing a contract amendment form enum in accordance with subsection num contract amendments .
the engineer may suspend the work wholly or in part in accordance with subsection num engineerordered suspensions .
num working drawings num general provide and submit to the engineer for approval working drawings in sufficient detail to control and complete the work .
working drawings supplement the contract their approval does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for completion of the work as specified .
the work and costs of preparing and obtaining approval for working drawings is incidental to the related pay items in the contract .
num shop drawings when specified the department requires the contractors fabricator to submit shop drawings .
send drawings to the following address the specified program or engineer title wyoming department of transportation num bishop boulevard cheyenne wy num the department requires shop drawings to show dimensions sizes of materials and other information and data necessary to make and erect the work .
provide num num control of work num num num num num num control of work drawings on paper sized approximately num in num in num mm num mm or num in num in num mm num mm .
review time of shop drawings will be proportional to the complexity of work but in no case will such time be less than num calendar days .
submit two complete sets of advance shop drawings for each structure or fabricated item on the project with any deviation from the contract requirements identified clearly as such .
note any deviation from the contract in the transmittal letter and forward a copy of the letter to the engineer and the contractor .
ensure that each drawing shows the name of the structure if applicable road route station wyoming project number county structure number if applicable and the department drawing number if applicable .
allow num calendar days for the department to review and return each shop plan drawing submittal .
the department will keep one set of the advance shop drawings and return the other with necessary corrections noted .
make the changes indicated clearly identify changes other than those requested by the department and note in the transmittal letter .
return to the department six complete sets of corrected drawings each marked final along with the transmittal letter .
forward a copy of the letter to the engineer and the contractor .
upon review and approval by the department final shop drawings become part of the contract the department will mark the drawings as approved and distribute as follows num .
one set to the fabricator along with permission to begin fabrication num .
one set to the contractor num .
two sets to the engineer num .
one set to the departments shop inspector and num .
one set to stay with the departmental program responsible for providing the approval .
do not make or order materials before receiving the approved drawings .
do not substitute materials change dimensions or deviate from the approved shop drawings without written consent from the department .
the departments approval of shop drawings constitutes its acceptance of the character and sufficiency of details it does not constitute a check on dimensions and does not relieve the contractor or fabricator from responsibility for errors or omissions and their necessary correction .
num num num num num conformity with contract perform work and provide materials in accordance with the lines grades cross sections dimensions tolerances and requirements specified .
perform incidental work in accordance with the technical section associated with the work .
the engineer may in accordance with subsection num unacceptable work and materials choose to accept work or materials that meet the contracts intent but not its requirements .
contract references to standard test methods or specifications such as those from aashto astm imsa and the materials testing manual refer to the methods or specifications in effect on the advertised date of the public bid opening .
if a later change to a cited document affects successful completion of the project the department will incorporate the new reference with a contract amendment form enum .
num coordination and precedence of documents in the contract the contract comprises complementary documents that together describe a whole such that a requirement or specification in one binds and acts as though appearing in all .
in case of discrepancy federal laws rules and regulations supersede conflicting contract requirements for projects involving federal funds and documents have the following order of precedence num .
successive contract amendments form enum in order of issuance most recent first .
num .
addenda num .
contract form enuma .
num .
departmentobtained agreements .
num .
proposal form enum .
num .
special provisions .
num .
supplementary documents .
num .
plans .
num .
supplementary specifications .
num num num num control of work num num num num num num num control of work num .
standard plans .
num .
these standard specifications .
num .
electronic cadd files .
calculated dimensions take precedence over scaled dimensions .
notify the engineer upon discovery and do not take advantage of errors or omissions in the contract .
the engineer will correct as necessary .
paper documents take precedence over electronic files .
num superintendence in writing and in accordance with subsection num preconstruction conference the department requires the contractor to designate a project superintendent who is an employee of the contractor with the following num .
the ability to read interpret and implement the relevant contract documentation num .
experience in work of the projects nature num .
authority to represent and act for the contractor including authority to execute directions by the engineer and num .
authority to obtain and provide sufficient materials equipment tools labor and incidentals to complete the project as specified .
when work is underway including work by a subcontractor ensure the presence at the worksite of the project superintendent unless otherwise agreed to by the engineer .
num cooperation by contractor cooperate with the engineer and inspectors .
num cooperation between contractors the department may contract with separate contractors for additional work on or near the worksite .
when separate contracts are let the department requires each contractor to cooperate with and to work without hindering each other .
num num num each contractor assumes liability financial or otherwise for its own errors acts or omissions and holds the department harmless from damages or disputes arising from inconvenience delay or loss due to the presence and operations of other contractors on or near the worksite including material sources .
these provisions apply also to work by the departments employees and equipment .
num equipment storage the contractor may store equipment on approved portions of the rightofway outside the specified clear zone .
after use restore storage sites to their original condition at no additional cost to the department .
if needed provide additional space at no additional cost to the department .
num construction stakes lines and grades num general do not begin work until the lines and grades that will control the work are staked .
preserve project control stakes and marks placed by the engineer .
the department will charge the contractor or deduct from monies due the cost of their replacement at a rate of num per hour .
the department makes available necessary information defining the control through its placement of stakes the contract or the engineer .
num department surveying when the contract does not include contractor surveying as a pay item the engineer will set construction stakes establishing lines slopes profile grades centerline and bench marks .
the department assumes responsibility for the accuracy of its work use the engineers stakes and marks to establish extended control .
to avoid delays notify the engineer at least ten calendar days before starting work that requires staking .
num contractor surveying num general when contractor surveying is a pay item the contractor is responsible for grade staking the project .
the department considers contractor surveying a num num num num num num num control of work num num num num num control of work specialty item for the purposes of subcontracting in accordance with subsection num subletting of contract .
perform survey work under the supervision of a professional land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state of wyoming .
the department will establish horizontal and vertical control for the project .
the department will set centerline and benchmarks for culverts protective and accessory structures and appurtenances as required .
the engineer will furnish necessary information relating to lines slopes and grades .
use these stakes and information as the field control to establish the project benchmarks and to perform the work .
do not set grade stakes until the subgrade elevation is within num in num mm of the final grade based on the slope stake information .
keep survey notes in a clear orderly neat manner and in accordance with the survey manual the engineer may randomly inspect the notes for compliance .
survey records belong to the department ensure their availability to the engineer for inspection or reproduction at all times .
correct deficiencies and transmit survey records to the engineer for inclusion in the project records before final project acceptance .
upon discovery notify the engineer of apparent errors in or discrepancies with previous surveys .
obtain corrections or interpretations before proceeding .
correct deficient work due to incorrect staking or failure to report errors or inaccuracies in work previously performed by the department .
reset grade stakes benchmarks reference points or property corners lost damaged or destroyed by traffic or construction .
num materials provide personnel materials and equipment necessary to perform the work .
calibrate equipment before starting and submit calibration data information from field checks of the calibration and results including location and dates performed to the engineer .
use stakes measuring at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
equip each stake with chasers .
num grade staking run a level circuit to check the project benchmarks on each roadway section before beginning roadway staking .
submit a letter to the engineer stating that num num num num num the vertical control has been established checked and meets the requirements of the survey manual for level accuracy .
set grade stakes required to control the work .
establish the grade stake elevation for the subgrade and each base course using grade information provided by the engineer .
consult the engineer before setting grade stakes for curve runoffs and ramps .
on typical sections using special borrow the department considers the top of the special borrow the subgrade for grade staking purposes .
set reference points and reference lines to control alignment and the grade elevations at the subgrade and at the top of each base gravel course .
establish additional lines as required for passing or climbing lanes and slope or crown breaks between shoulders .
set reference points and lines to produce the typical sections and ride quality specified .
set subgrade grade stakes for tangent sections at intervals no greater than num ft num m no greater than num ft num m for curves and at other miscellaneous break points as specified .
set grade stake lines for safety shoulders median and shoulder ditches at intervals of num ft num m. drive the top of each stake to within num ft num m of the specified elevation .
maintain horizontal alignment of each completed course within num ft num m in num ft num m of the true line .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure contractor surveying as a complete unit .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num control of work pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest contractor surveying ls ls ls num num num num num num .
twentyfive percent with the first monthly progress payment num num num num num num num control of work num .
twentyfive percent with the monthly progress payment following submission of the letter to the engineer stating that the vertical control has been established and checked and meets the requirements and num .
between num percent and up to num percent payment will be based on request from the contractor .
num .
the final num percent upon completion of the surveying .
num extracontractual agreements by contractor the contractor may enter into agreements with third parties whether public or private for the purpose of acquiring the use of land or materials to complete the project .
such agreements are subject to review by the engineer except for those with commercial sources submit copies of the signed documents describing the agreement to the engineer .
num authority of the inspector the engineer or an inspector representing the engineer has authority to inspect all work and materials at any stage including preparation fabrication or manufacture .
inspectors do not have authority to amend the contract .
num inspection of work give the engineer or an inspector representing the engineer access information and all help needed to enable safe complete detailed inspections during every phase of the work .
notify the engineer at least one working day before performing work that will need inspection .
if the engineer was not provided the opportunity for inspection expose the work as directed at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer may order the removal and replacement of work performed or materials used without inspection at no additional cost to the department .
if the engineer was provided the opportunity for inspection and failed to inspect the work or materials expose portions of the finished work for inspection as directed .
after inspection restore the work .
the engineer will pay for the cost of exposing and restoring the work as extra work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work if the work meets the contract requirements the engineer will not pay this cost if the work does not meet the contract requirements .
num representatives of governmental entities railroads or utilities that pay for or participate in parts of the work have the right to conduct inspections .
such inspections do not make these agencies a party to the contract and do not affect the rights of the contractor or the department .
num load restrictions except as provided in this subsection comply with legal load restrictions when moving equipment or hauling materials on public roads that remain in service .
a permit from the department to operate an overweight oversized or overwidth vehicle does not relieve the contractor of liability for damage to public roads due to the moving of equipment or materials .
the engineer may stop or reroute material transportation or eliminate the corresponding pay item from the contract if the activity appears detrimental to the roads used .
without damaging structures roadways or other work the contractor may operate empty overweight or oversize equipment on roadways within the construction limits as required to perform the work .
such operation does not require an overweight oversized or overwidth permit but is subject to approval by the engineer .
approval does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the repair of resulting damage .
do not allow loads on concrete pavement base or structures before the strength or time requirements for the concrete has been met .
in the case of pipes do not allow loads before placing the specified cover fill .
do not exceed the current maximum legal load limit when hauling materials over partially wholly or previously finished base or surface courses within the construction limits .
repair damage by hauling equipment at no additional cost to the department .
num maintenance of the work during construction protect the work and roadway from damage .
except as provided in subsections num final acceptance and num suspension of work preserve and maintain the undamaged work and roadway during construction and until final acceptance of the project .
use adequate and effective equipment and forces to keep the work and roadway in satisfactory condition at all times .
maintenance of the work and roadway is incidental to the pay items in the contract .
num num num num num num num num control of work num num num num num num num control of work when placing a course upon other courses or subgrade maintain the previous layers as constructed .
maintenance includes but is not limited to draining recompacting regrading or if damaged removing and replacing the damaged courses .
as necessary use equipment labor and new materials .
the engineer will notify the contractor immediately if the work or roadway is not maintained .
if satisfactory maintenance is not performed the engineer may direct other organizations to perform the maintenance .
the department will deduct the cost from monies due the contractor or will bill the contractor as appropriate .
num dispute resolution num general the department will not consider a submitted dispute if the contractor has not followed the notification process in accordance with subsection num contractorengineer notification .
notify the engineer in writing within five working days if the result of a request to amend the contract remains unacceptable at the end of the procedure specified in subsection num contractorengineer notification .
send by usps certified mail return receipt requested .
state clearly the activity or item of work disputed and the reason for continued disagreement with the engineer .
upon receipt of this notice the engineer may direct the contractor to start or resume the disputed work while the dispute is resolved .
with the exception of a dispute concerning final quantities which will be handled in accordance with subsection num final quantities the contractor waives the right to seek a contract amendment if the engineer receives the written notice more than num calendar days after the contractors receipt of the district engineers letter of final acceptance of the work as specified in subsection num final acceptance .
the contractor waives the right to seek a contract amendment by failing to meet a specified time limit .
the contractor and the department may however extend a time limit by a specific written mutual agreement .
the process specified in this subsection is intended to produce a reasonable resolution of disputes .
conduct the process in good faith completing the process is a condition precedent to filing suit in wyoming state courts .
num num payments warranted as a result of a dispute pursued in accordance with this subsection will be based on the actual costs incurred as shown in provided documentation without a percentage markup for profit .
the department may also require an audit of the contractors project records home office records financial records and other records .
num supporting documentation within num calendar days of notifying the engineer send to the engineer for review and audit accurate and complete documentation supporting the requested contract amendment .
send by usps certified mail return receipt requested .
provide copies of pertinent data arranged in a logical sequence include at least the following num .
copies of all previous correspondence related to the activity or item of work disputed num .
data and information used to assemble the bid if bid preparation is relevant to the disputed issue num .
schedules and updates prepared in accordance with subsection num schedule if time or delays are relevant to the disputed issue num .
documents similar in nature to those used to substantiate payments for extra or force account work as specified in subsection num force account documentation num .
supporting actual cost records and num .
accounting records and statements if overhead is relevant to the disputed issue .
num num control of work num num num num num num control of work accompany the submission with the following signed statement the undersigned is duly authorized to certify the enclosed documentation on behalf of the contractor .
the contractor certifies that the documentation is submitted in good faith that the information provided is accurate and complete to the best of the contractors knowledge and belief and that the monetary amount requested accurately reflects the contract amendment for which the contractor believes the department is responsible .
the contractor by ______________________ name and title date ______________________ num decision by resident engineer within num calendar days of the date the supporting documentation is received the engineer will review the request and return by usps certified mail return receipt requested to the contractor a written decision along with copies of documentation used by the engineer but not provided by the contractor in deciding the issue .
submission of additional information at any subsequent level of review by anyone will not be allowed once the claim record is assembled and the engineer has made a decision .
num appeal to district engineer within num calendar days of the date the resident engineers decision is received if that decision is unacceptable send a written notice of appeal to the district engineer by usps certified mail return receipt requested .
within num calendar days of receiving this notice the district engineer will convene a meeting of the resident engineer and the contractor to resolve the dispute .
within num calendar days of this meeting the district engineer will send a written decision to the contractor by usps certified mail return receipt requested .
num num num appeal to chief engineer within num calendar days from the date the district engineers decision is received if that decision is unacceptable send a written notice of appeal to the chief engineer by usps certified mail return receipt requested with a copy to the district engineer .
within num calendar days of receiving this notice the chief engineer will convene a meeting of the district engineer the resident engineer and the contractor to resolve the dispute .
within num calendar days of this meeting the chief engineer will send a written decision to the contractor by usps certified mail return receipt requested .
the department will not consider additional appeals after this decision .
num adjudication within num calendar days from the date the chief engineers decision is received if that decision is unacceptable the contractor may sue the commission in state district court .
adjudication will be by bench trial .
no part of this subsection num dispute resolution supersedes the laws of the state of wyoming .
the commission in seeking to resolve a dispute does not waive its sovereign immunity .
the contractor agrees not to challenge the commissions right to assert sovereign immunity as a complete or limited bar to the extent it has been reserved and in consideration for which the commission agrees not to assert sovereign immunity as a defense to resolve a dispute provided none of the following are included in the claim num .
prejudgment interest on the amount of the claim num .
exemplary or punitive damages num .
attorneys fees consultant fees or other costs of litigation num .
damages exceeding the actual costs as supported by the documentation presented or num .
consequential damages meaning those not encompassed in items num num and num exceeding num percent of the calculated amount in item num .
these items are meant to limit the potential liability of the commission .
if the contractor seeks relief beyond the limits of these items the commission may assert sovereign immunity as an affirmative defense and complete bar to the action .
num num control of work num num num num num num num num num num num num control of material section num control of material num quality requirements provide and use materials that meet the specified requirements .
the engineer will use procedures from the materials testing manual when applicable to determine whether materials meet the requirements .
when standard test methods or specifications are referenced in the contract use methods and specifications in accordance with subsection num conformity with contract .
when the contract refers to a particular product or manufacturer followed by the phrase or an approved equal the department is establishing a standard of quality durability and design it is not limiting competition .
the department will accept products of other manufacturers if they are equal to those specified and the engineer approves in writing .
submit certifications in accordance with subsection num manufactured product certifications .
num inspection and tests at source of supply the engineer may inspect materials at their source .
ensure the engineers access to relevant areas of the suppliers production facilities .
provide facilities to enable sampling of material at no additional cost to the department .
before their incorporation in the work the engineer may retest materials tested at their source .
num sources sites and haul roads num general provide material sources stockpile sites plant sites and associated haul roads if not designated in the contract as departmentfurnished .
num num departmentfurnished num general the department may acquire and make available for the contractors use material sources stockpile sites plant sites and haul roads .
for material sources interpret the departments data from the boring logs in accordance with subsection num examination of documents and work site .
the contractor has the right to determine the equipment and amount of work needed to produce a material that meets the contract requirements .
the engineer may specify the location of the procurement of material from any portion of a deposit .
perform the following at no additional cost to the department num .
moving equipment within a pit num .
moves made for the contractors benefit and num .
moves made due to the presence of unacceptable material except when the original location was designated by the engineer .
num available material sources in the contract the department may show available sources for required materials .
the engineer may approve changes from available sources by issuing a contract amendment form enum .
when the contract allows and the contractor elects to use a departmentfurnished source as a contractorfurnished source a contract amendment is not required .
the department will determine the quality of the material from the proposed source in accordance with subsection num approval of materials .
when the contractor chooses to use a source other than those initially designated as available excluding commercial sources the department will pay for quantities up to the specified amount at the contract unit price for the affected pay items .
the department will consider as incidental the following costs associated with the change num .
additional costs from increases in quantities for num .
overburden storing and placing num num num num num control of material num num num num num control of material num .
topsoil storing or placing num .
haul length num .
temporary fence num .
asphalt binder num .
hydrated lime num .
crushed base num .
plant mix pavement num .
seeding fertilizer or mulch and num .
royalty .
num .
all costs associated with num .
a change in the type of seed fertilizer or mulch num .
development costs num .
haul roads num .
erosion control measures and num .
necessary permits agreements and environmental clearance .
the engineer will not approve use of a source not initially designated as available or its associated haul roads before the contractor has submitted copies of the necessary permits and agreements from the owners or land management agency .
the engineer will not approve use of a proposed source that is not or has not been commercially active before the contractor has obtained environmental clearances in accordance with subsection num contractorfurnished and given copies to the engineer before starting work .
the contractor is responsible for delays associated with obtaining and using such sources .
num mandatory material sources when the department designates a source as mandatory use it .
num num stockpile sites plant sites and haul roads in the contract the department may show available stockpile sites plant sites or haul roads .
the engineer may approve in writing requests to change from available sites and roads to contractorfurnished sites and roads in accordance with the procedures and assessment of additional costs specified in subsection num available material sources but may not issue a contract amendment form enum .
num contractorfurnished num general when using commercial or contractorfurnished sources sites and haul roads all associated costs will be considered incidental to the contract .
the contractor is responsible for num .
submitting a letter to the engineer asking to use the proposed source num .
acquiring the necessary rights to take material num .
ensuring that the materials taken meet the requirements of subsection num approval of materials num .
associated delays num .
maintaining and repairing associated haul roads num .
submitting an acceptance statement signed by the landowner stating that all conditions and stipulations in the agreement have been met and num .
royalty including when the contract allows and the contractor elects to use a departmentfurnished source as a contractorfurnished source and for commercial sources .
num environmental requirements if the proposed site source or associated haul road is not or has not been commercially active obtain and give the engineer copies of the following documents and clearances num num num control of material num num num control of material num .
a united states geological survey num minute quadrangle map showing the location of the features and activity .
num .
necessary permits from owners land management and regulatory agencies blm wdeq etc .
and approved mitigation plans as appropriate .
num .
documents reflecting the proposed activitys socioeconomic cultural natural or physical impacts and the approved mitigation plans as appropriate .
for all proposed activities provide the following num .
a completed copy of the departments environmental impact evaluation form enum summarizing the findings .
num .
a copy of the class iii cultural resource inventory report to be completed by a qualified archaeologist .
include documentation of findings meeting wyoming state historic preservation office standards evaluations of eligibility to the national register of historic places and determination of no effect or no adverse effects by the proposed activity to any cultural resources located .
the department will deny all requests if the cultural resource inventory report has a determination of anything other than no effect or no adverse effects .
num .
a copy of the wetlands report if wetlands are locted in or near the area .
num .
a copy of the army corps of engineers permit if required .
num a copy of the biological assessment if endangered threatened or proposed species as defined in the endangered species act of num are present in or near the area .
the biological assessment must result in a determination of no effect or not likely to adversely affect for all endangered threatened and proposed species in or near the area .
if the biological assessment results in a may affect or likely to adversely affect determination the department will not approve the change .
the contractor must agree to and implement the terms and conditions of the current programmatic biological opinion issued by the united states fish and wildlife service .
num num a copy of approved mitigation plans as stipulated in permits from the appropriate regulatory agency .
the engineer will review the documents and provide a written response within num calendar days of receipt of the information .
num approval of materials num general use an aashtoaccredited laboratory to perform tests for source approval .
do not use materials from a source before the engineer has approved the source .
approval of a materials source does not constitute approval of the project specific material produced .
agree with the engineer on a sampling plan .
obtain representative samples in accordance with the procedures in the materials testing manual .
submit the samples to the engineer along with the request to use a contractorfurnished source .
also include the following num .
the sampling layout of the source num .
test data for num .
wear grading num .
plastic index num .
liquid limit and num .
soundness mgsonum soundness nasonum or both as required .
num .
depth at which samples were taken vertical limits of the useable material and depth of the pit floor .
the department will notify the contractor of its determination within num calendar days of receiving the samples and data .
num commercial sources the test frequency requirement will be once per year .
submit the information directly to the materials program when not being submitted for a specific contract .
the engineer may waive the tests for temporary or small quantities of materials .
num num num num num control of material num num num reclamation whether department or contractor furnished reclaim sites and associated haul roads used for material sources plant sites or stockpiling after completing the work .
perform reclamation as follows num .
where practical place or leave out of sight from the roadway those stockpiles designated to remain .
num .
return stockpiles of rejected or unused materials and overburden to the pit and blend with the surrounding terrain .
num .
remove oil asphalt and discarded parts and equipment .
num .
leave slopes no steeper than numvnumh unless the slopes initial grade was steeper .
num .
spread topsoil .
num .
seed fertilize and mulch .
num vacant num field laboratory num general provide maintain and equip a field laboratory for the departments exclusive use at a location directed by the engineer for the duration of the project .
as specified equip the lab with a built in or separate restroom for the departments exclusive use and keep the restroom clean and useable .
the department will repair damage due to abuse or negligence by its personnel .
for projects with multiple operation sites the engineer may request to move the lab to accommodate project operations .
level block and tie down the lab when placing .
the engineer will inspect field laboratories .
the decision to approve or disapprove a lab is independent of the labs history of use or approval on prior projects .
the lab remains the property of the contractor after completion of the project .
num num num num num control of material num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure each field laboratory including maintenance and two moves as a complete unit provided for the duration of the project .
the engineer will measure additional directed moves in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num control of material pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest field laboratory ea ea ea ea ea ea num num storage of materials store materials in a manner that facilitates inspection and preserves the materials quality and suitability for use .
the engineer may reinspect stored previously inspected materials before approving their use in the work .
as approved by the engineer and outside the clear zone the contractor may use portions of the right of way for material storage .
if needed provide additional storage space at no additional cost to the department .
before using property outside the rightofway or specified construction permits provide the engineer copies of agreements with the landowner lessee or land management agency .
after use reclaim storage sites to their original condition in accordance with subsection num reclamation at no additional cost to the department .
storage of materials or equipment not directly involved with bridge work will not be allowed on the bridge .
do not stockpile place or store debris rubble or aggregate on bridges .
num handling materials handle materials so as to preserve their quality and suitability for use in the work .
transport materials in vehicles built to prevent loss contamination or segregation after loading and measuring .
num num num num num num num num control of material num departmentfurnished material if specified the department will provide material for incorporation into the project .
the department will deliver such material to or make available at the locations specified .
take responsibility for material after the department has delivered or made it available .
the subsequent costs of handling and placing the material are incidental to the associated contract pay item .
num rights in and use of materials found in the work the engineer may authorize the use of aggregate or other material found in excavation for another pay item .
the department will pay the established contract unit price for the excavation of such material and for the pay item for which it was used .
if the excavated material is used for another pay item but was otherwise needed for embankments backfills approaches or other purposes provide an acceptable replacement at no additional cost to the department .
do not excavate or take material outside the slope stake limits without the engineers written approval .
the right to use and process material found within the project limits excludes use and processing for noncontract work .
if the contractor produces or processes more material from the project than is required for the contract without additional compensation to the contractor the department may num .
take possession of the excess material and direct its use or num .
require removal of the material and restoration of the land to a satisfactory condition .
num requirements for steel and iron the department requires the use of domestic iron and steel in the permanent components of a project .
domestic means all manufacturing processes occur within the united states .
such processes include but are not limited to rolling extruding machining bending grinding drilling and coating or similar processes to manufacture or modify the physical properties or chemical composition of iron or steel .
coatings include any protective or valueenhancing process .
the department will however accept num .
foreign iron or steel components whose total combined value including the cost of delivery to the project does not exceed num percent of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
num num .
the use of the following nondomestic raw materials scrap pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore. num .
nondomestic items that are used temporarily then abandoned in place at the contractors convenience .
for iron and steel components obtain from the manufacturer and provide to the engineer a material test report or certification that states clearly the country of manufacture .
include two copies of the itemized invoices for materials used and transportation costs for shipment to the project .
ensure that foreignmade bolts fasteners and associated hardware are tested and certified by an independent domestic testing laboratory in accordance with division num materials .
submit the test data and certifications to the engineer before use .
to seek a waiver of these provisions submit a written request to the engineer .
accompany the request with supporting information showing that the specified steel or iron products are not manufactured in the united states in sufficient available quantities of satisfactory quality .
the department will not grant time extensions or pay compensation for delays resulting from processing such a request .
num stockpiling aggregate clear and grub aggregate stockpile sites in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
ensure that sites are firm smooth and welldrained .
do not stockpile aggregate in a manner that causes or allows contamination or excessive degradation .
when not included as a pay item the stockpiling of aggregates for construction is incidental to the associated pay items .
num contractor testing num general when specified take responsibility for development of a mix design as applicable material sampling quality control testing and quality acceptance testing .
num num num num num num control of material num num num num num num num control of material num measurement and payment the engineer will measure contractor testing as a complete unit .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest contractor testing ls ls ls the department will divide and pay out the lump sum as follows num .
twentyfive percent with the first monthly progress payment num .
twentyfive percent with the monthly progress payment that follows the engineers written acceptance of the contractor mix design or the beginning of placement of tested materials and num .
the final num percent upon completion of the sampling and quality control and quality acceptance testing .
the department will not pay directly for changes to an accepted contractor mix design made for the contractors benefit complete it at no additional cost to the department .
at a negotiated lump sum price the department will pay for changes to an accepted contractor mix design made at the engineers request .
num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num applicable laws become familiar with and adhere to all federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority that may affect those engaged or employed on the project or affect the conduct of the work .
indemnify defend and hold harmless the state and its representatives against any dispute or third party liability claim due to a violation of any of the foregoing whether by the contractor or any party or person engaged by the contractor .
the department will not grant time extensions or pay compensation for delays or disruption resulting from actions against the contractor due to such violations .
the provisions of w. s. num apply when the contract amount is for num or more .
num permits licenses and taxes obtain all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary or related to the lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices materials and processes observe all patent and copyright laws and obtain through legal agreement with rights holders all necessary permissions for the use of intellectual property employed or incorporated in the work .
indemnify defend and hold harmless the department affected third parties and affected political entities from claims lawsuits or causes of action for infringement filed against the contractor by the rights holder of protected intellectual property .
pay any costs expenses or damages incurred by reason of such infringement at any time .
num contractors insurance requirements num general provide the following insurance and file a certificate of insurance with the contracts and estimates program in accordance with subsection num execution and approval of contract verifying each type of coverage the departments approval of insurance does not affect the contractors liability num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num .
workers compensation and employers liability insurance .
provide proof of workers compensation coverage for every employee who will work on the project .
obtain the coverage under the wyoming workers safety and compensation program or such workers compensation insurance as appropriate .
do not allow a subcontractor to work on the project without first giving the department proof of the subcontractors workers compensation and employers liability insurance .
num .
commercial general liability insurance .
provide coverage for the duration of the contract against claims arising out of bodily injury death damage to or destruction of the property of others including loss of use thereof and products and completed operations in the amount of at least num per occurrence and num general aggregate .
endorse the policy to include employees liability stop gap coverage in an amount of at least num per employee for each accident for each disease .
num .
umbrellaexcess liability insurance .
maintain for the duration of the contract and in addition to all other policies umbrellaexcess liability coverage in the amount of at least num per occurrence and num in the aggregate .
num. business automobile liability insurance .
maintain for the duration of the contract automobile liability insurance for claims arising out of the use of an automobile including owned and nonowned automobiles in the amount of at least num combined single limit .
num .
unemployment insurance .
register and stay registered with the department of employment employment tax division for the duration of the contract .
provide the department with notice of satisfactory unemployment insurance coverage prepared by the department of employment employment tax division for every subcontractor before allowing the subcontractor to work on the project .
num .
payment of premiums and notice of revocation .
maintain required insurance policies in effect for the duration of the project .
obtain primary not contributory policies .
provide insurance certificates for all num policies include a clause stating that each policy will not be revoked canceled amended or allowed to lapse until the expiration date of at least num calendar days or num calendar days if the cancellation is for nonpayment of premium with advance written notice .
num department may insure for contractor if a provision of this section is breached the department may purchase and maintain insurance in the name of the contractor .
the department will deduct the cost of such insurance from monies due the contractor or will bill the contractor as appropriate .
num department as additional insured except for the workers compensation and unemployment compensation insurances obtain policies that name the department as an additional insured and that contain a waiver of subrogation against the department its agents and employees .
provide a copy of the endorsement providing this coverage to the contracts and estimates program in accordance with subsection num execution and approval of contract .
num departments right to reject the department may reject a certificate of insurance if the issuing company is regarded in the insurance industry as financially unstable .
this includes but is not limited to insurance companies with an omit rating in the a.m. best insurance rating guides .
num departments right to contact insurer the department may obtain relevant policy information from the contractors insurance agent .
this includes but is not limited to exclusions endorsed and inprogress claims that could significantly reduce the annual aggregate limit .
if the policy is a claims made policy instead of an occurrence policy other information the department may obtain includes but is not limited to num .
retroactive dates num .
extended reporting periods or tails and num .
applicable deductibles .
num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num employee health and safety provide and maintain a safe workplace .
provide and maintain in a neat and clean condition portable sanitation facilities for use by everyone at the worksite .
do not operate equipment within num ft num m of survey or testing personnel .
move equipment to another location .
if equipment can not be moved provide flagging for the protection of all survey and testing personnel as approved by the engineer .
the department will pay for flagging in accordance with subsection num measurement and payment .
num railwayhighway provisions the department may arrange with railway companies for work within railroad rightsofway .
perform work on railroad property as directed by the rail company .
take responsibility for damages delays or injuries and for related suits actions or disputes due to the contractors operations within or next to a rail companys rightofway obtain the necessary rightofentry permits and notify the rail company before work begins inside the railroad rightofway .
num use of explosives give at least three calendar days notice to property owners and utility companies with facilities near the site prior to using explosives .
if necessary monitor vibrations air blast and noise with a seismograph or other equipment to prevent damage to adjacent structures .
fourteen calendar days before using explosives submit to the engineer for review a detailed plan showing hole spacing diameter and pattern loading timing and other pertinent data .
include plans for traffic control and indicate the precautions that will be taken to satisfy the requirements of this subsection .
such notices and plans do not relieve the contractor of responsibility for damage from blasting .
num num num protection and restoration of property markers and landscape num general preserve public and private property during work on the project .
take responsibility for damage or injury resulting from num .
any act omission negligence or misconduct in the execution of the work num .
defective work or materials and num .
the work of a subcontractor .
at no additional cost to the department immediately restore or replace real property damaged or injured in the course of the work to its prior or a similar condition .
coordinate repairs replacements or both with the affected property owner and obtain his or her written approval when the final work is complete inplace .
submit a copy of the property owners approval to the engineer .
if the contractor fails to perform such restoration within a reasonable time the engineer may do so and deduct the cost from monies due the contractor or bill the contractor as appropriate .
do not remove relocate or damage land monuments highway monuments or property markers or corners without direction from the engineer .
install temporary fencing or other measures approved by the engineer to control access of unauthorized vehicles onto adjacent private property or onto the highway rightofway .
num protection of livestock take the measures necessary to confine and prevent livestock from entering the highway rightofway .
install temporary stocktight fence if necessary .
if existing fencing is removed in the course of the work replace and restore to its original condition as soon as practical .
num vehicle damage claims if a vehicle owner makes a claim of vehicle damage send a written response to the claimant addressing the claim and the actions that will be taken .
send a copy of the response letter to the engineer and to the following address num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public state of wyoming department of administration and information attn risk manager num west numth street cheyenne wy num num accommodations for irrigation where the project involves work over through or around irrigated lands or irrigation facilities make arrangements with the owners for the timing and sequence of work .
document these arrangements and give copies to the engineer before starting the relevant work .
do not interfere with the proper handling or delivery of water .
num responsibility for damage claims indemnify and hold harmless the department its officers and its employees from suits actions or claims arising from num .
injury or damage to any person persons or property resulting from acts errors or omissions by the contractor including but not limited to num .
neglect in safeguarding the worksite or work in progress num .
use of unacceptable materials num .
acts errors omissions or misconduct causing injury or damage to a third party and num .
work outside of the construction limits .
num .
the wyoming workers compensation act or any other state or federal law ordinance order or decree .
if such a suit action or claim is initiated against the department the department may withhold money due the contractor for use by the state .
if no money is due the department may hold the contractors surety until such suits actions or claims for injuries or damages are settled .
the department will pay or release such money or surety when it receives evidence of settlement .
the department will not withhold money due the contractor when provided with evidence of num the contractors adequate protection by public liability and property damage insurance .
the contractors lack of response to a thirdparty claimant may affect the contractors prequalification status .
num traffic provisions and public safety num general in each area where traffic has been restricted from normal flow work continuously until the work is complete .
return traffic to normal unrestricted flow immediately after completion of the work .
work in a manner and sequence that least obstructs traffic in all its forms including but not limited to vehicular pedestrian and bicycle .
give consideration to the location of detours and the provision for handling traffic .
provide for the safety and convenience of both the general public and residents near the work .
the contractors rights of travel do not supersede those of the public .
obtain written approval from the engineer before stopping traffic conducting construction activities across or through traffic or closing public roads .
notify the engineer in writing at least num calendar days before starting an activity that will restrict the movement of oversized loads .
do not proceed with the activity until approved by the engineer .
the contractors responsibility for traffic and roadway maintenance begins on the projects first day of physical work .
notify the engineer of unsafe conditions that need immediate correction .
provide continuous temporary approaches to businesses and residences adjacent to the roadway intersections detours crossings and similar features or facilities to safely accommodate customary vehicular or pedestrian traffic affected by the work .
provide maintain and remove such accommodations in accordance with subsection num suspension of work .
do not prohibit access to adjacent businesses or residences without first obtaining written approval from the affected owners or tenants and from the engineer .
providing maintaining and removing temporary accommodations for traffic is incidental to associated pay items when not included as a pay item in the contract .
maintain an adequate surface on traffic carrying lanes including those of detours and temporary facilities under all weather conditions .
control dust by using water or other palliatives .
do not hinder traffic or restrict the width of the paved surface traveled way or shoulders from december num to march num without the num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num approval of the engineer .
do not place or leave materials or equipment within the specified clear zone .
num drainage structures for detours num general determine the size of the structure required to accommodate the anticipated volumes of water and provide a structure designed for an hsnum loading .
furnishing installing maintaining and removing the drainage structure is incidental to associated contract pay items .
loss or damage incurred as a result of an inadequatelysized temporary drainage structures is the contractors responsibility .
num bridges if electing to use a bridge as a drainage structure for a detour design the structure in accordance with the edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges in effect at the time of the public opening of bids .
for review and approval provide the engineer with three copies of the design computations and plans for the bridge structure in accordance with subsection num working drawings at least num calendar days prior to the anticipated installation .
prepare the design computations and the plans under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state of wyoming .
design and construct bridges to provide a minimum clear roadway width equal to the detour top width specified and include bridge rail and approach guardrail systems .
num delay to the traveling public maintain twoway traffic .
when the department specifies or allows one way alternating traffic do not allow delays to an individual vehicle passing through the project longer than the following num .
rural and residential areas .
no single delay longer than num minutes and total delay no longer than num minutes .
num. business areas .
no single delay longer than num minutes and total delay no longer than num minutes .
num num temporary traffic control provide install and maintain necessary devices to control traffic ensure safety of the public and protect the work .
use barricades to protect highways closed to traffic .
erect warning signs before places where work may interfere with the roads use by traffic and at intermediate places where the project crosses or coincides with an existing road bike path or sidewalk .
where it is impossible or impractical to divert traffic on existing roads or detours perform the work under traffic .
provide for traffic movement in accordance with the approved traffic control plan .
as necessary use flagging pilot car escorts or both .
provide install and maintain temporary traffic control devices in accordance with the contract and the mutcd .
temporary traffic control is incidental to associated pay items when not included as a pay item in the contract .
num edge dropoff do not expose any form of traffic to unprotected vertical dropoffs greater than num in num mm .
for dropoffs greater than num in num mm construct an edge slope no steeper than numvnumh from material approved by the engineer or provide other appropriate barricade devices .
slope grading or other excavation work to match the existing slopes or with a temporary slope no steeper than numvnumh .
when constructing pavements thicker than num in num mm under traffic schedule the work in accordance with subsection num spreading and finishing .
do not taper temporary pavement ends more steeply than numvnumh .
use temporary traffic control or safety devices to delineate dropoffs unless otherwise directed .
the provision maintenance and removal of temporary controls and tapers is incidental to associated pay items in the contract .
num responsibility for safeguarding the work the contractors responsibility for the work lasts until final written acceptance of the project by the district engineer in accordance with subsection num final acceptance and includes protection against injury or damage to any part of the project from any cause .
except for damage due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor rebuild repair restore and make good damages to any portion of the project from any cause before final acceptance and without additional cost to the department .
num num num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num suspension of the work does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the project except in accordance with subsection num suspension of work .
num responsibility for utility procedures and services num location the department makes every effort to indicate the location of utility and pipeline facilities in the contract and to notify utility companies of impending construction .
before proceeding with the work confirm the final grade and locations of such facilities in accordance with w.s .
num et sequens the wyoming underground facilities notification act and w.s .
num et sequens the wyoming high voltage power lines and safety restrictions act .
notify utility and pipeline companies of the proposed construction schedule at least three working days before the start of work .
ask for the nature location and depth of pipes and cables and the areas where they may conflict with the work .
if a company can not or will not provide this information obtain it by alternate means .
where conflicts may exist locate the relevant pipes or cables in three dimensions .
do not begin excavation until all such features have been located their owners notified and the engineer has approved .
do not start work near fire hydrants or gas regulators without arranging continued service .
num utility line conflicts and damage if utility lines are determined to be in conflict with or are damaged during the work stop work in the immediate area notify the utility or pipeline company immediately and cooperate with the owner to move or repair the utility .
num safety advise laborers and equipment operators whenever work will occur near high voltage power lines or underground utilities and warn them to use caution .
before beginning any work or a major change in operation schedule a safety conference with the engineer at a mutually agreeable time to discuss safety issues and policies .
ensure that appropriate subcontractors attend the conference .
num num measurement and payment the department will measure and pay for work required to locate utilities as force account work in accordance with subsection num force account .
num department utility work the department may construct access or work on a department utility any time if it is located in a rightofway under the jurisdiction of the department a municipality or a county .
the department may grant permits enabling other parties to construct access or work on any utility any time within the rightofway .
the engineer may direct the contractor to make repairs due to such activities .
payment for such extra work will be in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
for delays caused by the utility work the engineer may make an extension to the contract completion date in accordance with subsection num extension to the contract completion date .
num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num num num prosecution and progress section num prosecution and progress num subletting of contract num contractors required participation the contractor is responsible for completion of the project as specified no subcontract releases the contractor from contract obligations .
the contractor must perform work equaling at least num percent of the value of the original contract amount using his or her own organization .
in computing the contractors required participation the department will exclude the value of designated specialty items from the contract amount and the subcontracted amount .
num subcontracts and subcontractors with the state construction engineers written approval the contractor may sublet portions of the contract .
in turn subcontractors may sublet to lower tier subcontractors but no subcontractor at any tier may sublet more than num percent of the value of the work for which it has subcontracted .
sign and submit to the state construction office for approval before the start of subcontracted work and for every subcontractor at every tier a request to subcontract form enuma .
attach proof of the subcontractors workers compensation and employers liability insurance in accordance with subsection num contractors insurance requirements .
for federalaid projects attach to each form a copy of the subcontract agreement .
for subcontractors not on the departments list of current prequalified contractors or certified as a disadvantaged business enterprise dbe with the department also attach an equal employment opportunity affidavit form frnum .
with each subcontract request submit proof of workers compensation employers liability insurance and unemployment insurance in accordance with subsection num contractors insurance requirements .
the department will not approve requests without this documentation .
do not allow a subcontractor to work until the department has approved the subcontract .
work performed without an approved subcontract will be designated as unacceptable work in accordance with subsection num authority of the engineer .
the engineer will suspend work by a subcontractor without an approved subcontract .
num submit to the departments civil rights office the dbe notification of intent to subcontract federalaid projects form dbenum for each disadvantaged business enterprise committed to in the contract .
no subcontracts will be approved until all form dbenum paperwork has been received .
the department may reject a subcontract if at the time of the request the proposed subcontractor has failed to pay or satisfactorily settle any claim on record with the department .
the department may reject a contractor if it has been determined that he or she did not perform at least num percent of the work with his or her own forces under a previous department contract .
num work performed by equipment rental agreement submit written notice to the engineer before starting work with rented equipment .
include the following information num .
name of the rental agency num .
anticipated rental period num .
whether the rental agency will provide an operator and num .
description of the equipment .
the engineer may request a copy of the rental agreement .
except for truck drivers who haul and do not further handle or place material from a commercial source to the project wage determination decisions specified in the contract apply to operators of rented equipment .
maintain and provide as requested payroll documentation of operators names and wages plus substantiation that operators except the exempt truck drivers are carried on the contractor or subcontractors payroll .
num notice to proceed start work when the department has provided a fully executed contract in accordance with subsection num execution and approval of contract and a signed letter giving notice to proceed .
num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num num num num prosecution and progress num num num prosecution and progress num general notify the engineer at least num hours before changing shift schedules or project operations .
if prosecution of the work is stopped for any reason num .
maintain the project in accordance with subsection num suspension of work and num .
notify the engineer at least num hours before restarting work .
do not work on sundays or holidays without written authorization from the engineer .
request such authorization at least num hours in advance .
num schedule num general provide a schedule using the bar chart method in accordance with subsection num bar chart method except when the contract specifies a schedule using the critical path method cpm .
with the engineers approval a cpm schedule may be provided in place of the bar chart schedule .
plan and schedule the project and report progress to the engineer .
at least num calendar days before the preconstruction conference submit an initial project schedule in accordance with the requirements for an initial bar chart in subsection num bar chart method or if applicable subsection num critical path method .
ensure that the schedule meets specified partial and contract completion dates .
the engineer will review the initial schedule at the preconstruction meeting .
no more than five calendar days after the preconstruction meeting the engineer will accept the initial schedule or ask for more information .
the kinds of information requested may include estimated manpower equipment quantities and production rates used to determine the duration of an activity or item of work .
provide the information and resubmit the revised initial schedule no more than five calendar days after the engineers request .
the engineer will accept or reject the initial schedule based solely on completeness .
acceptance does not modify the contract or constitute endorsement num num num num or validation by the engineer of the contractors logic activity durations or assumptions in creating the schedule .
the department may withhold monthly progress payments until the engineer accepts the initial schedule .
submit a schedule update to the engineer on the first working day of each month or as requested by the engineer .
the department may withhold monthly progress payments if schedules are not updated as specified or requested .
num bar chart method the department requires the completion and use of an initial bar chart and monthly updates num .
initial bar chart .
this schedule identifies and includes num .
the activities needed to perform and complete the work activities that might delay contract completion and critical activities num .
the planned start and completion dates for each activity the duration of each activity stated in working days and with activities of more than num working days in duration broken into two or more activities distinguished by location or some other feature and the sequencing of all activities num .
the quantity and the estimated daily production rate for critical activities num .
an indication of how the schedule accommodates adverse weather days for each month num .
dates related to the procurement of materials equipment articles of special manufacture etc .
num .
dates related to the submission of working drawings plans and other data specified for review or approval by the department num .
dates related to required inspections of structural steel fabrication etc .
and num .
dates related to specified activities by the department and third parties .
num prosecution and progress num num num num prosecution and progress num num num .
monthly updates .
include on the schedule updates planned start and finish dates for each activity shown on the most recent accepted schedule .
for newly started or finished activities include the actual start or finish date .
for activities previously started and still ongoing show the remaining duration and planned finish dates .
next to each activity on the update show the planned or target dates of performance from the most recent accepted schedule .
num critical path method use software compatible with version num of oracle primavera .
email the initial schedule and updates to constructiondot.state.wy.us and indicate the name and version of the software used to produce the attached schedule .
notify the engineer when the schedules have been submitted by email .
within num calendar days of receipt of an initial cpm schedule or an updated schedule the engineer will accept the schedule or request more information .
if the latter provide the information make the appropriate adjustments or both and resubmit the schedule no more than num calendar days after the engineers request .
the department requires that cpm scheduling proceed in three stages num .
initial bar chart .
the engineer will use an initial bar chart to monitor progress until accepting the initial cpm schedule .
prepare and complete a schedule for the first num calendar days of work that meets the requirements for an initial bar chart contained in subsection num bar chart method .
with prior approval the engineer may accept activity durations of more than num working days .
include as well a summary bar chart schedule for the balance of the project activity durations on the summary chart may exceed num working days .
submit an updated version of the bar chart every num calendar days until the department accepts the initial cpm schedule .
num .
initial cpm schedule .
no more than num calendar days after providing the initial bar chart submit an initial cpm schedule to the engineer for review .
define and sequence activities so as to accurately describe the project and to meet contract requirements with respect to the scope of work phasing accommodations for traffic and interim milestone and project completion dates .
use working days to create the schedule num num and begin with the date of the notice to proceed .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer also use provide or include the following num .
the planned early and late start and finish dates for each activity num .
the duration of each activity with activities of more than num working days in duration broken into two or more activities distinguished by location or other feature num .
a logic diagram in color depicting no more than num activities on each num in num in num mm num mm sheet and with each sheet including title match data for diagram correlation and a key .
in the diagram which may be a timescaled program evaluation and review technique pert chart show the sequence of and the scheduling interrelationships among activities num .
only finish to start interrelationships among activities and without leads or lags num .
interim milestone and project completion dates specified in the contract as the only constraints in the schedule logic num .
the quantity and the estimated daily production rate for critical activities num .
activities related to the procurement of materials equipment articles of special manufacture etc .
num .
activities related to the submission of working drawings plans and other data specified for review or approval by the engineer num .
activities related to required inspections of structural steel fabrication etc .
num .
activities related to specified activities by the department and third parties num .
a narrative report indicating the workdays per week holidays number of shifts per day number of hours per shift and how the schedule accommodates adverse weather days for each month num prosecution and progress num num prosecution and progress num num .
tabular sorts of activities by early start responsibility by early start area by early start predecessor and successor and total float and num .
sixtyday look ahead bar charts by early start .
num .
monthly updates .
update and email the schedule each month to show the works status .
in the update provide or include the following num .
the actual start and finish dates of each activity or remaining durations of activities started but not yet completed num .
a narrative summary of progress during the month shifts in the critical activities from the previous update sources of delay potential problems work planned for the next num calendar days and revisions to the cpm schedule including but not limited to additions deletions or revisions to activities due to the issuance of a contract amendment form enum revisions to activity durations or revisions to the planned sequence of work or the method and manner of its performance and num .
paper copies of the tabular sorts for total float and activity by early start and the logic diagram as requested by the engineer .
num schedule revisions the engineer may request a schedule revision .
circumstances leading to such a request include but are not limited to the following num .
a delay actual or projected of partial or contract completion dates by num calendar days or more num .
a difference between the actual rate of progress and that depicted in the schedule and num .
issuance of a contract amendment form enum that by adding deleting or revising activities changes the planned sequence of work or the method and manner of its performance .
num submit the revised schedule no more than num calendar days after the engineers request .
within num calendar days of receipt the engineer will accept the revised schedule or request more information .
if the latter provide the information make the appropriate adjustments or both and resubmit the revised schedule no more than num calendar days after the engineers request .
num measurement and payment bar chart schedules are incidental to the contracts pay items .
the department may withhold the monthly estimate if updates are not submitted as required .
the engineer will measure cpm schedule as a complete unit and the department will pay as follows num prosecution and progress num num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest cpm schedule ls ls ls the engineer will pay as follows num .
half the value of the pay item will be paid with the monthly progress payment made after acceptance of the initial schedule num .
onefourth the value of the pay item will be paid when the contractor completes work representing num percent of the contract amount excluding the pay item cpm schedule and num .
onefourth the value of the pay item will be paid when the contractor completes work representing num percent of the contract amount excluding the pay item cpm schedule .
the department may withhold monthly progress payments until the contractor submits the initial cpm schedule .
num preconstruction conference the engineer will schedule and convene at a mutually convenient time before the start of work a preconstruction conference .
before or at the meeting provide the following if applicable num num num prosecution and progress num .
a letter providing the names of material suppliers and subcontractors num .
a list of rented equipment for both the contractor and subcontractors num .
available working drawings num .
available fabrication schedules num .
an eeo officer affidavit form enum for the contractor and each subcontractor num .
copy of the training plan and list of company trainees num .
spill contingency and storm water pollution prevention plans in accordance with subsection num erosion and pollution controls num .
a traffic control plan if standard plans are not used .
the name of and contact information for the traffic control maintainer and traffic control supervisor num .
a list of key personnel including the project superintendent and subordinates authorized to sign contract documents and project records num .
a list of phone numbers for personnel the engineer should call in case of emergency num .
a letter designating the cutoff date for the monthly progress payments in accordance with subsection num monthly progress payment num .
a letter accepting or declining partnership with the department in accordance with subsection num voluntary partnering num .
an organizational chart indicating lines of authority and providing names phone numbers and qualifications of the individuals responsible for the contractors quality control program and the material sampling and testing num .
confidential price quotes num .
mobile machinery affidavits num num .
price adjustment affidavits and num .
other items the engineer may request .
the engineer will schedule additional conferences as needed .
num requirements for workers methods and equipment provide enough qualified workers and enough capable equipment to complete the project in accordance with the contract .
provide workers that are sufficiently skilled to perform the work assigned to them .
in writing the engineer may direct the removal from the project of any person regardless of employer who is incompetent intemperate disorderly or insubordinate .
through written notice the engineer may suspend the work for failure to comply with such a directive or for failure to provide enough qualified workers .
make requests to use other methods or equipment than those specified in writing do not proceed without the engineers written approval .
include in the request a description of the proposed alternatives and the reasons for seeking a change .
approval does not relieve the contractor from the requirement to produce work in accordance with the contract .
the use of alternative methods or equipment resulting in work that fails to meet contract requirements may lead the engineer to in writing num .
direct a stop to their use num .
order the completion of remaining work using the original specified methods or equipment or num .
require the removal at no additional cost to the department of the unsatisfactory work and its replacement using the original specified methods and equipment .
approval of a change in methods or equipment does not imply approval of a change in pay item prices or the contract completion date .
num num num num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num num prosecution and progress num num num num suspension of work num general the provisions of subsection num suspension of work apply to full and partial suspensions .
in the case of partial suspensions they apply to suspended portions of the project contract requirements governing work on continuing portions of the project remain in effect .
work suspensions may occur due to seasonal conditions from december num to march num or for other reasons .
the contractor may ask the engineer to suspend the project in writing .
do not suspend operations or remove necessary equipment or materials without approval from the engineer on the status of project form enum .
during delays or suspensions if the traveling surface is a leveling course or nonpaved surface maintain the roadway for traffic use snow removal and placing of sand and the quality of the surface course until the placement of additional courses or temporary surfacing at no additional cost to the department .
if placement of concrete pavement or a full lift of plant mix pavement is not completed before delays or suspension of work provide place maintain and remove temporary plant mix pavement in accordance with subsection num temporary surfacing .
if the contract does not include a plant mix pavement mix design obtain the engineers approval of the proposed design before use .
during suspensions at no additional cost to the department store materials and equipment num .
outside the clear zone num .
as far from the travel way as possible num .
at a location that will not cause maintenance or safety problems for the roadway and num .
at a location where they will be protected from damage .
maintain living material in new plantings seedings and soddings in an acceptable growing condition and protect from injury at no additional cost to the department .
prevent damage to or deterioration of work already performed .
num at no additional cost to the department provide roadway drainage temporary structures necessary for public travel throughout the project and required temporary traffic control and remove and dispose of work or materials used for temporary maintenance such as temporary surfacing .
repair or replace materials lost or damaged during the suspension at no additional cost to the department .
before suspension protect slopes without vegetation in accordance with subsection num erosion control agent at no additional cost to the department .
throughout the suspension maintain appropriate measures for control of soil erosion and water and air pollution in accordance with section num storm water pollution prevention at no additional cost to the department .
the department will maintain and repair damage to portions of the work accepted in accordance with subsection num final acceptance .
num engineerordered suspensions the engineer may by issuing a status of project form enum suspend the work wholly or in part due to the existence of conditions unsuitable for prosecution of the work including but not limited to the following num .
failure to correct unsafe conditions num .
failure to carry out contract requirements num .
failure to carry out directions of the engineer and num .
adverse weather .
the provisions of subsection num repair and maintenance related to nonseasonal suspensions apply if the engineer suspends the work because of the preceding items num num or num subsection num repair and maintenance related to seasonal suspensions applies if the suspension is because of item num .
num repair and maintenance related to seasonal suspensions do not suspend work until having num .
prepared and left all permanent or temporary vehicular pedestrian or other trafficcarrying roads approaches and crossings in a condition num prosecution and progress num num num num num num num num to require only routine maintenance to accommodate safe travel during the suspension num .
completed necessary measures to protect the work and the roadway during the suspension num .
removed unnecessary temporary traffic control devices num .
placed traffic control devices as directed and num .
received the signed status of project form enum .
when clauses num through num have been satisfied the department will assume responsibility for maintaining traffic carrying surfaces during the suspension including snow plowing and the placing of sand except for leveling courses and nonpaved surfaces which will be handled in accordance with subsection num suspension of work general .
the department will maintain traffic control devices and permanent signs .
resume work when conditions are favorable .
the department will pay to restore damaged work and trafficcarrying surfaces when the suspension ends except as specified in subsection num suspension of work general .
the department will pay for materials used at pay item prices or if the contract does not include appropriate pay items in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num repair and maintenance related to nonseasonal suspensions the department will not pay to maintain the project routes carrying detoured traffic or for temporary traffic control during a suspension if the contractor suspends work voluntarily for reasons other than seasonal conditions or if actions of the contractor cause the engineer to suspend work .
under these circumstances make provisions for the continued safe accommodation of traffic .
if during a suspension the contractor fails to accommodate traffic or to maintain the project including temporary traffic control devices the engineer may direct other organizations to do so .
the department will deduct the cost from monies due the contractor or will bill the contractor as appropriate .
resume work when approved by the engineer .
the department will not pay to repair or replace work and the traveling surfaces when the suspension ends .
num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num num extension to the contract completion date num general the engineer will issue a monthly report each month .
this report shows the cumulative progress of the work as of the end of the preceding week relative to the contract completion date .
the engineer may discontinue the reports during suspensions .
if warranted the engineer will extend the contract completion date by issuing a contract amendment form enum .
the engineer will do so only if an excusable delay extends the scheduled late finish date beyond the lattermost of the contract completion date or its most recent extension .
the engineer will not consider a request to revise partial or contract completion dates without notice as specified in subsection num contractorengineer notification and without documentation from the project schedule including updates supporting the need for a revision .
the engineer will evaluate the information submitted and determine the time extension due if any .
the engineer will not grant an extension for delays incurred to work activities occurring on days not defined as a working day in accordance with subsection num definitions .
nor will the engineer grant an extension based on pleas that the contract specified insufficient time for the completion of the project .
the granting of a time extension by the engineer relieves the contractor from liability for the payment of liquidated damages during the period of the extension .
num excusable delays excusable delays are delays affecting working days that the contractor can not reasonably foresee or avoid and are not the contractors fault or responsibility .
they include but are not limited to the following num .
delays due to floods tornadoes lightning strikes earthquakes fires epidemics or similar natural phenomena num .
weather delays as specified in subsection num working day extensions for adverse weather num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num prosecution and progress num .
extraordinary unforseen and unavoidable delays in material deliveries num .
delays due to the acts of government entities other than the department num .
delays from industrywide strikes affecting the contractors or subcontractors or suppliers workforce that are beyond the contractors power to settle num .
if time allowances are not specified or if specified allowances are exceeded delays caused by the noncompletion of work by utilities or other third parties and num .
delays arising from a contract amendment in accordance with subsection num contract amendments .
num nonexcusable delays nonexcusable delays are delays caused by the contractor or that the contractor could reasonably have foreseen or avoided .
the engineer will not make an extension to partial or contract completion dates for nonexcusable delays .
num concurrent delays concurrent delays are delays occurring at the same time to separate critical activities .
when concurrent delays occur the department will give precedence to nonexcusable over excusable delays in determining extensions to the contract completion date .
num working day extensions for increased quantities upon written request from the contractor the department will allow extensions for increased quantities when final quantities are determined as shown on the cost summary report generated by the monthly progress estimate form enum .
the department will base the extension on the ratio of the original contract amount to the total cost of the work performed computed as follows num num num num where te is the time extension in working days .
ot is the original contract time and does not include time added by contract amendment form enum or the months of december january february and march .
num is the factor for converting calendar days to working days .
tc is the total cost of the work performed including cost increases resulting from contract amendments form enum for which an extension was not previously allowed and excluding costs associated with liquidated damages incentivedisincentive or bonus payments and costs for contract amendments for which additional time has already been allowed .
ca is the original contract amount .
to determine a revised completion date the department will add the working days indicated by the formula to the original contract completion date .
num working day extensions for adverse weather for whole or partial months within the contract time table num adverse weather days expected shows the number of working days included in anticipation of weather that will preclude work .
on the monthly report the engineer will show for each month and for the project to date the number of actual adverse weather days determined by the engineer and the amount by which this exceeds the number expected .
the engineer may extend the completion date if the actual number of adverse weather days exceeds the expected number and the contractor has pursued the work diligently during the month .
num num prosecution and progress num num tenum ot num tc ca num num prosecution and progress table num adverse weather days expected num num specified in the contract as including working days .
num for partial months the engineer will prorate the number of expected lost workdays due to adverse weather num opening sections of the project to traffic the contract may specify or the engineer may direct the opening to traffic of sections of the project before overall completion of the work .
such a partial opening does not constitute acceptance of the work or any part thereof nor does it waive any provision of the contract .
if the contractor does not complete the work on time the engineer may order all or a section of the project opened to traffic .
the contractor retains legal monthnum workdays incorporated in contract time in anticipation of adverse weathernum january num february num march num april num may num june num july num august num september num october num november num december num num num responsibility and responsibility for the maintenance of such opened sections until final acceptance of the project .
conduct the remainder of the work with minimum delays to traffic .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section of work in progress before starting additional sections if the opening of such a section is essential to the safety of the public .
maintain the roadway and associated appurtenances in accordance with subsection num responsibility for safeguarding the work .
num failure to complete work by the completion date the department will assess liquidated damages for each working day that specified work remains uncompleted after the contract completion date or amended completion date if applicable through and including the date on which the engineer agrees with the contractor that the work has reached substantial completion .
in addition the department will charge liquidated damages for days worked and for days the weather would allow the contractor to work during the months of december january february and march .
the granting of permission by the department to the contractor to finish the specified work after the contract completion date or amended contract completion date if applicable does not constitute a waiver by the department of its rights under the contract .
the department will deduct liquidated damages from money due the contractor or will bill the contractor as appropriate at the rates shown in table num schedule of liquidated damages .
num num num num prosecution and progress num num num num prosecution and progress num table num schedule of liquidated damages original contract amount from more than to and including charge per working day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num after the engineers agreement with the contractor of the substantial completion of the work the department will not continue to assess liquidated damages if the finish conference or final inspection as specified in subsection num final acceptance is delayed for reasons beyond the control of or not the fault of the contractor .
nor will the department assess liquidated damages for cleanup or minor work required as a result of the finish conference or final inspection and providing the contractor has shown constant effort in completing the work .
num termination for default using usps certified mail return receipt requested the engineer will notify the contractor and the surety in writing of the contractors delay neglect or default if the contractor num .
fails to start the work as specified num num .
fails to provide enough qualified workers and equipment to complete the project as specified num .
fails to perform the work as specified or fails to remove and replace unsuitable materials or work num .
stops prosecuting the work num .
fails to resume discontinued work within a reasonable time from notice by the engineer num .
becomes insolvent or commits an act of insolvency allows a final judgment against the contractor to stand unsatisfied for num or more calendar days makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or num .
otherwise fails to proceed acceptably .
if within num calendar days after the contractor has received the departments letter and the contractor or surety does not act in accordance with its terms the department will terminate the contract and take the prosecution of the work from the contractor .
the department may appropriate and use those project materials and equipment it deems suitable and may enter into an agreement or use other methods as required to complete the contract acceptably .
this paragraph binds the contractors surety company and supersedes the provisions of any surety bond or other surety agreement .
the department will deduct all costs incurred by the department as a result of terminating the contract together with the cost of completing the work as specified from monies due the contractor .
if such costs exceed the remaining amount payable under the contract the department will hold the contractor and the surety liable for payment of the excess to the department .
if the departments action regarding a contracts termination for default is determined to be wrongful the departments cause for the action will convert to one of termination on the publics behalf in accordance with subsection num termination on publics behalf .
num termination on publics behalf the department may at any time by written notice terminate all or part of the contract when the department determines it in the publics interest to do so .
num num num num prosecution and progress num num num prosecution and progress before such termination the engineer may require the completion of unaffected parts in accordance with the contract .
when all or part of the contract is terminated the department will pay the pay item price for the actual number of units completed or will compensate the contractor for actual costs incurred for work not started or completed .
the department will purchase from the contractor acceptable materials obtained but not used at the actual costs shown by receipted bills and cost records and delivered as designated by the engineer .
give the engineer access to all books cost records correspondence and papers necessary to determine the relevant prices and amounts .
the department intends in this provision to provide for an equitable settlement with the contractor .
the department will not pay for loss of anticipated profits under this provision .
termination does not relieve the contractor or the surety of its liability for just claims arising out of work performed .
under termination title to all property accruing to the commission vests immediately in the state of wyoming execute and deliver all necessary papers to the engineer .
num num num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities num standards the department will measure pay items in the units of measure specified in the contract using methods of measurement and computation that meet generally recognized good engineering practice .
units of the u.s. customary system of weights and measures are defined in num u.s. code section num .
units of the metric system or si the international system of units and the standard of practice for its use are provided in ieeeastm si num .
num symbols for bid and pay items the following table shows the symbols used in these standard specifications in the proposal form enum and elsewhere in the contract to indicate the units in which the department will measure bid and pay items table num unit symbols for bid and pay items num num num measurement and payment for contracts specified in inchpound units u.s .
customary system for contracts specified in si international system units metric bid or pay unit symbol bid or pay unit symbol acre acre hectare ha cubic foot cf cubic meter mnum cubic yard cy cubic meter mnum cubic yard hour cyhr cubic meter hour mnumh cubic yard mile cymi cubic meter kilometer mnumkm each ea each ea force account force account num num measurement and payment num table num unit symbols for bid and pay items continued for contracts specified in inchpound units u.s .
customary system for contracts specified in si international system units metric bid or pay unit symbol bid or pay unit symbol gallon gal liter l thousand gallons mg cubic meter mnum hour hr hour h crew hour crwh crew hour crwh pound lb kilogram kg foot ft meter m lump sum ls lump sum ls mile mi kilometer km mileday midy kilometerday kmd square foot sf square meter mnum shift shft shift shft station sta station sta square yard sy square meter mnum short ton num lb ton metric ton t short ton mile tmi metric ton kilometer tkm num measurement methods throughout these standard specifications the value and units shown in the measure to the nearest columns in the measurement and payment sections indicate the degree of the accuracy to which the engineer will make measurements .
num the engineer will measure pay items when in place and complete .
the engineer will measure the actual work performed excluding work outside the construction limits unless adjusted by the engineer .
the engineer will measure pay item quantities using the following methods num .
area .
computed from linear distances measured horizontally the department will not deduct for individual fixtures occupying areas equal to or less than num ftnum num mnum .
throughout these standard specifications the value and units shown in the measure to the nearest columns in the measurement and payment sections indicate the degree of accuracy to which the engineer will make linear measurements used in calculating area .
num .
structures .
as specified .
num .
linear .
items measured by the foot meter will be measured parallel to the surface on which the items are installed .
items measured by the mile kilometer will be measured using project stationing .
num .
lump sum .
although actual quantities of the components in a lump sum pay item used in the work may differ from the estimated quantities specified the department will not change the amount of payment unless otherwise specified .
num .
volumes of excavation embankment and similar pay items .
computed by volumetric measurements .
num .
volumes in hauling vehicles .
measured at the point of delivery based on volumes computed using struck capacity .
hauling units may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided the units body is shaped to enable the ready and accurate determination of the contents volume .
num .
converting between weights and volumes .
at the request of the contractor and with written approval from the engineer materials paid for by volume may be measured by weight with the measured units of weight converted to units of volume through use of a conversion factor agreed to before the measurement and payment .
also with advance approval materials paid for by weight may be measured by volume .
num measurement and payment num num num measurement and payment num num num num .
asphalt materials .
measured by the gallon cubic meter or short ton metric ton subject to correction for foaming shipping loss or other reasons for nonuse .
materials will be measured using net weights or converted to weights from volumes .
asphalt volumes will be measured at num f num c or when measured at other temperatures corrected to the equivalent volume in accordance with the materials testing manual .
num .
commercial additives .
bulk additives will be measured by the short ton metric ton .
additives in sacks will be measured using the net weight on the manufacturers label .
num .
timber .
measured by the foot meter incorporated .
num .
equipment time .
measured by the actual number of hours the equipment is used in the work including necessary travel time within the limits of the project .
num weighing procedures and equipment num general weigh material obtained from an available source or a noncommercial contractor furnished source on computerized scales .
material obtained from a commercial source may be weighed on a computerized or noncomputerized scale .
provide and maintain scales or use certified permanentlyinstalled commercial scales .
the engineer will approve scales for use and document the findings on scale check and daily truck tares form enum .
the department will pay for materials measured or proportioned by weight mass after quantities have been weighed on accurate scales and the results properly documented .
the department will only pay for the weight mass of material incorporated in the work .
the department will not pay for quantities weighed on belt scales .
ensure the scales accuracy to within num percent of the true weight throughout the scales range of use .
the engineer will verify the scales accuracy by observing the contractor check the scale before its first use and as often thereafter as the engineer deems necessary .
provide for this purpose ten or more numpound num kg weights or other calibration devices recommended by the scales manufacturer .
num ensure that vehicles hauling materials to from or on the project bear a plainly legible unique identification number .
the engineer will direct the daily taking of vehicle tare weights and record the results on scale check and daily truck tares form enum .
if applicable ensure that the system is capable of securing the poises in position and does not allow inadvertent change of position .
num documentation if computerized scales are used provide computer generated weigh tickets .
provide computer generated recap sheets using the same computer and data that produced the individual weigh tickets .
the contractor may use the departments weight ticket form enum and recap sheet form enum .
document the weight mass on a separate sequentially numbered weigh ticket containing at a minimum items num num num and num in the following list .
provide the ticket to the vehicle driver .
at the point of delivery and before incorporation into the work the engineer may ask the driver for the loads ticket loads without a ticket will be rejected .
the department will pay for materials on the basis of daily recap recapitulation sheets produced by the contractor and given to the engineer .
the department will treat the recap sheets as source documents for the purpose of payment include the following on each sheet num .
project number hand written or computer generated num .
delivery date num .
each loads net weight mass and ticket number with justification for out of sequence numbers num .
material type identified by pay item name num .
total tons of material delivered to the project num .
tons of material voided for the day num .
pay tons for the days production num .
previous pay tons num measurement and payment num num num num num num num num num measurement and payment num .
total pay tons to date num .
a signed statement from the contractor attesting to the accuracy and completeness of the facts represented and num .
a place for remarks .
if material is shipped by rail the suppliers net weight mass shown on the invoice may be accepted as documentation for payment .
if material is shipped by truck and the invoice shows the combined weight mass of the truck and material and the weight mass of the empty truck the suppliers invoice weight mass may be accepted as documentation for payment .
num scales the engineer may designate the scales location .
ensure that scale intervals are uniformly spaced throughout the marked length of the beam dial or digital readout do not exceed num percent of the scales nominal rated capacity and denote increments of at least num lb num kg .
do not use spring balances .
arrange beams dials platforms and other equipment so that they can be viewed safely and conveniently by the operator and inspectors .
ensure sufficient size and capacity of platform scales to enable setting the total tare weight mass on the tare bar and determination of the net weight mass on the second bar and to enable the simultaneous weighing of a tractor and at least one hauling unit additional hauling units may be weighed separately while attached to the tractor .
install and maintain scales so that the platform is level with rigid bulkheads at each end .
hauling units may be weighed separately if the total weight mass of the tractor and all hauling units weighed together is within num percent of the sum of the combined unit weight mass of the individual units .
place all axles on the scales when weighing a hauling unit separately .
the department will not allow the use of strain gauges on platform scales .
use pressureactivated load cell systems .
ensure a gross carrying capacity sufficient to support a fully loaded weighing container without loss of accuracy and to maintain the loaded scales center of gravity between the load supports .
a weighing container may be supported by a single load cell or multiple load cells with a scale lever system or multiple load cells .
use cell supports designed to num num num num num num prevent lateral or other nonaxial forces cells sealed for environmental protection and systems designed to resist the following num .
moisture num .
leakage num .
damage from overload or sudden impact num .
drift from high voltage or high temperature and num .
line noise or radio frequency interference .
ensure a convenient means either automatically or by the operator for checking both the load cell circuit and the signal conditioning and load display circuit .
ensure that digital weight mass indicators have sufficient range so as to be capable of displaying the scales capacity when fully loaded .
ensure that digital readouts can be easily read under normal operating conditions .
num corrections for inaccuracy the engineer will order the use of scales registering more than num percent over true weight mass stopped immediately .
for payment the weights mass of all loads and materials received since the time the scale was last verified as accurate on scale check and daily truck tare form enum will be reduced by the percentage of error greater than num percent of true .
the engineer will allow the scales return to use only after the scale has been adjusted and verified as accurate .
adjust scales registering lessthantrue weights mass the department will not pay additionally or otherwise correct for loads or materials weighed on such scales .
num payment the cost of providing facilities and equipment for the accurate weighing or proportioning of materials is incidental to the associated pay items in the contract .
include the cost in and distribute reasonably among the unit bid prices for associated items .
num num measurement and payment num num num num num num num measurement and payment num scope of payment the department provides either direct or incidental payment for contract work under the pay items shown in the proposal form enum .
num .
direct payment .
payment is provided directly under a pay item shown in the proposal form enum when one of the following applies num .
the work is measured in the measurement and payment subsection of the specification ordering the work and the proposal form enum contains a pay item for the work with the same threedigit number as the section of the standard specifications or the same first digit of the number as the division of the supplementary specification or special provision ordering the work .
num .
the measurement and payment subsection of the specification ordering the work references another section for measuring and paying for the work and the proposal form enum contains a pay item for the work from the referenced section .
num .
incidental payment .
work required to safely and satisfactorily provide or accomplish a pay item or items but which is not directly measured and paid for or for which the contract does not include a pay item is an incidental obligation of the contractor .
the department does not directly pay for such work instead payment is included under the associated pay items in the proposal form enum .
this includes instances when the specification ordering the work num .
references another specification for performing the work and num .
does not reference another specification for direct payment of the work .
the department will pay and the contractor agrees to accept the compensation provided for by the contracts pay items as full payment for furnishing all resources needed to perform the work in a complete and acceptable manner and for all risk loss damage or expense arising from the conduct or nature of the work .
include the work materials labor equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the construction of an item of work in accordance with the contract in the pay item established in the contract for the work .
num num if the measurement and payment clause in the contract relating to a unit bid price in the proposal form enum requires that the unit bid price cover and be considered compensation for a certain item of work or material essential to the item the department will not measure or pay for this same work or material under any other pay item in the contract .
payment for adhering to agreements included in the contract is incidental to the associated pay items in the contract include the cost of adherence in and distribute reasonably among the unit bid prices for associated items in the bid .
the department will pay for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or material furnished in accordance with the contract .
the department will not pay for work performed in excess of that specified staked ordered or otherwise authorized .
the department will not pay for an item until material requirements have been met and the engineer has received the required certifications in accordance with subsection num manufactured product certifications .
for pay items that include the word reset in the title the removal of existing items that will be reinstalled is incidental to the ordered item of work .
the department will measure and pay directly for removing other items in accordance with the measurement and payment section of the specifications ordering the work .
num compensation for altered quantities num general if the accepted quantities for an item of work vary from the quantities estimated in the proposal form enum the department will pay for the accepted quantities at the pay item prices .
except as provided in subsection num contract amendments the department will not allow for increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor from any cause including directly from alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation by the bidder of overhead expense among the pay times .
the department will reimburse the contractor at the documented actual cost for work or materials already placed or furnished in accordance with the contract but that becomes unnecessary because of a later alteration in quantities .
num num measurement and payment num num num num num num num measurement and payment num the department will reimburse the contractor for increases in material costs for overruns of plan quantity for corrugated metal pipes steel piling dowel bars tie bars for concrete pavement corrugated guardrail wood and steel posts for guardrail reinforced concrete pipes geotextiles geogrid paving fabric wood and steel fence posts fence wire seed and mulch .
to qualify for a price adjustment the following will apply num .
order materials any time after the award of the contract and within the time period indicated in the quote .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of any known quantity changes by the award date .
otherwise use quantities shown in the contract .
num .
take delivery of materials and provide for handling and storage of materials .
num .
at the preconstruction conference provide the engineer with confidential prices and proof that the order was placed within the timeframe indicated in the quote for the qualifying item .
ensure the information submitted contains the bid item number on all price quotes .
if information is not submitted at the preconstruction conference no price adjustments will be made .
num .
materials can not have a fixed price .
num .
the original contract or adjusted quantity as described in this subsection or by contract amendment overruns by more than num percent .
in this case a price adjustment will be made to the quantity over num percent .
num .
the original contract or adjusted quantity as described in this subsection or by contract amendment overruns and the price of material changes by more than plus or minus num percent from the confidential quote submitted at the preconstruction conference .
in this case a price adjustment will be made to the quantity over num percent .
notify the engineer when an overrun of a qualifying item appears necessary .
obtain three competitive price quotes from suppliers on wydot form enum suppliers quote for adjustment .
submit form enum to the engineer within three working days of notification .
num num num num num if form enum is not submitted within the time specified no adjustment to the unit price will be made .
the engineer will num .
use the lowest quote to determine if an adjustment is required num .
determine the new unit price by taking the original unit bid price or price amended by contract amendment subtracting the original material cost submitted at the preconstruction conference or time of contract amendment and adding the new material cost num .
notify the contractor in writing as to whether the material qualifies for a price adjustment and num .
pay for overrun quantity under a new bid item reflecting the new unit cost and overrun quantity .
notify the department in accordance with subsection num contractor engineer notification within num calendar days if the engineers decision is not acceptable .
num eliminated reduced or unused pay items the engineer may choose to eliminate a pay item or reduce the quantity of a pay item .
when the engineer notifies the contractor that a pay item will not be used or reduced the department will reimburse the contractor for actual work done and all costs incurred including mobilization of materials before the notification or effective date of the contract amendment form enum .
if materials have been delivered to the project and can not be returned to the supplier the department will pay for the materials at the invoice price plus num percent for overhead and take ownership .
the department will not pay for lost or anticipated profits resulting from the elimination or nonuse of a pay item .
num .
minor items .
the engineer may reduce the quantity of or eliminate a minor pay item by writing a notice to the contractor or by using a contract amendment form enum such action does not invalidate the contract .
num .
major items .
the engineer may eliminate or reduce the quantity of a major pay item by using a contract amendment form enum .
num measurement and payment num num num num num num measurement and payment num crushed aggregate if the original quantity of crushed aggregate material as estimated in the contract or as altered by a contract amendment form enum or in writing by the engineer is later reduced more than num percent and the engineer fails to notify the contractor of the reduction in writing before the material is produced the department will reimburse the contractor for the actual cost of producing the difference in quantities .
the department requires documentation substantiating the cost and approval by the engineer before such reimbursement .
the department will not pay for the production of more material than requested .
excess material produced from a departmentfurnished source will remain the property of the department .
num extra and force account work num general the department may direct the contractor to perform unforeseen work necessary to complete the project and pay for such work as specified in the remainder of this subsection and in the order of precedence given .
num contract prices the engineer will use the contract unit prices if they are representative of the work to be performed .
num negotiated prices the engineer and the contractor may negotiate new unit or lump sum prices by using a contract amendment form enum before the work is performed .
num force account the engineer may direct the contractor to perform work under force account .
the departments payment to the contractor for such work is compensationin full and will be determined as follows num .
labor .
for the time that workers and their immediate working foremen are engaged specifically and solely in force account work the department will pay the cost of those employees wages at the num num num num num num num rates shown on the payroll but not more than the rates for comparable work performed by current employees on the project plus num percent to cover overhead property damage and liability insurance workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes .
the department will also pay the actual costs of health pension and other bona fide fringe benefits required by collective bargaining agreements or otherwise applicable to the personnel involved .
the department will pay based on the actual hours of labor to the nearest recorded onehalf hour each day .
num .
materials .
the department will pay for the actual cost of materials approved for use by the engineer and incorporated into the work including transportation charges exclusive of equipment rentals plus num percent .
the department will not issue payment without receipt of invoices substantiating the material and transportation costs .
if materials are taken from the contractors stock provide a statement certifying that the materials were taken from stock that the quantity claimed was used and that the price and transportation claimed represent actual costs .
num .
equipment .
the department will pay for the rental of equipment approved by the engineer .
the engineer requires fully operational equipment of a size and capacity to perform the work .
the engineer may approve the use of equipment not meeting this requirement if furnished by the contractor at reduced prices that are mutually agreed upon .
the contractor and the engineer will agree on whether to use equipment already available on the project or to lease equipment .
the department will pay for equipment based on actual hours of use recorded to the nearest onehalf hour each day .
if the total period of operation within a day is less than one hour the department will consider the time as one full hour .
furnish an equipment rental rate determination form enumb with the equipment data portion of the form completed for each item of equipment used .
in determining payment rates the department will pay for rental of the contractors own equipment at rates given in the rental rate blue book for construction equipment volumes num published by equipment watch adjusted both regionally for wyoming and for equipment age .
num measurement and payment num num measurement and payment for each piece of equipment the department will establish its payment rate on the equipment rental rate determination form enumb submitted by the contractor using blue book rates it will maintain that initial rate for the duration of the project .
in determining equipment rental rates the department will include power control units and basic attachments and accessories already on the rented equipment even if a particular attachment is not actually used .
the department will pay for additional accessories that may be needed using the rental rate calculation procedure for the basic equipment plus the blue book operating costs .
exclusive of costs for the operator the department calculates the hourly rental rate for a piece of equipment by adding two distinct components both derived from the blue booka rental rate and an operating rate as follows num .
rental rate .
includes depreciation taxes major overhaul and repairs overhead interest regional adjustment equipment age adjustment insurance and storage .
the hourly rental rate is computed by dividing the equipments blue book monthly rate by num to establish the hourly rate and then multiplying by wyomings regional adjustment factor and the rate adjustment factor for the equipments age as follows num .
operating rate .
includes fuel lubricants labor service and maintenance field repairs tires and other expendable items needed for continuous and efficient operation .
computed as num .
total hourly rental rate .
the sum of a piece of equipments rental and operating rates exclusive of operator costs the department will not adjust the total hourly rate for fuel costs or horsepower differences from standard engine ratings .
operating rate blue book est .
operating cost per hour total hourly rate rental rate operating rate rental rate hourly regional adj .
age adj .
monthly rate num num if the equipment is not located on the project and is leased from an outside agency for the force account work only then the department will use the lease agreement rate or lump sum price as the rental rate .
if the equipment is located on the project and is leased from an outside agency for contract work other than force account work the department will determine a rental rate in accordance with preceding paragraphs num num and num .
for equipment present on the worksite as a part of normal project work the department includes mobilization costs in the mobilization item on the proposal form enum and will not pay additional mobilization for use of the equipment on force account work .
the department will pay actual move in and move out transportation costs for a piece of equipment not available on the project if the equipment is moved by another vehicle .
the department will pay the total hourly rental rate for equipment moved to the project site under its own power and for equipment moved within the limits of the project .
the department may for its own convenience approve payment for equipment standby time .
the department will pay for such time at num percent of the equipments rental rate it will use the standby rate when the engineer has ordered that equipment be made available for force account work but the equipment is idle for reasons not the fault of the contractor .
the engineer will determine the standby duration when initially approving the equipment for standby time .
the department will not pay for more than num hours per day or num hours per week of standby nor will it pay for standby on sundays or holidays .
num .
miscellaneous .
the department will not pay additionally for items or services already covered by or inherent to the contracted scope of work such as general superintendence use of small hand tools or the provision of storage facilities .
num .
documentation .
the engineer will document force account work on the daily force account record form enuma review and sign this record each day .
after completing the work prepare and give the engineer the original and one copy of the force account record form enum detailed as follows num measurement and payment num measurement and payment num num .
date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each classification of laborers and foremen num .
date daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each code designation unit of machinery and equipment num .
quantities of materials prices and extensions supported with invoices num .
transportation charges for materials supported with invoices and num .
total cost of the work .
num .
subcontract work .
if the engineer directs the performance of work by force account that the contractor then subcontracts the department will pay in accordance with the provisions of this subsection subsection num force account .
as reimbursement for its own administrative expenses the contractor may add num percent to the amount of the subcontractors billing for the work .
num .
invoice work .
if the engineer and the contractor agree that an item of work is minor in nature or requires a specialist the work may be paid for based on a contractor or subcontractor invoice .
the department prefers invoices itemized by labor material and equipment rental costs but may accept non or partially itemized invoices if full itemization is impractical or not standard practice for the work or service .
as full reimbursement for its own administrative expenses the contractor may add num percent to a subcontractors invoice .
num .
minor work .
the value of force account work performed as invoice work will not be allowed to exceed num percent of the dollar value established in the contract for the pay item force account work .
no single invoice or type of work will be allowed to exceed num percent of the dollar value established in the contract for the pay item force account work .
num .
specialist work .
if the engineer and the contractor agree that an item of work or service requires skills tools or equipment unavailable within the contractors or authorized subcontractors num organizations the contractor may use a specialist to perform the work or service .
if a contractor is required to perform specialized fabrication or machining in a shop facility away from the project the department may accept the charges for that portion of the contractors work as an invoice billing to which num percent has been added .
the department will base its payment for specialty work or service on current market price .
num payment the department will pay as follows num measurement and payment pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest force account work num num num monthly progress payment num general the department will make payments at least once each month .
additional payments may be made if the work total exceeds num and a request is made by the contractor .
payments will be based on the engineers estimates of the value of work performed and materials completeinplace in accordance with the contract and for materials delivered in accordance with subsection num payment for material on hand .
the contractor may choose cutoff dates of the numst numth or numth of the month for the progress payments .
num contractors payment to subcontractors the department requires the contractor to pay subcontractors promptly for their work upon receipt of payment for the associated work from the department .
after the first monthly progress payment to the contractor the engineer will make no further payment until the contractor submits for each subcontractor performing work the previous month one of the following num .
certification of subcontract payment .
a fully executed certification of subcontract payments form enum indicating the subcontractors receipt of payment .
num num num num num measurement and payment num .
good cause documentation .
documentation accepted in writing by the engineer that demonstrates good cause for not making the required payment .
the department requires the contractor to obtain an executed certification of subcontract payments form enum from each subcontractor within num calendar days of the subcontractors receipt of a payment .
if within this period the subcontractor fails to submit the executed form and the engineer accepts in writing the contractors documentation of the failure the department will consider the failure good cause for the contractor to withhold further payment to the subcontractor until the executed form is submitted .
notify the subcontractor of this action in writing .
within num calendar days upon completion of a subcontractors work and after he or she has met the requirements of the subcontractor agreement with the prime contractor pay the full amount due including retainage .
submit a final form enum to the department for all subcontractors .
num contractorsubcontractor disputes if an issue involving payment by the contractor to a subcontractor becomes the subject of dispute the party contractor or subcontractor raising the dispute is responsible for promptly submitting a written description of the dispute to the engineer .
state clearly who the dispute is between the reason for the dispute the dollar amount involved and other pertinent information .
upon receipt of the written notice the engineer will withhold the amount in dispute from the next monthly progress payment .
the contractor and subcontractor are responsible for settling their dispute .
upon written notification to the engineer that the dispute is settled signed by all parties involved in the dispute the department will pay the disputed amount in the next monthly progress payment .
if the contractor and the subcontractor fail to resolve the dispute the department will consider both parties in default of the contract .
the department may deny the parties future bid envelopes in accordance with subsection num bid envelope and electronic bid system device and it may not approve their performance of future subcontract work in accordance with subsection num subletting of contract .
num num num num num num num num payment for material on hand the department may pay for materials stockpiled or stored for later use on the project and for which the contractor provides acceptable documentation indicating the material meets contract requirements .
stockpiled or stored materials may be located on the project or at acceptable bonded facilities elsewhere which the department reserves the right to inspect .
the department will not make such payment without a written request received at least num calendar days before the date of the next scheduled progress payment and may not pay more than num percent of the items original bid extension .
include with the written request the following information as appropriate num .
purchased materials .
support material and shipping costs by invoices freight bills or other information required by the engineer .
the engineer may exceed the num percent limit if adequate documentation can be provided .
num .
stockpiled aggregate .
submit a production statement supporting the crushing and transport costs if applicable .
payment for stockpiled or stored materials does not constitute acceptance and the department may later reject materials for which it has made such payment .
num mobilization num general the department will pay for the costs of mobilizing the resources needed to prepare for the start of work .
mobilization includes but is not limited to the following num .
moving personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the site num .
establishing offices buildings and other facilities at the site num .
other preparatory work and operations and num .
performance bond .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure mobilization by the lump sum .
num measurement and payment num num num num num num measurement and payment the department will pay as follows num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest mobilization ls ls ls num .
on the first estimate following award num percent of the mobilization pay item or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num .
upon completion of all work on the project payment on any amount bid for mobilization in excess of num percent of the original contract amount will be paid .
num .
the total sum of all payments will not exceed the original contract amount bid for mobilization regardless of the fact that the contractor may have shut down the work on the project or moved equipment away from the project and then back again .
num num final quantities after the project has been accepted in accordance with subsection num final acceptance the engineer will prepare final quantities in which all prior monthly progress payments are subject to correction and it will then be given to the contractor for approval .
the engineer will send the contractor for review a copy of the final quantities using usps certified mail return receipt requested .
notify the department in accordance with subsection num contractor engineer notification within num calendar days of receipt if the final quantities are not acceptable .
num final payment and executed forms the department will advertise the project as complete after the physical work is complete and the contractor has submitted all documentation required by the contract and agreed with the final estimated quantities .
fortyone days after the department first advertises the project as complete the department will pay the contractor the remaining sum due .
num royalties the department will make royalty payments directly to the owner of the source of those materials it acquires .
the department will deduct from its payments to the contractor the royalty paid for the following num .
material remaining in the base of depleted aggregate stockpiles when waste contamination or overhaul is evident in the judgement of the engineer or num .
borrow source material used in excess of the quantities required .
such a deduction will not be made if the department uses the remaining aggregate piles for other projects .
num measurement and payment num num num num num num num num num wages and condition of employment num section num wages and condition of employment num scope adhere to the requirements for wages and conditions of employment incorporated into the contract by way of supplementary documents in the proposal form enum and physically incorporate these same requirements into all subcontracts .
num equal employment opportunity meet specified equal employment opportunity obligations and cooperate with the department in their reviews of activities related to these obligations .
num preference for wyoming citizens on projects funded solely by the state of wyoming employ only wyoming workers .
after informing the state employment office nearest to the worksite of the projects need for labor the contractor may use nonresident workers if num .
qualified resident workers are unavailable and num .
the state employment office has provided a letter substantiating its inability to supply resident workers and the contractor has submitted a copy to the engineer .
worker for this purpose means a person employed to perform skilled or unskilled manual labor for wages in any capacity and does not include independent contractors .
resident means a citizen of the united states who has lived in wyoming for at least one year immediately preceding his or her application for employment .
num num num certified payrolls submit weekly payrolls to the engineer as appropriate for the contracts funding source .
the department may suspend monthly progress payments if payroll submissions are more than num calendar days late .
num .
federal aid contracts .
submit payrolls and the statement of compliance form whnum for the contractor and subcontractors in accordance with the required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts form fhwanum .
num .
state funded contracts .
when required by a wage grievance or the need to document force account costs submit payrolls for the contractor and subcontractors .
wages and condition of employment num num num environmental requirements num section num environmental requirements num protection of the environment in accordance with subsection num applicable laws become familiar with and adhere to all laws relevant to minimizing damage to the environment and risks to human health .
if a requirement of section num environmental requirements conflicts with an environmental or pollution control requirement of another federal state of wyoming or local agency the more restrictive requirement applies .
implement best management practices to minimize pollution and soil erosion .
promptly revegitate disturbed areas .
notify the engineer promptly upon receiving notice in any form of noncompliance with a pollution or erosion control requirement and modify or cooperate in modifying the manner of work to bring about compliance .
cooperate with inspections by federal or state agencies to determine the status of the project with regard to environmental issues .
num forest protection prevent and suppress forest fires .
notify forest officials promptly of the location and extent of any fire and cooperate with requests from forest officials for help in fire control efforts .
num erosion and pollution controls num general do not pollute surface waters or wetlands with sediment or other harmful materials .
service and fuel equipment away from streams and riparian areas .
ensure staging areas are a minimum of num ft num m from riparian areas .
dispose of fuels oils bitumens salts cement or other potential surface or ground water contaminants in a licensed disposal site only .
prepare a spill contingency plan for petroleum products solvents and other hazardous materials to be used or stored at the worksite and submit to the engineer at the preconstruction conference include plans for emergency fills in surface waters as appropriate and in accordance with subsection num emergency fills .
num num num num num num maintain a collection system for garbage rubbish and salvaged material collected from the project .
remove such waste and dispose of at licensed landfills or other recognized salvage sites only do not use the rightofway adjoining property or material sources for disposal .
do not disturb lands or waters outside the construction limits without authorization from the engineer .
if provision of a waste site is specified obtain environmental clearances in accordance with subsection num contractorfurnished .
do not change the substrate composition type and size of the streambed .
separate the top num ft num m of stream bottom substrate from deeper soil layers and stockpile separately .
replace substrate layers in the same order in which they were removed .
num storm water pollution prevention plan implement the storm water pollution prevention plan swppp to incorporate temporary and permanent erosion control features into the project at the earliest practical time .
when not obtained by the department prepare an swppp in accordance with subsection num storm water control and submit at the preconstruction conference .
include in the plan all temporary and permanent erosion control features needed throughout the worksite including haul roads and material sources .
keep the plan current as work progresses .
num payment if temporary erosion or pollution control measures become necessary due to the contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent control features as scheduled the engineer may order the contractor to perform such work at no additional cost to the department .
if temporary control measures become necessary for other reasons the engineer may order the contractor to perform the work and the department will pay at pay item prices or if the contract does not include appropriate pay items for the work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
disturbances less than num acre num mnum that do not require a permit will not require a storm water pollution prevention plan swppp and will be eliminated in accordance with subsection num eliminated reduced or unused pay items .
num num num num environmental requirements num num num num num num air pollution control num general provide and use methods to control air pollution .
equip operate and maintain bituminous mixing plants to meet applicable particulate emission standards .
num payment the cost of implementing air pollution control measures is incidental to the associated contract pay items .
when specified and used to control air pollution the engineer will measure and pay for water or dust control agent in accordance with section num watering and section num dust control agent .
num surface waters and wetlands num general the u.s. army corps of engineers regulates the placement of permanent or temporary fill in or near surface waters and wetlands in accordance with section num of the federal clean water act .
the department will obtain the applicable permit when needed .
review carefully the terms of the permit in relation to the contract .
if any proposed element or activity of the work exceeds the encroachment authorized by the permit give the engineer a work plan at least num calendar days before starting the work that shows the approximate dimensions and proposed methods of implementing or constructing features or elements such as but not limited to the following num .
surface water diversions num .
temporary stream crossings num .
cofferdams and num .
dewatering systems .
upon receipt of the proposed work plan the engineer will contact the u.s. army corps of engineers to obtain authorization for the revised encroachment .
if the corps refuses to authorize the revision then perform the work within the original encroachment boundaries at no additional cost to the department .
num environmental requirements num num num num num do not begin work affecting areas outside the limits authorized by the original num permit until receiving a copy of the amended permit from the engineer .
when working in or near surface waters or wetlands minimize disruptions restrictions or damage to or of the quality or supply of downstream public waters .
ensure equipment entering or working over water is pressure washed and leaks are repaired before use .
do not ford or operate equipment in surface waters or wetlands except to install or remove encroachments or to perform brief necessary work .
ensure that machinery and equipment do not leak lubricants coolants or fuel .
pressure wash equipment and allow it to dry before moving it between watersheds .
num temporary encroachments do not allow to an extent greater than specified temporary encroachments to reduce waterways increase depth of flow cause bank erosion or bottom scour or inhibit the movement of fish or other wildlife .
use cofferdams silt barriers staked or floating booms bypass flumes or sediment pads to minimize turbidity .
be ready to remove temporary encroachments if warranted by flood or threat of flood .
use commercially available dikes commercially available cofferdams or clean gravel for temporary encroachments .
obtain clean gravel fill material from a nonstreambed contractorfurnished source in accordance with subsection num contractorfurnished .
do not use a source located within a surface water .
ensure a coarseness equal to or greater than the gradation of the natural streambed and that num percent of the material is greater than num in num mm .
remove fine material that would unacceptably increase turbidity .
release fish trapped by temporary fills culverts or other work into nearby unrestricted or open surface waters .
remove temporary encroachments as soon as practical do so in a manner that minimizes disturbance .
after removing the temporary encroachments dispose of fill and other waste materials in accordance with subsection num erosion and pollution controls general and return the affected environment such as stream banks bottoms and wetlands to their configuration before disturbance .
remove temporary pilings or sheeting to a depth of at least num ft num m below the streambed .
num environmental requirements num num num num num num num num num environmental requirements num emergency fills when it becomes necessary to temporarily place fill material in surface waters or wetlands to avoid flooding or retain spilled hazardous wastes obtain after the fact permits and certifications from the u.s. army corps of engineers and wdeq .
give the engineer copies of these documents when available .
to the extent possible place emergency fill in accordance with subsection num temporary encroachments remove the material and restore the affected site in accordance with that same subsection .
when approved by the engineer the department will pay for this work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num num num section num archaeologic paleontologic and historic sites num discovery of potential sites upon discovering evidence of a potential archaeologic paleontologic or historic site stop work in the area and notify the engineer .
the engineer will contact the proper authorities who will conduct a field inspection to evaluate the findings .
cooperate fully in facilitating this evaluation .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the results and of when work in the area may resume .
for delays due to the discovery the engineer may make an extension to the contract completion date in accordance with subsection num extension to the contract completion date .
num cultural clearances the department will obtain and provide the cultural clearances and permits for the specified rightofway and for material plant and similar sites and facilities as described in subsection num departmentfurnished .
before using sites other than those provided obtain such clearances and permits in accordance with subsection num permits licenses and taxes and subsection num contractorfurnished .
num archaeologic paleontologic and historic sites num num num acceptance num section num acceptance num acceptance of aggregate the department will accept the gradation of crushed or screened aggregates used for pavements bases subbases chip seals and stockpiled materials with a gradation specification based on random samples taken at the direction of the engineer and a quality level analysis of the test results .
quality level analysis is a method of analyzing aggregate gradation test results to determine compliance with the contract requirements .
the quality level analysis will include an evaluation for outlier test results using the departments computer software .
the engineer will determine the quality level acceptance and pay factor for each lot .
lot and sublot sizes are specified in the respective technical sections .
the engineer will include partial lots with less than three samples with the previous lot for quality level analysis .
all test results for a lot will be analyzed to determine the pay factor for the lot .
the lowest pay factor computed for any one sieve will be used to adjust the pay for that lot .
acceptance procedures will not apply to sieve designations with requirements of num percent passing num to num percent passing and num to num percent passing .
only the pl percent within lower limits will be calculated for the sieve designations requiring num to num percent passing and the pu percent within upper limits will be set at num .
the maximum obtainable pay factor will be num .
a lot containing material that does not meet the contract requirements will be num .
accepted if the pay factor is at least num or num .
rejected if the material fails to obtain at least a num pay factor .
to avoid a pay factor less than num the contractor may remove defective material and replace it with new material which the department will sample test and evaluate in accordance with this specification .
without testing the engineer may isolate and reject material that is obviously defective .
do not continue producing material that does not meet contract requirements .
if two consecutive lots have a pay factor less than num change procedures to meet the requirements .
num num num num num num num num acceptance num the engineer will compute the quality level analysis and pay factor as follows num .
determine the arithmetic mean .
where summation x individual test value n total number test values num .
compute the sample standard deviation s. s num .
compute the upper quality index qu .
qu where slu upper specification limit or target value of job mix plus allowable deviation .
target value for qu the single specification value with allowable deviations .
num .
compute the lower quality index ql .
ql where sll lower specification limit or target minus allowable deviation .
num n num n i num xi num slu s sll s n x num num acceptance num .
determine pu the percent within the upper specification limit corresponding to a given qu from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method .
if an slu is not specified or if the upper specification limit for the sieve being evaluated is num percent pu is num .
num .
determine pl the percent within lower specification limit corresponding to a given ql from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method .
if an sll is not specified pl will benum .
num .
determine the quality level the total percent within the specification limits .
quality level pu pl num num .
using the quality level from the preceding step determine the pay factor from table num pay factors .
to obtain a given pay factor meet or exceed the value in the table for the computed quality level .
pay factors greater than num do not apply when quality incentives are not included in the respective technical specifications for a pay item .
testing frequency indicates the minimum number of tests required for the specified quantity of aggregate produced .
for example num ton num t is equivalent to one test minimum required for each num ton num t of aggregate produced .
table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method pu or pl percent within limits for positive values of qu or ql upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql n num n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method continued num acceptance pu or pl percent within limits for positive values of qu or ql upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql n num n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num acceptance table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method continued pu or pl percent within limits for positive values of qu or ql upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql n num n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note for values of qu or ql less than zero pu or pl equals num minus the table value for pu or pl .
if the value of qu does not correspond exactly to a figure in the table use the next highest figure .
num table num pay factors num acceptance pay factor required quality level for a given sample size n and pay factor n num n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num acceptance table num pay factors continued num acceptance of asphalt materials the engineer may conditionally accept cutback and emulsified asphalt materials at the source based on test reports for each tankerpup delivered .
asphalt binder will be accepted in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
asphalt material used on the project that does not meet the contract requirements for the designated type and grade may at the direction of the engineer be num .
rejected and the contractor required to remove and replace all material affected by the nonspecification material at no additional cost to the department num .
accepted after evaluation in accordance with the applicable technical section and left in place with no payment made for the asphalt material used or num .
accepted at a reduced unit price in accordance with the applicable materials programs current schedule of price adjustments for asphalt materials in effect at the time of the award of the contract .
the reduced unit price is based on the price paid to the supplier or refinery for asphalt materials delivered to the project .
submit written documentation of these prices to the engineer .
if prices are not submitted the engineer will use unit bid price for asphalt materials .
pay factor required quality level for a given sample size n and pay factor n num n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num unacceptable work and materials the department considers the following unacceptable num .
work materials or both not in accordance with the contract num .
work performed contrary to the engineers orders num .
work outside the construction limits num .
materials placed without authorization and num .
extra work performed without authorization .
work done contrary to the instruction of the engineer work performed without subcontract approval or any extra work done without authority will be considered as unacceptable .
if the quality of the unauthorized work is acceptable to the engineer the work may be left in place without payment .
the engineer will not allow continued production of outofspecification material or work .
remove rejected work and materials including all portions of the work in which unacceptable materials have been incorporated at no additional cost to the department .
rejected work and the traffic control to replace the work will not be paid for .
the contractor may reuse removed material if it is adjusted to meet the contract requirements .
if the contractor fails to remove replace or correct unacceptable work as requested the engineer may direct other organizations to perform these activities and deduct the cost from monies due the contractor or bill the contractor as appropriate .
the engineer may isolate and reject obviously defective material without regard to testing procedures .
num final acceptance num general the department considers acceptance final and conclusive except as regards to latent defects fraud or gross negligence or with regard to the departments rights under any warranty or guarantee .
num num num num num acceptance num num num num acceptance num num num num finish conference either party may request a finish conference when the work has reached the point of substantial completion and the other party is notified in writing .
the department requires the contractors project superintendent at a minimum to attend .
the engineer and chief project inspector will attend for the department along with others as necessary .
inspect the project together and discuss what still needs work before the contractor can request final acceptance .
the engineer will provide a written punchlist of these items .
the contractor may demobilize when the work required on the punchlist has been satisfactorily completed and approved by the engineer or as directed by the engineer .
num final cleanup before requesting final inspection clean the grounds within the construction limits .
remove rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment and leave the project in a condition acceptable to the engineer .
num final inspection final acceptance of the project follows and is contingent on the results of a final inspection by the district engineer .
provide the engineer with a written request for a final inspection .
make the request after satisfactory completion of the punchlist in accordance with subsection num finish conference .
the engineer will notify the contractor if the final inspection discloses incomplete or unsatisfactory work .
correct or complete the work immediately the district engineer will then conduct another inspection .
when the physical work is complete the district engineer will give the contractor written notice of final acceptance as of the date of the inspection and the department will assume responsibility for the project .
the district engineer will send written notice of final acceptance to the contractor using usps certified mail return receipt requested .
in writing the contractor may request final acceptance of a portion of the work when that portion is complete and the use of that unit or portion is deemed necessary by the engineer for the convenience safety or both of traffic .
final acceptance of a portion of the work does not amend the contract .
num num section num laboratory personnel and correlation num general the department does not require that technicians employed by an aashto accredited laboratory and performing tests in that facility be qualified or have a certification .
obtain field samples with qualified or certified technicians .
num mix design num laboratory the department requires that laboratories performing mix designs obtain and maintain aashto accreditation for all tests and procedures and in all fields pertaining to mixes used in the project .
the department will not accept mix designs from a laboratory or source lacking appropriate accreditation .
the department will accept the submission of mix designs from a laboratory without all necessary accreditations when those tests and procedures for which it is not accredited are performed by another facility having the necessary accreditation and the accreditation documentation is submitted along with the mix design .
num correlation of laboratory test results implement the following procedures to control equipment or procedural bias .
num .
make test results from the aashto materials reference laboratory proficiency sample program available on request .
num .
provide the mix design test results to the materials program .
the department will compare contractor and department mix design results using the precision statements in accordance with the materials testing manual .
num .
if the difference between the contractors and departments test results are within the limits of the precision statements the department will use the contractors mix design to approve the job mix formula establish the target asphalt content and establish the voidless unit weight for density control .
num num num num laboratory personnel and correlation num num laboratory personnel and correlation num .
if the difference between the contractors and departments test results exceed the precision statements the department will begin resolving the discrepancy in accordance with subsection num resolving test discrepancies .
until the source of discrepancy is identified and the problem is resolved the results of the mix design performed by the materials program may be used to approve the job mix formula establish the target asphalt content and establish the voidless unit weight for density control .
num resolving test discrepancies to identify the sources of discrepancy between the findings of the two labs the contractor and the department will proceed as follows num .
the engineer the contractor and personnel from the contractors mix design laboratory and the materials program will review testing procedures equipment and other applicable information .
if the parties reach mutual agreement the materials program will record the resolution in writing and document the results in the project file .
num .
if the parties can not agree on a resolution mutually select a thirdparty laboratory .
the results of the thirdparty testing will determine which laboratory bears responsibility for the discrepancy .
num .
the department will pay the cost of the thirdparty testing and resolution if the contractors results are confirmed .
the department will not pay the cost if the departments results are confirmed .
num field testing laboratory and personnel requirements num general provide a quality control supervisor to serve all parties as the pointofcontact for quality control and quality acceptance issues .
at a minimum give the supervisor authority to coordinate activities for mix design quality control and quality acceptance testing to review and interpret test reports and to make recommendations for the control process including mix properties .
when testing is required ensure the presence at the production site of a certified or qualified technician during production of aggregate or plant mix pavement .
num num num num all test results are to be reviewed and signed by a certified technician .
ensure testing personnel use wydot testing procedures as outlined in the materials testing manual .
num personnel the department requires that sampling and testing of materials in the field for quality control quality acceptance and verification be performed by a certified or qualified technician defined as follows num .
certified technician .
the holder of a current certification from the wyoming materials technician certification program .
the department will not consider or accept test results performed by technicians without certification in accordance with table num testing certification requirements .
table num testing certification requirements num laboratory personnel and correlation tests minimum certification aggregate gradation aggregate coarse aggregate angularity aggregate fine aggregate angularity aggregate liquid limit aggregate plastic limit aggregate sand equivalent aggregate inplace density asphalt mix verification sampling asphalt and aggregate asphalt content asphalt num num num num num laboratory personnel and correlation num .
qualified technician .
a person who has satisfied each of the following steps num .
received training in procedures and methods for sampling and testing by a certified technician as verified by a qcqa testing technician qualification form ttqnum signed by the certified technician and submitted to the engineer .
num .
performed under the direct supervision of a certified technician and for the tests the technician will be responsible for the correlation process in accordance with subsection num correlation .
by direct supervision the department means that the supervising technician is physically present during the testing and without other assigned responsibilities than to oversee the trainees performance .
num .
obtained and submitted a letter signed by the supervising certified technician that documents the name of the trainee the trainees employer the date of training and the date of the correlation process .
submit the letter to the materials program the engineer and the contractor .
num .
obtained a qualification card from the materials program .
the materials program will issue a person one card in a lifetime and the card will expire on january num following issue .
a qualified technician may choose to follow the procedures necessary to become a certified technician with all the rights thereof .
once a qualification card expires the department will no longer consider or accept test results from the technician until he or she become certified .
num correlation num general for aggregate and density tests use correlation testing performed by the technicians responsible for the quality acceptance tests and verification tests to ensure results free from equipment and procedural bias .
num num num num num laboratory personnel and correlation before performing correlation tests on the project hold a meeting between the quality control supervisor other personnel responsible for the quality acceptance and verification testing and the technicians performing tests .
at a minimum address the following topics num .
testing personnel and their qualifications num .
equipment num .
time frames of correlation testing num .
test intervals num .
variables or options allowed by testing procedures i.e .
shaking time for sieve analysis core drying and soaking times etc .
and num .
where and how referee samples will be stored .
document the meeting discussions and outcomes obtain the signature of all attendees and submit to the engineer who will keep the documentation in the project file .
the department will use statistical evaluation procedures in accordance with the materials testing manual to decide if both groups of samples represent the same sample population .
if the statistical evaluation procedures indicate that the samples from the contractors and departments testing represent the same sample population quality acceptance testing may begin and the referee samples discarded .
if the samples from the contractors and departments testing do not represent the same sample population the department will begin resolving the discrepancy in accordance with subsection num resolving field test discrepancies .
perform additional correlation testsusing the entire procedureif either the contractor or the department suspects equipment or testing bias .
perform new correlation tests if new equipment or personnel department or contractor are introduced during testing .
num aggregate gradation before performing the correlation testing for aggregate gradation and starting production split at least one sample and perform gradation tests to give a preliminary indication of equipment or test bias .
num num num num num num laboratory personnel and correlation num correlate aggregate test results in accordance with the materials testing manual using samples taken during the first production lot .
if combined samples of aggregate can be obtained during crushing correlation can be performed then .
use the following procedures to correlate the results of the contractors and departments aggregate testing num .
use five sets of test results for the correlation .
num .
three individual samples cut from the belt or taken from a correlated sampling device by the contractor in the presence of the engineer represent a test set .
num .
from each test set test one sample for aggregate gradation do so independent of the department .
num .
from each test set the department will test one sample for aggregate gradation independent of the contractor .
num .
for each test set the department will keep the third sample as the referee sample .
num .
the engineer will perform the statistical evaluation after five test sets have been completed .
num density correlate results from the contractors and departments density tests during placement of the test strip .
use the following procedures num .
the engineer will mark seven randomly selected locations using a table of random numbers and with the exclusion of locations within num in num mm of the pavement edge .
num .
take one pair of core samples from each sample location in the presence of the engineer .
num .
the department and the contractor will dry the cores to constant weight mass with a nondestructive method .
num .
test one sample from each of the seven pairs of dry cores for bulk specific gravity and density do so independent of the department .
num num num laboratory personnel and correlation num .
the engineer will test the other sample from each of the seven pairs of dry cores independent of the contractor .
num .
the engineer will perform the statistical evaluation after the seven pairs of tests have been completed .
num resolving field testing discrepancies resolve discrepancies as follows num .
meet with department personnel and review testing procedures equipment condition and equipment calibrations in an attempt to solve the problem .
num .
when the cause of the discrepancy has been identified and corrected repeat the correlation procedure .
num .
if the second correlation determines that the contractors and departments test results represent different sample populations conduct referee testing .
num .
the materials program will conduct the referee tests using the retained referee samples for aggregate gradations and the departments cores for density testing .
num .
the materials program will make its results available within five working days of receiving the samples .
num .
if the samples represent a quality acceptance lot the engineer will use test results that correlate with the materials program test results for the quality acceptance calculations .
num num division num earthwork num section num clearing and grubbing num description this section describes the requirements for clearing grubbing removing and disposing of vegetation and debris .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant num construction num general the engineer will establish rightofway and construction lines and designate vegetation and other objects to remain .
protect from harm or defacement any vegetation and objects designated to remain .
num clearing and grubbing clear or grub surface objects trees shrubs plants stumps roots and other protruding obstructions not specified to remain .
fell and remove timber in a way that minimizes damage to riparian habitat .
except in urban areas stumps outside slope stake limits may remain in place if cut flush with the ground .
in urban areas cut stumps flush and grind to below grade .
backfill with suitable material and compact holes left by removed stumps and other obstructions in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
unburned refuse and debris become the property of the contractor remove it from the rightofway .
clearing and grubbing num num num num num num num num num num clearing and grubbing num num num mulching incorporate brush and existing vegetation that can be used as mulch into the topsoil in accordance with subsection num topsoil construction general .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
clearing and grubbing by the acre hectare or the complete unit .
the engineer will use one or more of the following methods num .
area basis .
by the acre hectare within the limits specified or staked by the engineer .
num .
lumpsum basis .
no measurement .
num .
clearing trees ____ in mm by the each .
trees less than num in num mm in diameter will be classified as brush .
trees will be classified and measured in accordance with table num nominal tree size measuring .
table num nominal tree size measuring diameter of tree at height of num in num mm in mm pay item size designation num to num num to num num in num mm over num to num num to num num in num mm over num to num num to num num in num mm over num to num num to num num in num mm over num to num num to num num in num mm over num over num num in num mm num the department will pay as follows clearing and grubbing num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest clearing and grubbing ls acre ls ha ls ft ls num m ls num acre ls num ha clearing trees ____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea num num removal num num num num num num section num removal num description this section describes the requirements for removing and disposing of obstructions or appurtenances not specified to remain salvaging material backfilling trenches holes and pits and removing and resetting mailboxes .
num materials provide mailbox components as specified .
provide galvanized nuts screws bolts and hardware .
num equipment if the contract includes pay items milling plant mix or profile milling plant mix remove the existing pavement using a poweroperated milling machine .
provide a machine equipped to perform the following num .
remove a strip of material at least num ft num m wide and num in num mm thick during a single pass .
num .
prevent the escape of dust from the operation into the atmosphere .
num .
establish a profile grade by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control and with a positive means of controlling cross slope elevations .
num .
for profile milling plant mix ensure the machine is equipped with a numfoot num m minimum mobile reference ski unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
other equipment providing the same or better results may be used for removal with the approval of the engineer .
cut bituminous pavement with a saw .
other equipment may be used if cuts are demonstrably equivalent with the approval of the engineer .
cut concrete using a saw with diamond blades .
num num construction num general raze remove and dispose of buildings foundations structures fences and other obstructions as specified .
do not remove utilities and items for which other provisions have been made .
backfill basements cavities and trenches left by structure removal to the level of the surrounding ground .
compact backfill in embankment areas in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
backfill holes created by the removal of posts .
place and compact backfill material in numinch num mm lifts until even with the existing ground surface .
backfill holes in plant mix surfaces with new hot plant mix surfacing material or other material approved by the engineer in thicknesses equivalent to the depths of the existing surfacing material .
without damage remove materials specified for salvage in pieces that can be transported and stockpile them at specified locations .
replace with new material at no additional cost to the department those materials specified for salvage that are damaged during removal transport or stockpiling operations .
materials removed and not specified for salvage recycling or incorporation into the work become the property of the contractor .
do not dispose of removed materials within the rightofway construction permit areas or pits .
num removal of structures do not remove structures used by traffic until provisions have been made to maintain traffic flow .
remove substructures to a depth of num ft num m below the streambed if applicable .
remove items not in a streambed to a depth of num in num mm below the natural ground surface .
where portions of existing structures lie entirely or partially within the limits of a new structure remove as necessary to accommodate construction .
if specified dismantle bridges designated for salvage and matchmark the members .
removal num num num num num num num num num num num removal num num num num num num num steel and timber bridge components may contain hazardous materials the contractor is responsible for mitigation .
dismantle transport and dispose of structural steel bridge components in compliance with governing regulations .
transport the structural steel bridge components to a recycling facility .
give the engineer documentation of the facilitys receipt .
do not burn timber bridges in place .
remove existing structures or obstructions without damaging new work appurtenances or existing roadway that is to remain in place .
if blasting is necessary give the engineer the following information at least num calendar days before blasting begins num .
a blasting plan that includes the credentials of the person doing the blasting .
num .
provisions for protecting appurtenances that are to remain in place .
num .
provisions for protecting property and the public from damage .
num removal of guardrail barrier bridge railing and pedestrian railing removal of existing guardrail and barrier includes rail posts spacer blocks associated hardware bridge rail connections and end anchorages .
remove concrete post foundations anchorage blocks and barrier foundations .
removal of bridge railing and pedestrian railing includes rail posts associated hardware and anchor bolts if specified .
bridge railing components may contain hazardous materials the contractor is responsible for mitigation .
num removal of pipe flared end sections and storm sewer systems remove and clean pipes and flared end sections storm sewer systems manholes and inlets specified for salvage .
num num removal of surfacing concrete sidewalks curbs gutters median double gutter etc .
remove concrete plant mix base course sidewalks curbs gutters double gutters median etc .
specified for removal using one or more of the following methods num .
concrete removal .
break concrete into pieces of approximately num ft³ num m³ or less .
provide a site and dispose of the pieces .
sawcut concrete pavement fulldepth .
repair at no additional cost to the department spalling cracking breaking or similar damage of the existing pavement or appurtenances that are to remain in place .
num .
milling plant mix and profile milling plant mix .
use a milling machine for removal when milling plant mix or profile milling plant mix are specified pay items .
remove the plant mix to the grade and width and at the locations specified .
when profile milling plant mix is specified milling depths will vary across the roadways length width or both .
work may include transition milling into structures into project tieins at box culverts and at the beginning and end of project transitions .
conduct milling operations parallel to the travel lanes unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
correct vertical differences greater than d in num mm between adjacent peaks and valleys of the milled surface .
correct surface irregularities resulting from milling activities using cold milling or other operations at no additional cost to the department .
stockpile removed material not designated for recycling or incorporation into reused base or surfacing at a specified site .
place the material without operating equipment on the stockpiles .
removal num num num num removal num num num num num num .
surfacing subgrade and miscellaneous materials .
use suitable means to remove ballast gravel plant mix material crushed base subbase materials or other surfacing materials stockpile or dispose of them at specified sites .
if removed materials will be incorporated or stockpiled as reused surfacing or base remove without contamination from underlying materials .
num .
cutting plant mix pavement or base .
if surfacing is to be removed next to surfacing that is to remain cut the pavement along the limits of removal .
make a vertical cut deep enough to allow removal of the pavement and base if applicable without leaving a ragged edge or damaging the adjacent pavement .
vary the depth of cut as dictated by changes in the thickness of the pavement .
num removing and resetting mailboxes as necessary move and maintain mailboxes to ensure accessibility by mail carriers during construction .
mount reset mailboxes on new posts unless the old posts and mountings comply with contract requirements .
whenever possible reset existing mailboxes .
erect replacement mailboxes as furnished by the department .
return posts and mailboxes that are removed and not reused to the landowner .
num removal of fence snow fence and signs when fence removal includes salvage roll salvaged wire into rolls no larger than num ft num m in diameter .
backfill and compact holes left after the removal of posts anchors and other components .
if the snow fence anchors will not come out of the ground cut the anchors off num in num mm below the ground level .
backfill and compact the hole to match the existing ground elevation .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num num num .
cutting bit pvmt and cutting concrete by the foot meter .
in contracts without a pay item for cutting bit pvmt or cutting concrete this work is incidental to the associated removal pay item .
num .
milling plant mix by the short ton metric ton square yard square meter or cubic yard cubic meter .
num .
profile milling plant mix by the short ton metric ton square yard square meter or cubic yard cubic meter .
num .
removal of bit curb removal of curb and removal of curb and gutter by the foot meter .
num .
removal of bridge rail removal of guardrail and barrier and removal of pedestrian rail by the foot meter .
num .
removal of cattle guards by the each .
num .
removal of concrete removal of concrete median and removal of concrete pavement by the square yard square meter or cubic yard cubic meter or as a complete unit .
num .
removal of crushed base and removal of surfacing by the short ton metric ton square yard square meter or cubic yard cubic meter .
num .
removal of double gutter and removal of sidewalk by the foot meter or square yard square meter .
num .
removal of fence by the foot meter .
num .
removal of inlets and removal of manholes by the each .
num .
removal of pipe by the foot meter of pipe removed including flaredend sections or by the each .
num .
removal of pipe fe section by the each for removal of the flaredend section only .
num .
removal of rc box culverts as a complete unit .
num .
removal of signs and removal of sign structures as a complete unit .
removal num num num removal num num .
removal of snow fence panels by the each .
num .
removal of storm sewer by the foot meter or as a complete unit .
num .
removal of structures and obstructions by the complete unit payment is full compensation for the removal of all structures and obstructions within the rightofway or other specified locations .
num .
removal of _______ bridges by the each .
num .
reset mailbox ____ by the each .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest cutting bit pvmt ft m num ft num m ft num m cutting concrete ft m num ft num m ft num m milling plant mix sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft numft num ton num m num m num t sy cy num ton mnum mnum num t profile milling plant mix sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft num ton num m num t sy cy num ton mnum mnum num t removal of bit curb ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of bridge rail ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of cattle guards ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of concrete ls sy cy ls mnum mnum ls num ft num ft ls num m num m ls sy cy ls mnum mnum removal of concrete median ls sy cy ls mnum mnum ls num ft num ft ls num m num m ls sy cy ls mnum mnum num removal num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest removal of concrete pavement ls sy cy ls mnum mnum ls num ft num ft ls num m num m ls sy cy ls mnum mnum removal of crushed base sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft num ft num ton num m num m num t sy cy num ton mnum mnum num t removal of curb ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of curb and gutter ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of double gutter ft sy m mnum num ft num ft num m num m ft sy num m mnum removal of fence ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of guardrail and barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of inlets ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of manholes ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of pedestrian rail ft m num ft num m ft num m removal of pipe ea ft ea m ea num ft ea num m ea ft ea num m removal of pipe fe section ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of rc box culverts ls ls ls num num removal pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest removal of sidewalk ft sy m mnum num ft num ft num m num m ft sy num m mnum removal of signs ls ls ls removal of sign structures ls ls ls removal of snow fence panels ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of storm sewer ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls num m removal of structures and obstructions ls ls ls removal of _____ bridges ea ea ea ea ea ea removal of surfacing sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft num ft num ton num m num m num t sy cy num ton mnum mnum num t reset mailbox ___ ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num excavation and embankment num description this section describes the requirements for excavation hauling disposal placing shaping grading and compaction of material .
excavation classifications are as follows num .
borrow special excavation is a pitrun granular material taken from specified material sources .
num .
muck excavation consists of the removal and disposal of saturated soils or saturated mixtures of soils and organic matter from within the construction limits but not associated with culvert installations .
soils or mixtures of soils will be classified as muck excavation only if they can not be excavated using the same equipment and procedure as used for unclassified excavation .
classification and removal of unsuitable materials associated with culvert installations is specified in section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
num .
rock excavation consists of the removal and disposal of igneous metamorphic or sedimentary rock which can not be excavated without blasting or the use of conventional excavating equipment .
the limits of rock excavation are based on seismic velocities as defined in the contract and the structural characteristics of the bedrock .
excavation outside these limits is unclassified excavation as defined below .
num .
unclassified excavation consists of the excavation and placement or disposal of materials encountered in the work including excavation from material sources not classified under other contract pay items .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant excavation and embankment num num num num num excavation and embankment num num num num num num num num num num construction num general in this section the term borrow source refers to the source for excavation materials .
for borrow sources adhere to the requirements of subsection num sources sites and haul roads .
construct embankments when air temperatures allow compaction to the specified densities .
suspend work during sustained periods of freezing that induce frost in the embankment or excavation .
before beginning excavation activities construct required fencing in accordance with section num fences .
before beginning excavation activities construct contour diversion ditches in accordance with subsection num contour diversion ditches .
perform grading during daylight .
grading may be allowed after dark provided adequate lighting equipment is provided for the safety of the traveling public and the work force and for inspection .
conform to the neat lines and elevations staked by the engineer .
do not waste excavated materials without approval from the engineer .
conduct grading and related operations without disturbing the terrain outside of the construction limits .
restore disturbed terrain outside of the construction limits and seed with the specified seed mixture at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer may require additional excavation where rock unstable soil or other unsuitable material is encountered below subgrade .
if the material at grade can be finished and compacted excavation below grade will not be required .
obtain material for backfilling to subgrade from other grading areas .
dispose of unsuitable material at a specified waste site or incorporate into other portions of the work as approved by the engineer .
give five working days advance notice before beginning excavation in any borrow source .
do not remove material before crosssectioning or digital terrain modeling of the site by the engineer .
sequence roadway construction and excavation from borrow sources to minimize the waste of material .
if more borrow material is used than is required causing an excess of excavation material the excess quantity will be deducted from the num excavation volume measured in the borrow source or sources .
the department will deduct from monies due the contractor for the royalties on borrow source materials used in excess of the quantities required .
leave borrow areas in a smoothed condition satisfactory to the engineer and conducive to accurate measurements after the excavation is completed .
do not place rocks broken concrete or other solid materials in embankments where piling will be installed .
if embankment material can be placed on only one side of abutments wing walls piers or culvert head walls perform compaction without causing overturning or placing excessive pressure against the structure that would cause movement .
until the superstructure is in place do not place the fill next to a bridge abutment higher than the bottom of the backwall .
when embankment material is placed on both sides of a concrete wall or boxtype structure bring the embankment up equally on both sides of the structure .
dispose of excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders that can not be used in embankments as specified or approved by the engineer .
construct roadway embankments with loose layers num in num mm thick thoroughly mixed to provide uniform moisture distribution and compacted as specified before placing the next layer .
before compacting use spreading equipment to obtain a uniform thickness .
while compacting level and manipulate to ensure uniform density .
control water use to obtain the required density .
route construction equipment uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
when the excavated material consists mainly of rock larger than num in num mm place the material in maximum lifts of num ft num m. work each lift for moisture distribution compact level and smooth with suitable equipment .
do not construct lifts within num in num mm of the finished subgrade .
construct the balance of the embankment with approved material placed and smoothed in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
num benching requirements when placing embankment material on or against slopes steeper than numvnumh bench the existing slope as the new embankment material is brought up in layers .
cut each bench num ft num m horizontally into the original ground line from the vertical side of the previous cut .
compact materials from the benching with the embankment material .
excavation and embankment num num num num num num num num num excavation and embankment num num num num num num num num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control num general construct fill in embankments and cut areas with moisture and density control .
perform compaction when soil moisture content is within plus num percent to minus num percent of the optimum moisture content .
determine maximum densities by method a or method c as specified in the materials testing manual .
when embankment material can not be tested using method a or method c as specified in the materials testing manual place and compact the material using construction methods in accordance with subsection num excavation and embankment construction general and locate the material at least num in num mm below the finished subgrade .
in embankment and cut areas place and compact material above the num in num mm scarified layer of moisture and density control to at least num percent of maximum density .
reprocess and recompact to the specified density embankments damaged by hauling operations or improper drainage at no additional cost to the department .
remove and replace newly constructed embankments that are soft yielding or otherwise unacceptable at no additional cost to the department .
num cut areas treat cut areas for moisture and density control to at least the depth of the plane from ditchbottom to ditchbottom not to exceed a depth of num in num mm below the finished subgrade .
scarify the lower num in num mm of the moisture and density control layer adjust the moisture content and compact the material to at least num percent of maximum density .
num embankment areas remove sod vegetation and topsoil from embankment foundations and scarify the surface to a depth of num in num mm .
adjust moisture content and compact material to at least num percent of maximum density .
num num embankments without moisture and density control construct embankments specified as not requiring moisture and density control in accordance with subsection num excavation and embankment construction general .
consolidate the material to a uniform consistency by routing the hauling and leveling equipment over each lift .
add water to each lift if the natural moisture is insufficient to aid in the placement compaction .
compact the soil when moist .
num finishing sequence finishing work with other operations .
where practical round the tops of cut slopes to blend with the adjacent terrain .
cut subgrade shoulders and ditch bottoms to eliminate scalloped or ragged lines and grade to drain .
trim inslopes and backslopes to eliminate unsightly humps or hollows and blend at pipe ends drilled shaft foundation and erosion control devices .
remove and dispose of piled boulders unsuitable material and other debris as approved by the engineer .
perform finishing operations at a right angle to the slope .
hand raking may be required where finishing work can not be performed by machine .
num measurement and payment num general all classifications of excavation will be measured by the engineer in its original position using volumetric measurements in accordance with subsection num definitions .
the volumes will be computed when the work is completed .
volumes for authorized excavation below subgrade elevation will be computed by this same method .
the volume calculation will be adjusted to remove topsoil quantities .
the engineer will measure materials actually excavated except for excavation resulting from benching operations .
additional excavation required by the engineer in accordance with subsection num excavation and embankment construction general will be measured for payment .
excavation and embankment num num num num num num num num num num num excavation and embankment num num num num num where it is impractical to measure material by volumetric measurement methods because of the erratic location of isolated deposits the engineer will use acceptable methods involving threedimensional measurements .
for excavation that requires repeated handling before final placement the engineer will measure each approved handling including that of materials to be stockpiled and preserved for later use in the work .
when repeat handling is for the contractors convenience no additional measurement will be made .
the engineer will measure num .
borrow special excavation by the cubic yard cubic meter or by the short ton metric ton .
when payment is by weight mass the weight mass of water added before measuring will not be deducted .
num .
muck excavation by the cubic yard cubic meter .
num .
rock excavation by the cubic yard cubic meter using volumetric measurements .
the engineer will not measure overbreak .
num .
unclassified excavation by the cubic yard cubic meter .
in embankment and cut areas the num in num mm of material scarification adjustment of moisture content and recompaction to num percent will not be measured for payment directly and is considered incidental to the various classifications of excavation .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest borrow special excavation cy ton mnum t num ft num ton num m num t cy num ton mnum num t muck excavation cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum rock excavation cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum unclassified excavation cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
clearing and grubbing in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
num .
contour diversion ditches in accordance with section num equipment work or subsection num extra and force account work .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num .
topsoil storing in accordance with section num topsoil .
num .
water in accordance with section num watering .
excavation and embankment num num num num haul num num num num num num num num section num haul num description this section describes the requirements for transporting material from an original or specified location to a final location .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant num construction num general haul specified materials from their original location to a final location specified .
as necessary obtain permits for haul operations on local roads .
num wet haul the term wet haul means that all commercial additives water bituminous materials lime or cement have been blended with the aggregates for final processing and laydown .
num dry haul the term dry haul means material hauled from its original source to a plant or storage site or from storage sites to the roadway for final processing without additives .
num measurement and payment material moved within the material sources or mixing sites will not be measured for haul payments .
natural filler will be included in haul computations .
within the construction limits the engineer will compute haul quantities on the basis of transporting the materials along the highways centerline or baseline num without regard to lateral distance from such line to the outer limits of the highway rightofway or contiguous construction limits on multilane highways haul will be computed along the survey center line without regard for lateral or median crossover distance .
except from contiguous areas haul from outside the rightofway will be computed along the shortest practical route from the loading point to a point of entrance on the center line or base line and then along the center line or base line to the point of disposition .
the contractors choice to use a longer route will not affect this computation .
if a shorter route is used the computation will be based on the actual distance .
the engineer will measure haul by the following num .
cubic yardmile cubic meterkilometer .
in determining cubic yardmile cubic meterkilometer haul the engineer will assume that material is hauled the shortest distance from excavation to deposit .
quantities will be computed as the distance as described above that each cubic yard cubic meter is hauled .
num .
short tonmile metric tonkilometer .
in determining short tonmile metric tonkilometer haul the engineer will compute and measure the distance as described above that each short ton metric ton of material is hauled .
the weight mass of dry haul materials used to determine dry haul quantities may be computed in accordance with paragraph num dry haulwet haul combination within subsection num measurement and payment .
the haul of commercial additives bituminous materials lime or cement to the plant site will not be measured .
material lost through dryers or dust control equipment left in stockpiles rejected or lost in bases of stockpiles will not be measured .
measurements for short tonmile metric tonkilometer haul will be based on the final pay quantity of the item in its final location on the roadway or in a stockpile .
no addition or deduction will be made for natural aggregate moisture .
haul num num num num num num haul num num wet hauldry haul combination .
when haul is a combination of wet and dry haul the dry haul quantity will be computed from the wet haul scale weight mass with deductions for any additives blended or processed into the material .
natural aggregate moisture and water added during crushing operations will not be added into the weight mass quantity for computing the dry haul .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest haul cymi mnumkm ydnum num ft mnum num m num cymi num mnumkm haul tmi tkm num ton num ft num t num m num tmi numtkm num section num haul road maintenance and restoration num description this section describes the requirements for the maintenance and restoration of public roads used to haul construction materials .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant num construction before using the haul roads conduct an inspection with the engineer to determine the condition of the existing roadway drainage structures and other appurtenances .
visually record the routes condition both before and immediately after completing hauling operations .
submit the tapes and any other photographic evidence for incorporation into the project files and for determination of repairs necessary due to hauling operations .
maintain the road to its existing condition before hauling or better as directed by the engineer .
ensure that hauling operations do not jeopardize the safe movement of traffic at the posted speed limit .
upon completion of hauling operations restore the haul road to the original condition .
the engineer will determine the type and quantity of restoration that will be required .
restore and leave haul roads as they were before execution of the contract .
if legal load limits were exceeded restore damaged haul roads at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure equipment operation labor and materials required for haul road maintenance or restoration and for which no other applicable pay haul road maintenance and restoration num num num num num num num num num num haul road maintenance and restoration num items are included in the contract as haul road maintenance and restoration in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
the department will pay as follows num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for work and materials for the maintenance or restoration of haul roads with appropriate pay items when established in the contract and in accordance with the applicable requirements in the contract .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest haul road maintenance restoration num num num section num excavation and backfill for culverts num description this section describes the requirements for the excavation disposal of materials and backfilling needed to install pipe culverts structural plate pipe box culverts storm sewer systems pipe siphons water lines sanitary sewer lines and other conduits .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection admixtures num aggregate num fly ash num portland cement num water num use existing material for backfill do not use material with frozen lumps chunks of highly plastic clay stones or other materials that could damage the structure .
num equipmentvacant num construction num excavation num culvert excavation culvert excavation includes excavation for box culverts pipe culverts structural plate stock passes or similar structures that require a uniformwidth channel bottom and sloped sides .
vertical limits of culvert excavation are from the base of the bottom slab of box culverts or the grade required to set the invert of pipe culverts at the specified flowline to the top of the existing ground which is the natural terrain surface in fill areas and the final subgrade line in cut areas .
longitudinal limits are num in num mm beyond each end of the installation the engineer may stake excavation beyond the longitudinal limits .
excavation and backfill for culverts num num num num num num num excavation and backfill for culverts num num num num num num num num trench excavation trench excavation includes excavation for storm sewer systems sanitary sewer lines pipe siphons water systems utility lines or similar installations where the contract specifies a trench with vertical sides .
vertical limits of trench excavation are from the base of the bottom slab of box culverts or the grade required to set the invert of pipe culverts at the specified flowline to the top of the existing ground which is the natural terrain surface in fill areas and the final subgrade line in cut areas .
excavate trenches to the specified line grade and width and with sides as nearly vertical as practical .
when necessary shore sheet and brace sides to prevent sliding or sloughing .
alternatively the engineer may allow sloping of the trench walls above the top of the pipe being installed .
unless excavation is required for the installation of bed course material or the engineer requires excavation below the pipe for foundation improvement excavate the trench to grade so that the pipe may be installed on undisturbed earth .
excavate for manholes inlet or outlet structures and other structures associated with various types of conduit in the same manner as for conduit with approximately num in num mm clearance outside of each footing or wall .
num culvert trench subexcavation the engineer may require additional excavation when unsuitable foundation conditions are encountered at the bottom of a channel or trench or when it is impractical to excavate to the established grade .
excavation below the grade required to set a culvert at the specified flowline will be classified as culvert subexcavation .
num disposal of excavated materials dispose of excavated material by one of the following methods num .
stockpile for use as backfill .
num .
incorporate into other portions of the work .
num .
handle as waste .
num do not stockpile material for backfilling so that it interferes with construction or channel drainage .
transport excess material suitable for embankment construction to specified sites or as approved by the engineer .
waste and dispose of material unsuitable for use elsewhere on fill slopes or at specified locations .
do not place waste material next to a channel or on flood plain where flood waters can wash the material into a channel .
num protection of structures protect excavations from saturation or erosion and dewater sites where standing or running water would interfere with proper installation of the structure or pipes .
num structure foundation if bedding material is not specified install the conduit on undisturbed material .
where channels or trenches have been excavated below the established grade place and compact backfill in loose layers approximately num in num mm thick for the full length of the installation .
compact the last num in num mm layer of material below the bottom of structures or bedding and other backfill material to at least num percent of maximum density and within plus num percent to minus num percent of optimum moisture content in accordance with subsection num embankments and cut areas with moisture and density control .
num backfilling num general place backfill in loose layers approximately num in num mm thick .
compact each layer to at least num percent of maximum density and within plus num percent to minus num percent of optimum moisture content in accordance with subsection num embankments and cut areas with moisture and density control .
do not damage structures culverts or coating while backfilling and compacting .
to avoid damage or lateral displacement place and compact backfill layers equally on the sides of structures or culverts .
do not place backfill against box culverts or other castinplace structures until the concrete has cured for num calendar days or test cylinders indicate an achieved compressive strength equal to at least num percent of design strength .
when placing bedding and backfill below the springing line of a conduit tamp or ram the material between the culvert and the channel bottom .
excavation and backfill for culverts num num num num num num num num num excavation and backfill for culverts num num num place backfill over water and sanitary sewer lines by hand to an initial depth of num in num mm .
do not drop material directly on pipe place on both sides of the trench and allowed to flow over the pipe .
compact uniformly on both sides of the pipe to a height of approximately num in num mm above the top of the pipe .
num flowable backfill when specified backfill culvert excavations to the depth and width specified and at least num in num mm over the top of the conduit or structure with a flowable backfill .
design the flowable backfill mix in accordance with table num flowable fill requirements .
table num flowable fill requirements num provide the correct amount of water to allow the mix to flow properly without excessive segregation .
parameter property or limit cement minimum or cement and fly ash minimum num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbs cementydnum num kgmnum and num lbs fly ashydnum num kgmnum waternum estimated num galydnum num lmnum aggregate estimated num lbsydnum num kgmnum air entraining admixture optional air content maximum num percent slump minimum num in num mm numday compressive strength minimum num psi num kpa numday compressive strength maximum num psi num kpa num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
culvert subexcavation and trench subexcavation by the cubic yard cubic meter based on the neat lines for the installation .
num .
flowable backfill by the cubic yard cubic meter of material placed based on the batch ticket quantities .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
excavation beyond longitudinal limits described in subsection num culvert excavation as unclassified excavation in accordance with section num excavation and embankment .
num .
backfill and bedding materials not excavated at the installation site by the short ton metric ton or cubic yard cubic meter for the types of materials used in accordance with the applicable sections of these standard specifications .
excavation and backfill for culverts num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest culvert subexcavation cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum flowable backfill cy mnum num ydnum num mnum cy mnum trench subexcavation cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum num num topsoil num num num num num num section num topsoil num description this section describes the requirements for removing storing and placing topsoil .
num materials topsoil is soil suitable for the growth of grass or other cover crops reasonably free of hard dirt clay rocks or other materials that would inhibit germination or growth .
provide topsoil that is a fertile friable material loam or sandy clay loam .
do not provide topsoil that is saline or sodic or contains noxious weeds toxic substances stones or sticks greater than num in num mm in diameter or similar objectionable matter .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general before removing topsoil clear and mulch overlying brush grass crops and other suitable material and incorporate them into the topsoil .
mulch the material by chopping with brush chopper or shredding with a rotary blade mower .
in this section the term borrow source refers to the source for topsoil materials .
for borrow sources adhere to the requirements of subsection num sources sites and haul roads .
num topsoil storing topsoil storing consists of removing and stockpiling topsoil within the limits of the project in uniform piles and out of the way of other activities .
clear and grub stockpile sites in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
ensure the sites are firm smooth and well drained .
num num topsoil placing before topsoil placement construct embankment or cut slope areas to the specified lines and grades and scarify all areas to a depth of approximately num in num mm .
place topsoil to a uniform depth commensurate with the quantity available and the area to be covered .
after spreading remove clods stones and other foreign materials that hamper effectiveness appearance or reclamation operations .
do not remove mulch .
when weather warrants apply a fine spray of water to prevent topsoil erosion .
num topsoil borrow topsoil borrow is topsoil either obtained from a borrow source outside the project limits and hauled directly to its final location or obtained within the limits of the project and hauled across a balance station in the earthwork for final placement .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
topsoil borrow by the cubic yard cubic meter using volumetric measurements of the borrow source .
when topsoil borrow is handled repeatedly for the contractors convenience no additional measurements will be made .
the department will pay royalty costs for topsoil borrow except when the topsoil is obtained from a contractorfurnished source .
num .
topsoil placing and topsoil storing by the cubic yard cubic meter using volumetric measurements .
num topsoil storing .
the quantity placed in stockpile will be the total quantity for payment .
num topsoil placing .
the difference between the quantity originally put in the stockpile and that remaining after all required placement will be the total quantity for payment .
topsoil num num num num num num num num topsoil num num num topsoil stripped from its original position within the project limits and placed directly in its final position will be measured as topsoil placing unless it is hauled across an earthwork balance station in which case it will be measured as topsoil borrow .
quantities will be determined from preliminary and final volumetric measurements of the stripped area .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for water in accordance with section num watering .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest topsoil borrow cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum topsoil placing cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum topsoil storing cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum num section num vacant num vacant num num watering num num num num num num num section num watering num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing water for application to soil or aggregate .
num materials furnish water from specified sources or from sources approved by the engineer .
num equipment apply water in a fine uniform spray during finishing and seeding operations using pressurecontrolled spray bars or nozzles .
provide water meters to measure water used and for royalty purposes .
use departmentcertified tanks departmentcertified distributors or certified water meters .
for meters used to determine quantities for payment or measurement provide a copy of the test report and certification that the meters have been calibrated within the preceding num months and are accurate to within plus or minus num percent .
num construction num general if the contractor elects to use water sources other than those specified provide documentation to the engineer for the water source site and the associated haul road in accordance with subsection num contractorfurnished .
a contract amendment form enum will not be required .
costs associated with the change in water source will be at no additional cost to the department .
apply water as follows num .
embankment construction .
distribute over the full width of each layer of embankment material without puddling or saturation .
num num .
aggregate courses .
immediately before mixing and if required during placing of the material .
num .
finishing .
in a uniform fine spray across the full width of the course .
num .
seeding .
in a spray that does not wash or erode the seeded areas .
num .
dust control .
when using water to control dust for the protection and safety of traffic for abatement of air pollution or for other purposes apply enough to eliminate the dust .
num prewetting the engineer may allow wetting of materials before excavation .
before prewetting submit a detailed plan showing the method and equipment to be used .
show the proposed location of water lines and sprinklers the quantity of water to be applied by each sprinkler the rate of application and other pertinent data .
base the plan on soil classification estimated efficiency and inplace moisture data from adequate predrilling and sampling for the full depth of each area to be prewet .
multistage prewetting operations may be used .
apply water at a rate that provides optimum moisture content to the depth of excavation .
do not prewet material already over optimum moisture capacity .
prevent or correct excessive runoff through leveling constructing contour diversion ditches in accordance with subsection num contour diversion ditches or constructing dikes .
during and after prewetting check the depth of water penetration and moisture content using the methods prescribed in the materials testing manual .
submit test results for incorporation into the project files .
stop prewetting and take corrective measures if it appears that impervious layers or other conditions are interrupting penetration and water is being wasted .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure water by the num gallons cubic meter using tank volumes distributor volumes or water meters .
watering num num num num num num num num num num watering num num num water wasted or used contrary to the contract will not be measured .
the department will deduct from monies due or the contractor will reimburse the department for royalties on water wasted or used contrary to the contract .
when specified the department will pay for all water obtained from the source or sources indicated in the contract .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest water mg mnum num mg num mnum num mg num mnum num section num equipment work num description this section describes equipment for hourly work .
num materialsvacant num equipment num backhoe provide selfpropelled backhoes equipped with buckets sized to be capable of handling the material to be moved commensurate with the power and size of the backhoe and at least the manufacturers rated bucket size .
provide equipment specifications if requested by the engineer .
backhoe types are num .
type ibackhoe .
a twowheel drive backhoe with a manufacturers weight specification of up to and including num lb num kg .
num .
type iibackhoe .
a fourwheel drive backhoe with a manufacturers weight specification of up to and including num lb num kg .
num .
type iiibackhoe .
a twowheel drive backhoe with a manufacturers weight specification of more than num lb num kg .
num .
type ivbackhoe .
a fourwheel drive backhoe with a manufacturers weight specification of more than num lb num kg .
num bulldozer provide tractors mounted on tracks and with an engine rating of at least num flywheel hp num flywheel kw .
equip each with a blade at least num ft num m wide .
when specified equip with a rearmounted ripper .
equipment work num num num num num num num equipment work num num num num num num excavators provide excavators equipped with buckets sized to meet the following criteria num .
capable of handling the material to be moved .
num .
commensurate with the power and size of the excavator .
num .
at least the manufacturers rated bucket size .
excavator work that requires an extended stick will be specified .
num loader provide wheeled or tracked loaders equipped with buckets sized to meet the following criteria num .
capable of handling the material to be moved .
num .
commensurate with the power and size of the loader .
num .
at least the manufacturers rated bucket size .
num motor grader provide dieselpowered motor graders with an engine rating of at least num flywheel hp num flywheel kw and with at least four driving wheels .
equip each with a poweroperated blade at least num ft num m long and with at least one scarifier with all teeth in place .
num roller provide roller equipment that is selfpropelled or towed appropriately .
a towed roller and separate power unit are considered a single roller unit .
if requested provide equipment specifications including weights horsepowers and tire pressures .
the following are roller types num .
type iequipment roller .
a scraper with a minimum capacity of num yd³ num m³ a ballast weight of at least num ton num t and tires inflated to at least num psi num kpa .
use larger equipment if the required compaction density is not achieved .
num num .
type iilight pneumatic roller .
a roller num in num mm wide with seven pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter mounted on two axles attached to a rigid frame an empty operating weight from num lb to num lb num kg to num kg and tire contact pressure of at least num psi num kpa .
num .
type iiisheeps foot roller .
a roller num in num mm wide with one or two steel drums at least num in num mm in diameter and with studded tamping feet .
provide a roller with feet that project at least num in num mm from the drum surface are spaced from num in to num in num mm to num mm measured center to center in any direction and have a surface area from num in² to num in² num mm² to num mm² .
operate with enough load to produce a ground pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
num .
type ivnum ton num mg pneumatic roller .
a roller with four pneumatic tires mounted on a frame with a ballast body and enough capacity to produce an operating weight from num ton to num ton num t to num t. provide a roller with tires uniform in size and capable of an inflation pressure of at least num psi num mpa and with wheels loaded equally .
num .
type vsegmented tamping roller .
a selfpropelled segmented wheel tamping roller with drive and guide rolls at least num in num mm in diameter and at least num in num mm wide .
provide either a three or fourwheel type weighing at least num tons num t and powered by an engine with at least num brake hp num brake kw .
num .
type vivibratory roller .
a selfpropelled smoothwheel two axle vibratory roller no more than num in num mm wide overall with a minimum net weight of num lb num kg and a minimum vibratory frequency of num vibrations per minute .
provide a roller with a compression roller at least num in num mm in diameter and num in num mm in width .
num .
type viivibratory roller .
a vibratorytype roller weighing at least num lb num t and selfpropelled or towed by a tractor .
equip with a single or dual steel vibratory drum each with a minimum vibratory frequency of num vibrations per minute and a minimum width of num in num mm .
a towed roller and separate power unit are considered a single roller unit .
equipment work num num num equipment work num num num num num num scraper provide selfpropelled scrapers with two or four drive wheels that are selfloading or have additional power equipment to load to capacity .
num truck provide trucks equipped with dump bodies capable of hauling highway materials load to the manufacturers recommended struck capacity .
num construction ensure the availability of equipment within the time frames needed and in coordination with other work .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will not measure standby time .
unit payment includes supervision operator and labor costs fuel oil lubricants maintenance and other related items .
the engineer will measure num .
backhoe work by the hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the lowest pay factor from table num backhoe pay factor for the provided equipments engine or bucket size rating .
table num backhoe pay factor backhoe type pay factor i num ii num iii num iv num num num .
bulldozer work by the hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the pay factor from table num bulldozer pay factor for the provided equipments horsepower kilowatt rating .
table num bulldozer pay factor num includes a ripper when specified .
when a ripper is not specified and is required or approved for use by the engineer an additional num will be added to the above pay factor .
num .
excavator work by the hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the lowest pay factor from table num excavator pay factor for the provided equipments metric ton size rating .
equipment work num minimum flywheel hp kw pay factornum num and over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num num num equipment work table num excavator pay factor num the industry does not use english equivalent weight for excavators .
num .
loader work by the hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the lowest pay factor from table num loader pay factor for the provided equipments engine or bucket size rating .
table num loader pay factor excavator size metric tonnum pay factor minimum bucket size ydnum mnum num and over num num num and over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num less than num num minimum flywheel hp kw pay factor minimum bucket size ydnum mnum num and over num and over num num and over num and over num to num num to num num num num num to num num to num num num num num to num num to num num num num num to num num to num num num num num and under num and under num none num num .
motor grader work by the hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the pay factor from table num motor grader pay factor for the provided equipments horsepower kilowatt rating .
table num motor grader pay factor num pay factor includes the blade scarifier or both .
num .
roller type __________ work by the hour computed as actual hours of use .
num .
scraper work by the cubic yard hour cubic meter hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the provided equipments manufacturerrated capacity in cubic yards cubic meters multiplied by the appropriate pay factor from table num scraper pay factor .
equipment work num minimum flywheel hp kw pay factornum num and over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and under num num num equipment work num table num scraper pay factor num two tandem powered standard scrapers operating in tandem .
num .
truck work by the cubic yard hour cubic meter hour computed as the actual hours of operation multiplied by the equipments capacity from manufacturerrated struck capacity or field measurements .
the department will pay as follows type of scraper manufacturers rated volume in ydnum mnum num to num num to num num to num num to num num and over num and over singleengine singleengine auger num num num tandempowered singleengine auger num num num pushpullnum num num num elevating num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest backhoe hr h num h num hr num h bulldozer hr h num h num hr num h excavator hr h num h num hr num h loader hr h num h num hr num h motor grader hr h num h num hr num h roller type _____ hr h num h num hr num h scraper cyhr mnumh ydnum num h mnum num h num cyhr num mnumh truck cyhr mnumh ydnum num h mnum num h num cyhr num mnumh num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
additional power equipment required to load scrapers to capacity by equipment hours in accordance with section num equipment work for the equipment used or in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num .
equipment used to load trucks by equipment hours in accordance with section num equipment work for the equipment used or in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
equipment work num num num num culvert cleaning num num num num num section num culvert cleaning num description this section describes the requirements for removing hauling and disposing of debris silt and obstructions from existing culverts .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant num construction unplug and flush clean existing culverts as specified .
dispose of material removed at a contractorfurnished site .
do not damage culverts appurtenances or property or create a public hazard or nuisance .
if damage occurs repair in accordance with subsection num protection and restoration of property markers and landscape .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure culvert cleaning by the each .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest culvert cleaning ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num structure excavation and backfill num description this section describes the requirements for excavation and backfill for the construction of bridge foundations retaining walls bin walls and other structures and for the disposal of excess materials .
structure excavation will be classified as follows num .
dry excavation is material removed from above the water line .
num .
wet excavation is material removed from below the water line .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection pervious backfill material num provide backfill material consisting of clean gravel from sources other than surface water sources and free from large or frozen lumps wood rocks or other potentially harmful matter .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general where practical construct structures in open excavation .
shore or brace and protect with cofferdams where necessary .
forms may be omitted with the approval of the engineer when the site is dry and footings can be placed without cofferdams .
fill the excavation with concrete to the top of the footing in accordance with section num structural concrete .
provide and place additional concrete required because of eliminating the forms at no additional cost to the department .
if additional excavation depth is required by the engineer the department will pay for additional class b concrete .
structure excavation and backfill num num num num num num num num structure excavation and backfill num num num num num num num num restore channels to as near original condition as possible .
num depth of footing excavate for footings to the specified elevations .
if the material encountered at the specified elevation is unsuitable for foundation the engineer will require additional excavation .
fill with class b concrete to the specified elevation for the bottom of the footing .
num preparation of foundations for footings when excavations for footings are in rock or other hard foundation material cut the final surface level and remove loose debris .
clean seams and fill with concrete mortar or grout .
when placing concrete on an excavated surface other than rock avoid disturbing the bottom of the excavation .
place concrete immediately after removal of foundation material to grade .
num cofferdams construct cofferdams to protect fresh concrete against damage from a sudden rising of the stream and to prevent damage to the foundation by erosion .
when required provide cofferdams as water tight as possible designed to safely satisfy the requirements of the site and construction .
construct earthen cofferdams using clean material from sources other than surface water sources .
to provide clearance straighten reset or enlarge cofferdams that tilt or move sideways during sinking .
provide interior clearance of at least num in num mm between forms and cofferdam to allow for construction inspection and pumping .
when dewatering is not feasible before placing concrete it may be necessary to construct a concrete foundation seal in accordance with subsection num cofferdam seals .
after completion of the substructure remove cofferdams including all sheeting and bracing without disturbing or damaging the finished concrete .
num evacuation of water from structural excavation pump water from inside foundation enclosures during and at least num hours after concrete placement .
use a suitable sump pump located away from the num concrete work .
do not start pumping to dewater sealed cofferdams until the seal is sufficiently set to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
num inspection notify the engineer after excavation is complete .
do not place concrete until the depth of the excavation and the character of the foundation material is approved .
num backfill if necessary wash material to remove fines that would make stream water turbid .
backfill excavated areas to the surface of the surrounding ground or stream bed and compact the areas to the same density as adjacent material .
backfill material placed below water level does not require compaction .
neatly grade the top of the backfill material to blend with the adjacent area .
to prevent forward movement first place the backfill material in front of such structures or bring it up evenly with the material behind .
deposit backfill material behind abutments wingwalls retaining walls and similar structures in horizontal layers approximately num in num mm loose in thickness and compact it to the same density as adjacent material .
step or adequately roughen excavation slopes next to concrete components to prevent wedging action during backfilling .
do not jet backfill material behind abutments wingwalls or retaining walls .
when placing backfill around piers deposit material equally on both sides to the final elevation .
place backfill to drain water away from structural elements .
do not place backfill that would cause unequal stresses in abutments retaining walls wingwalls or other structures until the concrete has cured for num calendar days or test cylinders indicate an achieved compressive strength equal to at least num percent of design strength .
num pervious backfill material provide pervious backfill material of the same grading at any one location .
where otherwise at risk of erosion cover pervious backfill with at least num in num mm of approved material .
structure excavation and backfill num num num num num num num num num num num structure excavation and backfill num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
dry excavation and wet excavation for structures in its original position by the cubic yard cubic meter and by computing the theoretical volume within the vertical planes num in num mm outside of the footings and the horizontal planes at the bottom of the footing and the existing ground line .
the existing ground line is the natural ground line roadbed excavation line or roadbed embankment line whichever is in place at the time of excavation .
the measurement will include the volume for additional excavation required by the engineer or required as a result of slips slides caveins or silting beyond the contractors control .
num .
pervious backfill material by the cubic yard cubic meter based on the actual volume of material used .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest dry excavation cy mnum num ft num m num cy num mnum pervious backfill material cy ton mnum t num ft num ton num m num t num cy num ton num mnum num t wet excavation cy mnum num ft num m num cy num mnum num section num overburden num description this section describes the requirements for removing and replacing overburden material from a material source .
num materialsvacant num equipmentvacant num construction num general strip topsoil in accordance with section num topsoil and stockpile separately from the overburden stockpiles .
strip material sources to the depth and extent necessary for the production of a quality material .
portions of the material source to be used and overburden stockpile locations may be designated by the engineer .
place overburden in neat uniform stockpiles located to not interfere with the removal of material from the source .
num replacing stripped material after the construction materials are removed place the overburden over the material source area before placement of topsoil .
place the material uniformly and smooth it to blend with the surrounding terrain .
place topsoil in accordance with section num topsoil .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
overburden removal by the cubic yard cubic meter using volumetric measurements .
overburden num num num num num num num num overburden num num num num .
overburden placing by the cubic yard cubic meter computed as the difference between the original volume in the stockpiles and the volume remaining in the stockpiles upon completion of the work .
if overburden is stripped from its original position and placed directly in its final position it will be measured as overburden placing .
the quantity will be determined from preliminary and final volumetric measurements of the stripped area .
the engineer will not make additional measurements if overburden stockpiles are moved to facilitate material source operations except when the stockpile locations were directed by the engineer .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for removal and placement of topsoil in accordance with section num topsoil .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest overburden placing cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum overburden removal cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum num section num lime treated subgrade num description this section describes the requirements for constructing one or more courses of a mixture of soil lime and water .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection hydrated lime num water num use existing subgrade soil or approved borrow material as specified with deleterious materials removed .
num equipment num general correct equipment leaks immediately or remove the equipment from the work area .
num lime spreaders use lime spreading equipment capable of spreading lime uniformly at the specified rate and keeping the slurried lime in suspension .
num water distribution use equipment capable of uniformly distributing the required water .
do not use water pumps on water distributors .
num mixing use a selfpropelled rotary mixer except that disc harrows motor graders and other equipment may be used to supplement the mixing performed by the lime treated subgrade num num num num num num num num num num lime treated subgrade num num num num num num rotary mixer .
use mixing equipment capable of mixing to a compacted depth of at least num in num mm .
provide a traveling mixing plant for incorporating the lime into the soil designated for treatment .
ensure that the traveling mixing plant is capable of spreading the lime slurry in an even traverse layer providing a homogeneous mixture of lime and subgrade and metering the lime at the desired application rates for the volume of material to be treated per layer .
num compaction use compaction equipment that is selfpropelled .
finish roll with a pneumatic tire roller a smooth steelwheeled roller or a combination of both .
num construction num general perform lime stabilization when the air temperature is num f num c or above .
do not mix the lime with frozen soils or soils containing frost .
do not apply lime when wind conditions are such that excessive loss of lime occurs or when blowing lime becomes hazardous to traffic workers or adjacent property owners .
num soil preparation shape the subgrade surface of the prepared roadbed subgrade to be treated to the staked lines grades and cross section .
excavate subgrade material in cut sections to the required depth and incorporate excavated material into the roadway embankment .
place excavated subgrade material in a windrow adjacent to the section to be treated stockpile or waste .
when lime treatment depth is more than the contractors equipment is capable of handling excavate material above the bottom layer to be treated in excess of what the contractors equipment can treat and place it in a windrow or stockpile .
when practical place the excavated material in a windrow adjacent to the area to be treated and place it on the roadway as each treated layer is completed .
cut drains through the shoulders adjacent to the excavated areas to drain the roadbed .
cut drains through the windrows at sufficient intervals to prevent ponding of water .
move the windrows when necessary to allow the subgrade to dry .
num scarify the subgrade to be lime treated to the specified depth and width and partially pulverize it .
control the depth of scarification to ensure that the surface of the roadbed below the scarified material remains undisturbed and matches the required cross section .
before the stabilization work remove unsuitable material including stones retained on a num in num mm sieve .
num application of lime num general apply the lime dry or as a slurry at the specified rate .
base the volume of lime on airdry weight mass and calculate the spread as the quantity of lime required for each square yard square meter of treated surface for each compacted layer .
allow only the equipment needed for the lime treatment operations on the applied lime before mixing is completed .
immediately discontinue procedures that result in displacement of the lime .
num dry application if the dry process is used take necessary precautions to minimize the amount of airborne hydrated lime .
num lime slurry application adjust lime slurry proportions and application rates so that the specified application rate of lime is maintained while meeting moisture content requirements .
when necessary process materials to be treated so that the existing moisture content is adjusted sufficiently to allow the addition of moisture from the lime slurry .
when approved by the engineer lime slurry may be applied directly to the subgrade materials to be treated .
before approval submit a detailed plan for lime slurry application in writing .
include equipment to be used in spreading the lime slurry anticipated lime slurry proportions and mixing and delivery methods in the plan .
lime treated subgrade num num num num num num num num num num lime treated subgrade num num num num num num num num mixing immediately after the lime has been spread mix it thoroughly into the soil with water added as necessary for the full depth of treatment .
incorporate the lime thoroughly and uniformly into the soil layer to the full depth of treatment so that the result is a homogenous friable mixture of soil and lime .
mix the lime by a traveling mixing plant with a single pass to the depth specified .
place and compact the lime treated material within num hours after mixing .
when it is not practical to place the mixed material within num hours place it in a windrow or spread it over the road and seal the surface with a steelwheel or pneumatictired roller to prevent the loss of moisture .
num placing compacting and finishing after mixing each layer of material place them in the approximate section and compact to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density at a moisture content of plus or minus num percent of optimum .
a light sprinkling with water may be required during placement operations to maintain the specified moisture content .
accompany compaction by finish grading work to eliminate irregularities and maintain the staked lines grades and cross section .
when after treatment additional subgrade materials need to be added to the grade to reach the staked lines and grades use lime treated materials .
lightly scarify the surface of the treated subgrade before placing additional material required for finish grading .
process and compact the subgrade materials in accordance with the requirements described in this section section num placing compacting and finishing .
lightly scarify and grade the surface of the final layer during finishing operations to eliminate imprints left by the equipment .
use a roller with pneumatic tires to make the final roll on the completed surface .
num protection and curing when compaction and finish grading are completed cure the treated subgrade for a minimum of num hours before allowing highway traffic and construction equipment on the lime treated subgrade .
repair damage to the treated subgrade due to traffic and construction equipment .
num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
hydrated lime subgrade by the short ton metric ton .
num .
processing lime treated subgrade by the station foot meter or square yard square meter .
each roadway of a divided highway will be measured separately for payment .
when treatment by the square yard square meter is specified the measurement will be made on the top surface area of each layer treated excluding shoulder slopes .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
water in accordance with section num watering .
num .
unclassified excavation in accordance with section num excavation and embankment for materials that have proven to be untreatable and are removed upon approval of the engineer .
lime treated subgrade num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest hydrated lime subgrade ton t num ton num t ton t processing lime treated subgrade sta ft sy num sta m mnum num sta ft num ft num sta num m num m num sta ft sy num sta m mnum num num storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num section num storm water pollution prevention num description this section describes the requirements for control of pollutants and discharges of storm water from construction and industrial activities including temporary and permanent measures to control erosion .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection burlap bag curbs num cover crop seed num erosion control agent num mulch straw or hay num silt fence num wire staples num woven wire backing num provide silt fence posts with a nominal wood size of num in num in num mm num mm or steel tpost weighing at least num lbft num kgm .
tie the silt fence to the post with wire cord staples pockets or other approved means .
provide erosion bales with approximate external dimensions of num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm weighing from num lb to num lb num kg to num kg and tightly bound with wire ties or nylon twine .
to secure use numfoot num m wooden stakes with a nominal dimension of num in num in num mm num mm .
provide excelsior sediment logs made of excelsior that is encased in a tube of polypropylene netting having a minimum diameter of num in num mm a standard length of num ft num m and a weight of approximately num lbft num kgm .
to secure use numfoot num m wooden stakes with a nominal dimension of num in num in num mm num mm .
synthetic triangular silt dikes consist of geotextilewrapped foam or heavy plastic mesh .
provide foam dikes with a minimum height of num in num mm sides of equal length base of num in num mm standard length of num ft num m and with an outer cover of woven geotextile fabric with flaps extending num in num mm .
num provide heavy plastic mesh dikes with height of num in num mm sides of equal length base of num in num mm base and standard length of num ft num m. to secure use upin wire staples .
provide plastic liner wooden flumes metal pipe plastic pipe halfround pipe or erosion control blanket for slope drains .
use nontoxic chemical settling agents for water treatment as necessary .
num equipment where practical use a spreader truck with a pressurized spray bar to apply the erosion control agent and ensure a continuous uniform application .
use other equipment in areas not accessible to the pressurized spray bar .
set seed drills to produce uniform rows no more than num in num mm apart and equip them with a positive means for calibration to ensure seed distribution at the specified rate .
num construction num general coordinate temporary and permanent soil erosion work .
stage permanent erosion control work to minimize the need for temporary workthe purpose of which is to supplement the permanent work and provide effective control throughout the construction period .
protect locations of exposed erodible earth with functional erosion control measures installed correctly .
maintain measures to ensure maximum sediment reduction .
complete erosion control work temporary and permanent as soon as practical and in conjunction with other construction work and subject to seeding date restrictions .
restore and seed haul roads material sources staging areas and other disturbed areas as work is completed and subject to seeding date restrictions .
when permanent soil erosion control is established remove the temporary measures spread the accumulated sediment and seed the disturbed area caused by the removal of the temporary measure as specified for the project reclamation .
storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num num storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num storm water control num contractor storm water control apply and secure approval for an epa or wdeq general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activities and where necessary industrial activities for work within the construction limits .
develop implement and monitor a storm water pollution control plan for the project including temporary erosion control measures necessary in addition to those specified and associated labor materials equipment and incidentals needed to fully implement the plan and comply with all rules regulations and restrictions imposed by epa or wdeq as a part of the general permit program .
authority to issue permits for lands on the wind river indian reservation resides with the epa the water quality division of wdeq maintains authority elsewhere .
give a copy of the approved general permit and storm water pollution control plan to the engineer before starting work on the project .
during work give the engineer copies of required monitoring reports and necessary storm water pollution control plan revisions .
this information is not for approval but will be used to document the contractor storm water control pay item .
throughout the work implement the storm water pollution control plan modifying as necessary .
temporary soil erosion control details and specified information in subsection num temporary soil erosion measures may be used in developing and implementing a storm water pollution control plan .
other methods are available that may be more appropriate depending on the circumstances .
upon project completion remove and dispose of temporary soil erosion control measures not specified or designated by the engineer to remain as permanent erosion control measures .
upon final acceptance of the project in accordance with subsection num final acceptance submit to the wdeq or epa a notice of termination or request a permit transfer to the department or other specified entity .
after approval of the termination or transfer the department or other entity will accept responsibility for storm water control on the project .
num num department storm water control when specified the department will secure modify and terminate the npdes permit and storm water pollution control plan for the project material sources or both .
the engineer will perform monitoring and reporting requirements .
implement modify and remove storm water control measures for the storm water pollution control plan as specified or directed by the engineer .
num temporary soil erosion measures num burlap bag curbs install burlap bag curbs at specified locations and elsewhere as needed to control slope erosion .
use burlap tubes num ft num m long and filled with sand or suitable excavation material from the project .
after filling sew or tie the tube ends to form a closed unit .
abut the tubes tightly to form a watertight curb .
direct drainage from the curb into embankment protectors or drainage structures .
inspect the burlap bag curbs frequently to ensure that there are no breaks or underwashing .
num silt fence install silt fences at specified locations and elsewhere as needed to prevent erosion of ditch channels and sheet flows .
use a wirereinforced silt fence woven wire above wdeq class i waters and in severe snowfall or high wind areas .
build fences and grade fence locations so that water is spread uniformly along the fence .
taper the ends of the fence uphill .
drive posts to a minimum depth of num in num mm at a maximum spacing of num ft num m. where it is impossible to drive the posts to a depth of num in num mm adequately secure the fence to prevent overturning .
attach fabric to each post using at least two ties through the top num in num mm of fabric .
embed a minimum of num in num mm of the geotextile fabric at the bottom of the fence in a trench .
backfill the trench with soil and compact .
construct the fence to handle the stress of the sediment loading .
maintain the silt fence until the fence is removed or until the final acceptance of the project in accordance with subsection num final acceptance .
check num storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num num num storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num the fabric after each rainfall event to ensure it is free of rips tears and other types of deterioration and replace as needed .
remove sediment deposits when the deposit depth reaches one half of the height of the silt fence .
num ditch checks install ditch checks to control ditch channel and inlet erosion .
install ditch checks to ensure that water does not flow around between or under the devices .
construct ditch checks of either of the following devices num .
erosion bales .
straw or hay bales placed to reduce ditch and channel erosion .
bury bales at least num in num mm deep .
num .
excelsior sediment logs .
stake with wooden stakes placed at intervals of num in num mm .
bury logs at least num in num mm deep .
tightly butt the devices together .
stake and backfill devices driving stakes into the ground at least num in num mm .
inspect ditch checks frequently and replace deteriorated or damaged devices that are not functioning properly .
use removed devices to mulch areas of sediment disposal in accordance with subsection num storm water pollution prevention construction general .
num triangular silt dike place synthetic triangular silt dikes to reduce ditch and channel erosion .
attach foam dikes to the ground with wire staples .
prior to installation of the mesh dikes place erosion blankets or ditch liner as specified .
place plastic panels next with the upstream panel folded into and pinned to the underlying blanket liner .
attach to the ground with wire staples spaced at num in num mm intervals along the panel lips .
num rock check dikes install rock check dikes to control ditch and channel erosion as specified .
use rock with diameters from num in to num in num mm to num mm intermixed with gravel .
to maintain filtering capability do not use larger rock .
establish the flow line from num in tonum in num mm to num mm below the side elevations .
num do not install rock check dikes within the specified clear zone .
num sediment traps construct sediment traps to reduce sediment in runoff .
construct sediment traps as close to the source of the sediment as possible .
construct the sediment trap by excavation of a basin by using a natural terrain depression or by building a low dam .
determine the size of the sediment trap based on the inflow and as specified .
remove accumulated sediment as necessary to maintain proper sediment trap operation .
num contour diversion ditches to prevent erosion of construction areas surface runoff may be diverted to permanent or temporary cross ditches .
use triangular contour diversion ditches as specified for low volume runoff .
use parabolic or trapezoidal contour diversion ditches as specified and when necessitated by higher volume runoff .
if high velocities are expected or if runoff is causing erosion to the ditch line the ditch with erosion control blankets .
when using ditches divert water from a slope by one of the described ditches and then water may be redistributed with a level spreader as specified .
cover the level spreader with geotextile fabric erosion control blanket or rock .
inspect ditches frequently for breaks .
remove accumulated sediment as necessary .
num slope drains use slope drains to convey runoff down unprotected fill slopes .
use slope drains in conjunction with temporary diversion features at the edges of newly constructed slopes .
construct slope drains so that the water funnels into it and does not wash around the drain .
stake or weigh down drains .
compact the soil around the inlet .
as the construction progresses modify slope drains as necessary .
inspect slope drains after each storm for structural integrity blockage and stability at the inlet .
storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num num num num num storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num erosion control agent apply erosion control agent to specified nontraffic areas of exposed erodible soils .
before applying give two copies of the manufacturers published material specifications and recommended application procedures to the engineer .
before proceeding with the full application verify agents performance characteristics at the recommended application rate by testing on a small area designated by the engineer .
unless approved by the engineer only one product will be used on the project .
before applying the agent and to ensure penetration prepare treatment areas by loosening hardpacked soil to a depth of from ½ in to num in num to num mm .
smooth areas to prevent runoff and puddling .
mix store and apply the agent in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
protect slopes left unfinished and without vegetation before suspension of work by one of the two following methods num .
applying an erosion control agent .
num .
planting a temporary cover crop in accordance with subsection num temporary cover crop .
if the slopes are not vegetated because of contractor delays furnish and apply the slope protection at no additional cost to the department .
reclaim by may num areas of erodible earth that were not revegetated but could have been before winter suspension .
if not reclaimed by this date apply an additional application of the erosion control agent at no additional cost to the department .
num temporary cover crop plant a temporary cover crop to minimize soil erosion in the following situations num .
topsoil stockpiles if stockpiled before june num or to be in place through the winter work suspension .
num num .
open slopes steeper than numvnumh not permanently seeded prior to work suspension .
num .
long term disturbed areas within borrow areas .
an erosion control agent in accordance with subsection num erosion control agent may be placed instead of a temporary cover crop .
when soil is free of frost plant by drilling seeds to a depth from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
steeper slopes may require broadcast seeding .
prepare and use seeding rates for temporary cover crop areas as specified or as approved by the engineer .
use seeds that will produce sterile plants .
num chemical water treatment where turbidity caused by fine silt particles in runoff that has passed through other sediment control devices is in excess of allowable limits chemical settling agents may be required .
use manufacturer recommendations for the following num .
injection methods .
num .
locations within the system for addition of the chemical settling agent .
num .
concentration levels .
num .
system maintenance .
ensure even mixing of the chemical settling agent with the storm water runoff .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
burlap bag curb by the foot meter .
num .
contractor storm water control by the lump sum .
the engineer will pay num percent of the lump sum price for contractor storm water storm water pollution prevention num num num num num num num num num storm water pollution prevention control on the first monthly progress payment .
additional monthly progress payments will be prorated based on the total project work actually performed as compared to the total original project cost .
the total lump sum payment will not exceed the original lump sum bid except by a contract amendment form enum .
adjustments will only be made for significant added work .
disturbances less than one acre num mnum that do not require a permit will not require a swppp and contractor storm water control will be eliminated in accordance with subsection num eliminated or unused pay items .
num .
department storm water control in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work for work without individual pay items in the contract .
num .
erosion bales by the each .
num .
erosion control agent by the acre hectare or short ton metric ton .
num .
excelsior sediment logs by the foot meter .
num .
rock check dikes by foot meter .
num .
silt fence by the foot meter .
num .
triangular silt dike by the foot meter .
num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
contour diversion ditches and sediment traps in accordance with section num equipment or in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num .
chemical water treatment in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num .
seeding for temporary cover crop in accordance with section num seeding fertilizer and sodding .
num .
slope drains utilizing contract pay items representative of the work and in accordance with the associated technical section in these standard specifications .
storm water pollution prevention num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest burlap bag curb ft m num ft num m ft num m contractor storm water control ls ls ls department storm water control erosion bales ea ea ea ea ea ea erosion control agent acre ton ha t ft num ton num m num t num acre num ton num ha num t excelsior sediment log ft m num ft num m ft num m rock check dikes ft m num ft num m ft num m silt fence ft m num ft num m ft num m triangular silt dike ft m num ft num m ft num m the department will pay as follows num num num seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num section num seeding fertilizer and sodding num description this section describes the requirements for soil preparation furnishing and spreading fertilizers furnishing and drilling or broadcasting seed mulching and furnishing and placing sod .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection coconut fiber ditch lining num erosion control blanket num erosion control netting num grass seed and fertilizer num mulch straw or hay num mulch tack num sod num upin staples num num equipment num hydraulic for mixing and slurry application use hydraulic equipment with builtin agitators to keep the various combinations of seed fertilizer mulch mulch tack when specified and water mixed homogeneously until pumped .
for pumping ensure a pressure adequate to maintain a continuous nonfluctuating slurry stream .
provide sprayers equipped with nozzles and hose extensions adequate to obtain a uniform slurry application .
apply mulch tack type ar with a hydraulic seeder capable of producing a coarse spray and calibrated to the specified application rate .
mix mulch tack types mc and gu in a hydraulic seeder equipped with a mechanical agitation system .
use the smallest nozzle available for the equipment in use to ensure accurate distribution .
num num dry mulch use equipment that does not pulverize or excessively shorten the individual stems of the mulch .
after spreading anchor the mulch in the soil with blunt notched disks or scalloped rollers manufactured specifically for crimping mulch .
do not use sharpened smooth disk harrows .
num seed drills set drills to produce uniform rows no more than num in num mm apart .
equip with a positive means for calibration to ensure seed distribution at the specified rate .
num construction num general perform and complete seeding between the time frost leaves the ground in the spring and june num or between september num and before frost enters the ground in the fall .
complete seeding in stages as the grading and topsoil work are completed .
if the weather conditions are favorable the engineer can extend the spring seeding date to june num and start the fall window on august num .
if at least half the project is above num feet in elevation there will be no restrictions on seeding in the summer .
do not begin or continue reclamation when the wind speed exceeds num mph num kmh or there is frost in the ground .
before seeding complete slopes to the specified line and grade .
spread topsoil uniformly on prepared slopes in accordance with section num topsoil .
scarify or discharrow horizontally the entire seed bed to a depth of approximately num in num mm leaving definite furrows and the topsoil in an uncompacted workable condition for seeding .
leave steep slopes that can not be scarified in a rough condition similar to scarification .
repair damage to prepared slopes or replace lost material resulting from delays in the work activities at no additional cost to the department .
coordinate other work such as fencing with seeding operations .
spread fertilizer uniformly before seeding except in locations where hydraulic seeding or hydraulic mulching is specified .
use a method that will not contaminate adjacent surface waters .
apply seed by drilling or broadcasting followed by mulching .
seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num num num num num num seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num when specified spread type v fertilizer uniformly and mix into the upper num in num mm of topsoil using a disc or other suitable equipment .
within the specified clear zone remove newly exposed rocks that have diameters greater than num in num mm .
protect reclaimed areas from damage by construction equipment .
repair areas damaged by traffic or construction equipment at no additional cost to the department .
num seeding num general if requested by the engineer have seed on the project and available for testing num working days before seeding operations begin .
num drilling maintain specified drilling depths for the seeds planted .
when the depth is not specified follow the seed suppliers recommendation .
num broadcasting broadcast seed only where drilling will not be safe or effective .
scarify areas for seed broadcasting in accordance with subsection num seeding fertilizer and sodding construction general .
apply seed at num½ times the rate specified for areas seeded by drilling .
distribute seed uniformly using mechanical or hydraulic broadcasting devices then cover by raking or chaindragging the ground wherever practical drag on the contour .
num hydraulic seeding perform hydraulic seeding as follows num .
slurry preparation .
combine seed mulch mulch tack when specified and water .
when the tank is at least onethird full of water add the mulch and remaining water while agitating continuously to maintain homogeneity .
when the tank is full of water add seed .
continue mixing at least five minutes before applying the slurry .
do not add seed before mulch .
num num num .
slurry proportions .
mix the materials in the proportions specified .
num .
area preparation .
scarify or rough grade the seeding areas in accordance with subsection num seeding fertilizer and sodding construction general .
num .
application .
use the following method num .
mix seed water and approximately num lbacre num kgha of hydraulic mulch and apply the mixture uniformly .
num .
before the final mulch application cover seed with approximately ¼ in to ½ in num mm to num mm of soil on slopes numvnumh or flatter .
the seed may be covered by dragging with a log chain chain harrow or other appropriate mechanical means .
num .
within num hours of the completion of seeding mix the remaining hydraulic mulch specified amount less the num lbacre num kgha used in step num. above fertilizer and mulch tack with water and apply the mixture uniformly .
num hydraulic mulching perform hydraulic mulching within num hours after the completion of seeding .
mix the hydraulic mulch fertilizer and mulch tack with water and apply the mixture uniformly .
num sodding provide machinecut sod strips with an adhering soil layer from d in to num in num mm to num mm thick .
do not install sod that has dried has a soil layer that breaks tears or crumbles or was cut more than num hours previously .
keep sod rolls moist and protected from the sun and wind by tarpaulins or shade cloth .
before sodding ensure the presence of uniformly graded topsoil layer at least num in num mm thick apply fertilizer at the specified rate .
till topsoil and fertilizer to a depth of num in num mm roll and smooth so that the topsoil is firm but not compacted .
rake to remove stones and debris with diameters larger than num in num mm .
leave finished grade approximately num½ in num mm below the top of adjacent curbs and sidewalks .
prior to placing the sod apply water to the topsoil and fertilizer .
seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num num num num num lay sod strips parallel to slope contours and tightly abutted with the ends staggered to minimize erosion when watering .
water thoroughly .
after the water has soaked in roll the sod to ensure good contact with the topsoil .
regularly water newlain sod to avoid brown spots and until firmly rooted .
num dry mulching spread dry mulch uniformly at the specified rate .
begin application at the top of the slopes then proceed down the slope .
where steep slopes or other factors prohibit the use of equipment mulch may be spread by hand or blower and covered with erosion control netting or lightweight erosion control blankets to hold the mulch in place .
do not place mulch that can not be covered with netting or blankets the same day .
anchor mulch the day of placement and so that at least num percent of the stems are vertical after crimping .
num erosion control blankets and coconut fiber ditch lining num general use erosion control blankets and ditch lining to prevent erosion in borrow ditches drainages and roadway slopes .
shape finish seed and fertilize areas as specified before placing erosion control blankets or ditch lining referred to as blankets from here on .
prior to installation do not expose stored rolls of blanket to moisture .
to achieve maximum blankettosoil contact roll out blankets evenly and smoothly without stretching .
unroll blankets with netting on only one side so that the netting is on top .
overlap lengthwise blanket edges at least num in num mm and with the direction of prevailing winds to minimize overturning .
embed the nonoverlapping ends of the initial blankets in num in wide num in deep num mm num mm check slots the full width of the blanket .
staple blankets to the ground using ushaped industrial quality bright basic wire staples with the following dimensions for the sites soil conditions as determined by the engineer num num .
soil to moderately rocky conditions .
use num gage num mm or larger and at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
num .
extremely rocky or densely compacted soil .
use num gage num mm or larger and at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
num .
sandy or unconsolidated soils .
use num gage num mm or larger and at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
drive upin staples vertically through the material .
use a single staple common to both blankets at overlapped ends and edges .
place centerline and quarterline staples to form a diagonal grid pattern with equidistant staple locations .
drive staples in all corners .
after erosion control blankets are installed backfill seed and fertilize check slots as specified .
num ditches unroll blankets in the direction of water flow extending up side slopes at least num in num mm above the projected water line with ends overlapped at least num in num mm and the downstream end on top creating a shingle effect .
offset overlapped edges at least num in num mm from the centerline of flow in ditch bottoms .
in ditches with a flow gradient greater than num percent embed the full width of the blankets in check slots placed at intervals from num ft to num ft num m to num m. place staples at intervals of num ft num m along overlapping lengthwise edges and at intervals of num ft num m along overlapping ends and the bottom of check slots .
drive staples along the longitudinal centerline and quarterlines of the blankets at alternating intervals of num ft num m. drive additional staples on the side slopes at the projected water line .
num slopes unroll blankets in the direction of water flow with ends overlapped at least num in num mm and the uphill blanket on top .
on slopes of numvnumh or steeper or longer than num ft num m staple in accordance with subsection num ditches .
on flatter slopes drive staples at intervals of num ft num m along overlapping lengthwise edges and at intervals of num ft num seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num num num num seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num m along overlapping ends and the bottom of check slots .
drive centerline and quarterline staples at alternating intervals of num ft num m. num erosion control netting seed fertilize and mulch areas before placing erosion control netting .
do not crimp straw mulch .
place erosion control netting immediately after mulch .
unroll erosion control netting over mulch and in the direction of water flow .
replace netting damaged after placement at no additional cost to the department .
overlap adjoining pieces from num in num mm to num in num mm with the upstream piece on top .
fasten netting with upin staples in accordance with subsection num erosion control blankets and coconut fiber ditch lining general .
num mulch tack type ar do not apply when rain or snow is forecast within the next num hours or when air temperatures are below num f num c. do not allow concentrated emulsion or dilute mix to freeze .
mix mulch tack type ar in the following sequence num .
fill application equipment with fresh water and start mechanical agitation .
operate at full agitation rate .
num .
add fiber mulch then seed and fertilizer as specified .
add remaining water at the same time .
num .
minimize agitation and add concentrated copolymer emulsion at the specified dilution ratio .
apply the mulch tack to prewetted soil immediately after mixing .
num mulch tack type mc mix mulch tack type mc in the following sequence num .
fill application equipment with onethird of the water required and start mechanical agitation .
num num num num .
slowly pour the mucilagegum powder into the tank agitating source .
add the remaining water .
num .
add wood fiber seed and fertilizer as specified .
continue agitation for approximately five minutes before application .
apply immediately after mixing .
num mulch tack type gu mix mulch tack type gu in the following sequence num .
fill application equipment with onethird of the water required and start mechanical agitation .
num .
very slowly pour the guargum powder into the tank agitating source .
add the remaining water .
mix until gumballs are dissolved .
num .
add wood fiber seed and fertilizer as specified .
continue agitation for at least ten minutes before application .
apply immediately after mixing .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
coconut fiber ditch lining erosion control blanket and erosion control netting by the square yard square meter of completed exposed surface area .
overlaps will not be measured .
num .
dry mulch by the short ton metric ton on the basis of airdry weight mass .
num .
fertilizer type i ii iii iv and vi except those quantities required for hydraulic seeding or hydraulic mulching by the pound kilogram of available nitrogen .
num .
fertilizer type v by the airdry short ton metric ton determined as the actual weight mass of the fertilizer less the percentage weight seeding fertilizer and sodding num num num num num num num seeding fertilizer and sodding mass due to water in the delivered composted manure as indicated by the laboratory certificate or by the cubic yard cubic meter based on volumetric measurements .
num .
fertilizer type vii except those quantities required for hydraulic seeding or hydraulic mulching as pounds kilograms of available phosphorous .
num .
hydraulic seeding by the short ton metric ton of hydraulic mulch based on the airdry weight mass of the mulch before the addition of water fertilizer mulch tack and seed .
the measurement will include fertilizer seed mulch tack and unless otherwise specified water as one payment .
num .
hydraulic mulch by the short ton metric ton of hydraulic mulch based on the airdry weight mass of the mulch before the addition of water fertilizer and mulch tack .
the measurement will include fertilizer mulch tack and unless otherwise specified water as one payment .
num .
mulch tack type ar mulch tack type mc and mulch tack type gu by the acres hectares treated except those quantities required for hydraulic seeding or hydraulic mulching .
the measurement will include guargum powder wood fiber fertilizer and unless otherwise specified water as one payment .
num .
seeding by the lump sum or the square yard square meter complete in place which includes seed fertilizer and mulch .
num .
seeding pls seeding special pls by the pound kilogram of pure live seed mixture based on the actual airdry weight mass of the seed applied .
the increased application rate of seed for broadcast seeding will be measured only on authorized areas .
the weight mass of seed wasted or used without authorization will be deducted from the measurement .
num .
sodding by the square yard square meter in place .
topsoil and fertilizer will be measured under the respective pay items .
num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
topsoil placing in accordance with section num topsoil .
num .
water in accordance with section num watering .
seeding fertilizer and sodding num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest coconut fiber ditch lining sy mnum num ft num mnum sy mnum dry mulch ton t num ton num t num ton num t erosion control blanket sy mnum num ft num mnum sy mnum erosion control netting sy mnum num ft num mnum sy mnum fertilizer type _____ lb kg lb num kg lb num kg fertilizer type v ton cy t mnum num ton ydnum num t mnum num ton cy num t mnum hydraulic mulching ton t num ton num t num ton num t hydraulic seeding ton t num ton num t num ton num t mulch tack type _____ acre ha ft num m num acre num ha seeding ls sy ls mnum ls num ft ls num m ls sy ls mnum seeding pls lb kg lb num kg lb num kg seeding special pls lb kg lb num kg lb num kg sodding sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum the department will pay as follows num num num geotextiles num num num num section num geotextiles num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing geotextile .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection geotextile and impermeable plastic membrane num num equipment meet the following equipment loads when placing and compacting material above a geotextile num .
a maximum wheel load of num lb num kg .
num .
a maximum contact pressure of num psi num kpa as calculated from the applied wheel load in pounds n and the resulting contact area in square inches square meters .
num .
lighten equipment loads if ruts are produced greater than num in num mm deep .
num construction num general submit test results and certification by the manufacturer showing the geotextile performance relative to contract requirements .
submit a test sample num ft num m long by the full width of the roll at least num calendar days before the use of any geotextile .
obtain this sample from a roll of fabric that is on the project site .
make sure the sample is labeled with the product name machine direction lot and batch number date of sampling project number and certification of num compliance .
if sewing is specified submit a seam sample num ft num ft num m num m with the seam in the center and parallel to the numfoot num m length .
during shipment and storage enclose geotextile in heavyduty wrapping to provide protection from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays moisture temperatures greater than num f num c mud dirt dust and debris .
when storing outdoors elevate the rolls and protect them with a waterproof cover .
remove unprotected geotextile from the project .
num installation num general lap geotextile at least num in num mm at ends and sides of adjoining sheets .
when sheets are sewn together ensure seam strength and efficiency properties in accordance with subsection num geotextile and impermeable plastic membrane .
overlap seams num in num mm .
leave seams exposed for ease of inspection .
place gravel or other specified material on the geotextile so that it is not torn punctured or shifted .
limit pile heights of materials to prevent geotextile distortion .
repair tears or punctures by placing a patch of the same type of geotextile over the ruptured area and overlapping at least num ft num m from the edge of any part of the rupture or by patching with sewn seams that meet strength requirements in accordance with subsection num geotextile and impermeable plastic membrane .
with approval pegs or pins may be used to fasten geotextile for embankment erosion control until the specified cover material has been placed .
install pegs or pins only at locations that are not detrimental to the finished product .
do not use pegs or pins for other types of installation .
except when used for erosion control and silt fences place cover material over the fabric daily .
repair ruts exceeding num in num mm by filling with additional cover material .
num foundation stabilization when using geotextile for foundation stabilization geotextiles num num num num num num num num num num geotextiles num num num num .
level and smooth the subgrade to remove ruts depressions or humps greater than num in num mm before installation .
ensure that the surface is free of objects that might tear or puncture the geotextile .
num .
place the geotextile and cover material in lifts of at least num in num mm .
num .
do not operate equipment directly on the geotextile .
num .
compact cover material with a roller or other equipment .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure geotextile _____ by the square yard square meter of surface area covered with no allowance for overlaps .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for cover material in accordance with section num excavation and embankment .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest geotextile _____ sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum num section num impermeable plastic membrane num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing impermeable plastic membrane .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection impermeable plastic membrane num num equipmentvacant num construction num general during shipment and storage protect membrane rolls from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays moisture temperatures greater than num f num c mud dirt dust and debris .
when storing outdoors elevate the rolls and protect them with a waterproof cover .
remove unprotected membrane from the project .
submit test results and certification by the manufacturer showing the membrane performance relative to requirements .
submit a test sample num ft num m long by the full width of the roll at least num calendar days before the use of any membrane .
obtain this sample from a roll of membrane that is on the project site .
make sure the sample is labeled with the product name machine direction lot and batch number date of sampling project number and certification of compliance .
do not place membrane during wet weather or when the subgrade is wet .
num installation num general overlap longitudinal and lateral joints at least num in num mm and glue using a product type application rate and curing procedure recommended by the impermeable plastic membrane num num num num num num num num num impermeable plastic membrane num num num num num membrane manufacturer .
if joints are not glued overlap the membrane at least num in num mm .
shingle the overlaps so that the exposed edges face the same direction as the flow of drainage .
reinforce and seal blemishes holes or scars with waterproof plastic adhesive tape .
replace damaged portions of membrane and unsealed joints at no additional cost to the department .
do not use pegs or pins to hold membrane in place .
place cover material over membrane daily .
equipment may runbut not turndirectly on membrane when placing membrane or cover material .
replace membrane damaged after installation because of construction activities at no additional cost to the department .
num crushed base cushion when specified provide a crushed base cushion between the membrane and subgrade .
place the cushion at least num in num mm thick and in accordance with section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material .
num trenches for vertical installation in trenches use backfill from the trench excavation and place to prevent damage to the membrane .
for backfill that will come in direct contact with the membrane provide material that is approved by the engineer before use and is free of objects that might puncture or tear the membrane .
backfill the trench immediately after placing the membrane .
compact and finish backfill in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure impermeable plastic membrane by the square yard square meter of surface area including vertical surfaces in trenches with no allowance for overlaps .
num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for crushed base in accordance with section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material .
num impermeable plastic membrane num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest impermeable plastic membrane sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum the department will pay as follows num num num num num num num num num rockfall mesh section num rockfall mesh num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and installing anchors and rockfall mesh on finished backslopes .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection anchors num hardware num lacing and fasteners num nonshrink grout num polyester resin grout num rockfall mesh num wire rope num provide mesh in an industrystandard color .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general before installing mesh prune shrubs and trees so that mesh will lie flat .
scale backslopes in accordance with section num scaling rock cuts .
submit copies of the tensile and punching test results along with a sample num ft num ft num m num m of all types of rockfall mesh to be used on the project .
obtain these samples from a roll of rockfall mesh that is on the project site .
at least num calendar days before starting the work submit a plan for the ground anchors that details the following num num .
the proposed construction sequence and schedule .
num .
the proposed drilling methods and equipment .
num .
the proposed grout mix design or specifications and placement procedures .
num .
the proposed anchors plate washers and nuts top support wire rope wire rope clips thimbles and rockfall mesh fasteners all with specifications including manufacturers data sheets .
num .
calibration data for each load cell and calibration data for the test jack and master pressure gauges to be used in the work obtained from calibration tests performed by an independent testing laboratory within num calendar days of the submission .
num .
the proposed stressing procedures and stressing equipment setup .
begin installation after the engineer has approved the plan in writing .
polyester resin grout may be used in lieu of nonshrink grout if test data can substantiate that the polyester resin grout meets or exceeds the desired anchor load .
do not use resin grout that exceeds the manufacturers expiration date .
store resin grout as recommended by the manufacturer .
give the engineer a copy of the record of each days work on the following work day .
include in the daily records the location and quantity of anchors grout rockfall mesh top support wire rope hardware and accessories installed .
num installation num general install anchors vertically or perpendicular to the slope embedded at least num ft num m into soil or rock .
do not use steel bolt couplings .
extend anchors above the ground through the bearing plate to ensure a sufficient bar length for installation of the end hardware .
secure mesh together at the seams with a num in num mm overlap by lacing or fasteners .
space fasteners a maximum of num in num mm apart .
place mesh so that the natural curl from the roll is toward the slope face .
do not anchor the face or bottom of the mesh and extend it above the ditch as specified .
num num num num rockfall mesh num num num num num num rockfall mesh num num num connect the ½inch num mm top anchor cable to each anchor by wrapping the cable one full circumference around the anchor hold in place beneath a bearing plate washer and nut .
extend the anchor through the bearing plate to ensure a sufficient bar length for installation of the end hardware .
fold at least num in num mm of the mesh over the top anchor cable and onto itself secure by lacing or fasteners .
num grouted anchors embed grouted anchors at least num ft num m into competent rock and in holes with a diameter of at least num in num mm and blow holes clean after drilling with at least num psi num kpa compressed air introduced at the back of the hole .
support anchors in the drilled hole with centralizers spaced no more than num in num mm apart .
num acceptance the minimum vertical pullout resistance for grouted anchors is num tons num kn .
conduct pullout tests on at least num percent of the anchors .
acceptance criteria is zero load loss and zero anchor movement while the anchor is held for a numminute period at num tons num kn .
if any anchors fail the engineer may perform testing on additional anchors .
replace and retest failed anchors at no additional cost to the department .
test driven anchors as specified .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
driven anchors and grouted anchors by the each .
num .
rockfall mesh by the square yard square meter complete in place .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest driven anchors ea ea ea ea ea ea grouted anchors ea ea ea ea ea ea rockfall mesh sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum num section num scaling rock cuts num description this section describes the requirements for the removal and disposal of unstable rocks from cut slopes .
num materialsvacant num equipment scaling machine consists of dragging a scaling apparatus suspended from a crane over a slope to remove loose rock soil and debris .
provide a scaling apparatus consisting of a series of cleated dozer tracks blasting mats or similar equipment .
provide a crane with sufficient reach and lifting capacity to drag the scaling apparatus up and down the slope .
if the equipment and methods do not produce the desired results propose and test changes until results are satisfactory .
num construction before starting install a temporary rockfall barrier in the portion of the cut to be scaled .
scale within the limits of the rockfall barrier .
do not allow traffic to pass through the work zone while scaling .
protect the pavement with blast mats or other protective systems .
repair damaged pavement at no additional cost to the department .
clear the roadway and ditches of rock and load haul and dispose of rock debris to a specified location .
manually scale unstable rock that can not be removed by machine .
during manual scaling provide a crew on the slope that consists at all times of a working foreman and two scalers .
immediately replace with a foreman or scaler any crew member who leaves .
light mechanical means such as hydraulic jacks or splitters may be used to remove unstable rock that can not be removed by conventional manual methods .
slopes will be inspected to determine whether scaling is complete .
if inspection reveals additional hazardous rocks continue scaling until the engineer is satisfied .
num num num num num num scaling rock cuts num num num num num num scaling rock cuts num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
scaling machine by the actual hours the equipment is used for scaling .
num .
scaling manual by the crewhour with a crew defined as a working foreman and two scalers .
setup or standby time of personnel and equipment for either scaling pay item will not be measured directly for payment .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest scaling machine hr num h num hr scaling manual crwh num h num crwh num section num dust control agent num description this section describes the requirements for applying dust control agent .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection dust control agent num dust control agent may be either oil or a magnesiumbrine solution .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection distributor truck num num construction before applying dust control agent furnish the engineer with a copy of the manufacturers recommendations for application .
apply dust control agent per manufacturers recommendations .
before application scarify reshape and compact surfaces with hard crusty or tirepolished areas or that are poorly shaped .
apply dust control agent to dry or damp surfaces that have been graded and shaped .
once applied protect dust control agent from heavy truck traffic until cured .
slow automobile traffic may be allowed on the treated surface after complete penetration .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure dust control agent by the short ton metric ton .
num num num num num num num num dust control agent num num num num dust control agent the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest dust control agent ton t num ton num t num ton num t num division num aggregate materials num section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num description this section describes the requirements for placing one or more courses of aggregate on a prepared surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate num num equipment unless otherwise approved by the engineer use a pugmill capable of thorough and consistent blending to mix aggregate and water for subbases and bases .
num construction num bed course material shape the bed course material to coincide with the bottom surface of the item or appurtenance to be constructed on the bed course material .
tamp or compact the bed course material into place .
no density requirements will apply .
num subbases and bases num general at least num calendar days before placement submit aggregate samples for determination of optimum moisture content maximum density and rvalue .
obtain the samples in the engineers presence .
num num num num num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num num num lot and sublot sizes num weight mass measurement a lot is defined as the quantity of material represented by five tests or a maximum of num ton num t and a sublot is the quantity of base or subbase represented by one test or a maximum of num ton num t. num volume measurement a lot is defined as the quantity of material represented by five tests or a maximum volume of num ydnum num mnum and a sublot is the quantity of base or subbase represented by one test or a maximum of num ydnum num mnum .
num area measurement a lot is defined as the quantity of material represented by five tests or a maximum area as calculated by the following equation num .
inchpound u.s .
customary num .
step num .
determine the number of lots .
num .
step num .
determine the lot size .
num. international system metric num num num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material lots q th num where lots number of lots required q total quantity of base or subbase ydnum th lift thickness in where lots number of lots required q total quantity of base or subbase ydnum lot size ydnum q lots lot size mnum num th where th lift thickness mm num num num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num num num num num num a sublot is the quantity of base or subbase represented by one test or a maximum of onefifth of the lot size .
num placing during placement of material the engineer will determine the liquid limit ll and plasticity index pi for all gradation samples .
remove from the roadway material exceeding the specified limits for these values in accordance with table num aggregate properties subbase and base and replaced with material meeting the requirements .
do not allow the compacted thickness of any one layer to exceed num in num mm .
if the compacted depth of the base or subbase course exceeds num in num mm construct the course in two or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
compact each layer to at least num percent of aashto tnum maximum density .
compact material when moisture content is within plus num percent to minus num percent of optimum .
add water if necessary during mixing and apply water over the materials during compaction as necessary to obtain optimum moisture content and maximum density .
num acceptance aggregate gradation for subbase and base material will be accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure pit run subbase crusher run subbase crushed subbase subbase crushed base and bed course material by the ton metric ton cubic yard cubic meter or square yard square meter .
num .
cubic yards cubic meters .
volume of material will be computed by using the neat line for width including one half the taper width where applicable multiplied by the neat line for thickness multiplied by the neat line for length of the completed surface .
num num num num .
square yards square meters .
surface area will be computed as the neat line for width including one half the taper width where applicable multiplied by the neat line for length of the completed surface .
num .
weight mass .
the weight mass of natural moisture and the required water for mixing added to the material before the material is weighed will not be deducted from the measurement unless it exceeds the maximum moisture content .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
water added to the material before the material is weighed in accordance with section num watering .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bed course material ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num ton cy sy num t mnum mnum crushed base ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num ton cy sy num t mnum mnum crushed subbase ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num ton cy sy num t mnum mnum crusher run subbase ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num toncy sy num t mnum mnum pit run subbase ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num ton cy sy num t mnum mnum subbase ton cy sy t mnum mnum num ton ft ft num t num m numm num ton cy sy num t mnum mnum num num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material num num determination of pay factor the engineer will evaluate aggregate gradation tests for subbases and bases in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and will apply pay adjustments .
the maximum pay factor per lot will be num .
num section num blended base and blended subbase num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing blended base or blended subbase on a prepared surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate num reclaimed asphalt pavement rapexisting asphalt pavement milled from the roadway within the project limits .
reclaimed portland cement concrete pavement rpccpexisting concrete pavement removed from the roadway within the project limits .
num equipment unless otherwise approved by the engineer use a pugmill capable of thorough and consistent blending to mix aggregate rap rpccp and water for blended bases and subbases .
num construction num general remove the existing plant mix pavement concrete pavement or both from the roadway haul it to the plant site and stockpile it in accordance with subsection num removal of surfacing concrete sidewalks curbs gutters median double gutter etc .
minimize contamination of the milled asphalt pavement or removed concrete pavement .
if required crush the raprpccp to the maximum size specified and stockpile it separately .
before blending the virgin crushed base aggregate with raprpccp obtain virgin crushed base aggregate samples at the direction of the engineer in accordance with the materials testing manual .
sample the virgin crushed base aggregate from the belt immediately before blending it with raprpccp .
num num num num num num num blended base and blended subbase num num mix the raprpccp virgin crushed base aggregate and water .
haul place and compact the blended base or blended subbase in accordance with subsection num placing .
num lot and sublot sizes a lot for gradation is defined as the quantity represented by five tests or a maximum of num ton num t of virgin crushed base and a sublot is the quantity represented by one test or a maximum of num ton num t of virgin crushed base aggregate .
the sublot size will be dependent on the rate of virgin crushed base aggregate to be incorporated into the blended base or blended subbase using the equation below .
ls ss where ls lot size for blended base or blended subbase ton t ss sublot size for blended base or blended subbase evaluated ton t vu percent virgin crushed base num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure blended base and blended subbase by the ton metric ton cubic yard cubic meter or square yard square meter .
num .
cubic yards cubic meters .
volume of material will be computed by using the neat line for width including one half the taper width where applicable multiplied by the neat line for thickness multiplied by the neat line for length of the completed surface .
num .
square yards square meters .
surface area will be computed as the neat line for width including one half the taper width where applicable multiplied by the neat line for length of the completed surface .
num blended base and blended subbase num num num num vu num lsbb num num num num num num .
weight mass .
the weight mass of natural moisture and the required water for mixing added to the material before the material is weighed will not be deducted from the measurement unless it exceeds the maximum moisture content .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest blended base sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft num ft num t num m num m num t sy cy num ton t mnum mnum blended subbase sy cy ton mnum mnum t num ft num ft num t num m num m num t sy cy num ton t mnummnum num blended base and blended subbase num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
milling plant mix in accordance with section num removal .
num .
removal of concrete pavement in accordance with section num removal .
num .
water in accordance with section num watering .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num determination of pay factor the engineer will evaluate aggregate gradation tests for virgin crushed base in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and will apply pay adjustments .
the maximum pay factor per lot will be num .
num pay adjustments the engineer will calculate pay adjustments for blended base and blended subbase as follows num num num blended base and blended subbase num bbpa bb cbpf num ls vu num where bbpa pay adjustment for blended base or blended subbase for evaluated lot bb contract price per ton for the blended base or blended subbase pay item cbpf crushed base pay factor ls lot size for blended base or blended subbase pay item ton vu percent virgin crushed base num section num vacant section num vacant section num cement treated base section num vacant section num vacant section num vacant section num emulsion stabilized base emulsion stabilized base num num section num stockpiled aggregate num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing aggregate in stockpiles .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregates num sodium chloride num num equipment unless otherwise approved by the engineer use a pugmill capable of thorough and consistent blending to mix water and aggregate or sodium chloride and aggregate .
num construction num general furnish deliver and place aggregate in stockpiles at designated sites .
ensure that the sites are firm smooth and welldrained .
when required clear and grub sites in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
remove and stockpile topsoil in accordance with section num topsoil .
to prevent the intrusion of soil or foreign material place a bed of the same aggregate being stockpiled under the stockpile .
make the bed at least num in num mm deep and extend it at least num ft num m beyond the edge of the stockpile .
to prevent mixing separate stockpiles of different types or sizes of aggregates by spacing them at least num ft num m apart or by using suitable walls or partitions .
do not use stockpiling methods that allow contamination or excessive degradation of the aggregate .
the engineer will use gradation tests to evaluate degradation .
if num num num num num num num stockpiled aggregate num num samples fail to meet gradation requirements the engineer will reject stockpiled aggregates .
change stockpiling procedures to provide the specified gradation .
when specified blend sodium chloride uniformly with the aggregate .
furnish weigh mass tickets with each load of sodium chloride .
do not allow sodium chloride to leach into surrounding surface or ground water .
num lot and sublot sizes num weight mass measurement a lot is defined as the quantity of material represented by five tests or a maximum of num ton num t and a sublot is the quantity of base or subbase represented by one test or a maximum of num ton num t. num volume measurement a lot is defined as the quantity of material represented by five tests or a maximum volume num ydnum num mnum and a sublot is the quantity of base or subbase represented by one test or a maximum of num ydnum num mnum .
num acceptance aggregate gradation will be accepted with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
stockpiled _________ and maint stockpile type _________ by the ton metric ton or cubic yard cubic meter .
natural moisture in the material will not be deducted before measurement and payment .
no deduction will be made for the weight mass of salt in the mixture .
stockpiles volumes will be measured using volumetric measurements in accordance with subsection num definitions .
aggregate beds will not be measured separately and will be considered incidental to stockpiled _________ and maint stockpile type _________ .
num .
sodium chloride by the ton metric ton .
num num num num num num num stockpiled aggregate num the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num .
clearing and grubbing in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
num .
topsoil storing in accordance with section num topsoil .
num determination of pay factor the engineer will evaluate aggregate gradation tests for stockpiled material in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and will apply pay adjustments .
the maximum pay factor per lot will be num .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest maint stockpile type _____ ton cy t mnum num ton ft num t num m num ton cy num t mnum sodium chloride ton t num ton num t num ton num t stockpiled ______ ton cy t mnum num ton ft num t num m num ton cy num t mnum num num num stockpiled aggregate num num division num pavements num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num section num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num description this section describes the requirements for construction of one or more courses of plant mix pavement or recycled plant mix pavement placed on a prepared foundation .
num materials num performance graded asphalt binder provide performance graded asphalt binder pgab of the specified grade and meeting the requirements of subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
use a qualified source of pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder except as modified in paragraph num of this subsection.the department maintains a current list of qualified suppliers which is available on the wydot website .
the contractor may use a different grade of binder if num .
the upper specification temperature is increased or the lower specification temperature is decreased num .
the engineer receives written notice of the proposed grade change before mix production begins and num .
grades are not changed repeatedly .
the engineer will test pgab at the temperatures for the grade specified .
the department will not pay extra for grade changes proposed by the contractor .
ensure that asphalt binder and required modifiers are blended prior to delivery to the project .
the department requires the supplier to perform material testing and provide the materials program with test reports for applicable properties in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder weekly by email .
in the reports provide all test data for the preceding week including daily num quality control testing and all specification compliance testing .
present the data in a clear and concise spreadsheet format using computer software that is compatible with microsoft excel version num and recorded in the units specified in subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
ensure that each load of pgab is delivered to the project site accompanied by a supplierfurnished shipping document that clearly indicates the specification grade of the pgab as well as the daily dynamic shear and rotational viscosity test results .
if the project estimated quantity shown on the proposal form enum is less than num tons num t the source of the pgab does not have to be qualified .
submit to the materials program a written certification for the project that lists the grades of pgab and verifying that the pgab meets all applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
accompany the certification with representative test reports for the applicable properties in accordance with subsection num binder properties .
num aggregates provide aggregates in accordance with section num aggregate .
num recycled plant mix pavement provide aggregates for recycled plant mix pavement in accordance with section num aggregate with the gradation bands modified as specified .
use reclaimed asphalt pavement rap from specified sources .
excess rap remains the property of the department .
num hydrated lime provide hydrated lime in accordance with section num hydrated lime .
num burner fuel fuel mixing plants with natural gas nos .
num or num fuel oil butane propane or used oil .
in the case of used oil comply with num cfr num standards for the management of used oil give the engineer copies of tests certified by the supplier showing that applicable requirements have been met .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num truck bed release agent do not use a solvent or petroleumbased truck bed release agent .
num equipment num milling produce rap with a milling machine that meets the requirements of subsection num equipment .
num crushing crush rap with compressiontype equipment such as jaws rollers or cones .
do not use impact or grindingtype crushers .
num mixing plant num general use a batch or drum plant to make the plant mix .
for projects with an estimated need for more than num ton num t provide a mixing plant with a manufacturer rated capacity no less than num tonh num th .
equip or provide the plant with the following num .
cold feed control system with adjustable positive controls to ensure that aggregates and rap if specified are blended in the proper proportions .
equip with an automatic plant shutoff or other means of control if the flow from any bin is stopped or restricted .
equip with calibration devices to readily check the aggregate delivery system .
if blending aggregates from two or more bins at the cold feed ensure and use a means of synchronized proportioning .
num .
control unit equipped with weighing or metering devices enabling the accurate proportioning of asphalt binder in the mix .
num .
dryers to heat and dry aggregate and equipped with a mechanical feeder that maintains uniform production and temperature .
during operation ensure the aggregate is continuously agitated and that flames are properly adjusted to prevent damaging or coating the aggregate num with soot oil or other contaminants .
do not burn used oil as fuel if it adversely affects the plant mix it produces incomplete combustion and resulting fuel condensation or it causes the malfunction of burner emissioncontrol or other equipment .
num .
dust collection system either a wet scrubber or a baghouse for the heating operation .
if a baghouse is used and the fines are reintroduced into the mixture provide equipment using a positive means of controlling the addition rate including a calibrated feeder tied to the plant controls and operating from a surge silo .
direct auguring from the baghouse does not constitute a positive means of control .
num .
scales in accordance with section num measurement and payment to weigh aggregates lime and asphalt binder separately and mixed .
num .
storage bins of sufficient capacity to supply the mixer when operating at full speed .
arrange to ensure separate and adequate storage of each aggre gate fraction and rap if specified .
do not allow bins to overflow equip enclosed bins with overflow chutes to prevent spillage into other compartments or bins .
equip each compartment with an individual outlet gate that does not leak when closed and that cuts off quickly and completely .
provide separate dry storage for commercial additives and a means to feed the additives into the mixer .
num .
storage space sufficient to keep the different aggregate sizes separate until the material is delivered to the collecting conveyor .
num .
tanks for storing asphalt binder .
equip with a steam oil coil electric or other system for heating and maintaining the binder at required temperatures without allowing flames to contact the tanks .
equip with a system to ensure the proper and continuous circulation of binder during the operation .
equip with a sampling valve at the discharge line in accordance with the materials testing manual .
equip with and ensure the availability of accurately marked dipsticks for measuring the tanks contents and a chart to convert the dipstick readings to gallons cubic meters .
num .
thermometers of adequate range fixed in the asphalt binder feed line near the charging valve at the mixer unit or near the discharge end of num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num the storage tanks .
equip the dryer discharge chute with a temperature recording device that continuously registers the temperature of the heated aggregates .
also equip the mixer with a temperature recording device that registers and records the temperature of the mixture as it is discharged .
num batch plants in addition to the requirements specified for all mixing plants in subsection num mixing plant general equip or provide batch plants with the following num .
asphalt binder control system with a nontilting bucket equipped with a loose sheetmetal cover .
ensure that the discharge opening or spray bar is at least threefourths the length of the mixer and discharges directly into the mixer .
ensure adequate heating of the bucket discharge valves and spray bar if used ensure that steam jackets are drained and connections are constructed to not interfere with the operation of the asphalt binder scales .
ensure the presence of a heated quick acting nondrip charging valve directly over the bucket .
ensure that the bucket and indicator dial capacity exceed by at least num percent the quantity of asphalt binder to be used in a batch .
provide controls that can be secured at any dial setting and that automatically reset after the addition of asphalt binder to each batch .
place the dial in full view of the operator .
ensure a means to automatically begin the flow of asphalt binder when dry mixing is over and to complete the discharge in num seconds or less .
ensure that spray bar openings are sized and spaced to provide a uniform application of asphalt binder for the full length of the mixer .
num .
screens to separate aggregates to the specified sizes and with capacities greater than the full capacity of the mixer .
num .
twin pugmilltype mixer capable of producing a uniform mixture .
enclose the mixer box or equip with a hood to prevent the escape of dust .
allow no more than num in num mm of clearance between the blades and other fixed or moving parts .
num num .
timing features including an accurate timelock to control a complete mixing cycle and capable of being set at intervals of num seconds or less throughout a total cycle of up to num minutes .
ensure that the weigh box gate locks after the charging of the mixer and remains locked until the mixer gate closes at the end of the cycle .
ensure that the asphalt binder bucket locks during the interval between the opening of the weigh box gate and the first introduction of asphalt binder the dry mixing period and that the mixer gate locks and remains locked during this and the following period of wet mixing num .
weigh box or hopper capable of accurately weighing each aggregate size and with a capacity to hold one full batch without overflowing .
equip with a tightclosing gate to prevent leakage of material while weighing .
num drum plants in addition to the requirements specified for all mixing plants in subsection num mixing plant general equip or provide drum plants as follows weigh cold aggregate and rap when specified continuously on an approved belt scale .
make provisions for determining the cold aggregates moisture content and correcting the wet weight mass to a dry weight mass .
provide an automatic printout and digital display of the weight mass of the dry aggregate and the asphalt binder prior to mixing and the time of discharge of the mixture .
ensure the plant produces a printout for every num tons num t of mix produced or at least two times per day once in the morning and once in the afternoon whichever is greater .
provide the engineer with this documentation daily .
to ensure the asphalt binder content in the mix provide a positive interlock between the system for weighing the aggregate and the system for delivering the binder .
provide equipment that will adjust the flow of binder as demanded by changes in the aggregates weight mass .
provide a means to dry and heat the aggregate to meet moisture and temperature requirements include a temperature recording device at the discharge chute of the dryer .
ensure the production of a uniform mixture of aggregates and asphalt binder .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num hauling equipment num performance graded asphalt binder equip tank trucks delivering pgab with a sampling valve similar to those specified in aashto t num and mounted on the trucks discharge line .
the department provides drawings of suggested mountings in the materials testing manual .
num plant mix ensure that trucks hauling plant mix have tight clean smooth metal beds .
as needed provide trucks with covers to protect the mix from the weather and maintain its temperature .
when using a material transfer device mtd num .
obtain permission from the engineer that all bridges have adequate loadcarrying capacity num .
ensure the mtd is empty when crossing bridges and num .
add hot mix directly to the mtd .
do not place material in a windrow in front of the mtd .
num plant mix pavers provide plant mix pavers that are selfpropelled have a heated vibratory screed and are capable of spreading and finishing the mix in widths applicable to the typical section and thicknesses specified .
equip the hopper with a distribution system to place the plant mix uniformly in front of the screed .
if used provide screed extensions that are heated vibratory in the same horizontal plane at the same slope as the fixed portion of the screed and equipped with fullwidth feed augers .
equip pavers to automatically control the laying of the mix to the specified transverse slope and established longitudinal grade .
provide a paver control system that is automatically actuated from an independent line and grade control reference through a system of mechanical sensors and sensordirected devices that maintain the paver screed at the proper transverse slope and height to establish the top surface of the compacted plant mix at the specified slope and grade .
the independent line and grade control reference may be either of the following num num num num .
a tightly stretched wire or string line offset paralleling true line for pavement edge or num .
a mobile reference equipped with a floating string or other device that actuates the automatic screed control in reference to the base on which it is riding .
num rollers provide selfpropelled rollers in accordance with subsection num roller and capable of reversing direction without backlash .
equip pneumatictired rollers with covers to maintain tire temperature .
equip vibratory rollers with a variable amplitude and frequency system .
do not use rollers that adversely affect the surface of the plant mix pavement .
num paving leveler provide a type a or type b leveler as follows num .
type a .
a leveler attached to and controlled by a plant mix paver .
ensure a length of at least num ft num m between castertype support wheels and a frame of sufficient strength and rigidity to prevent deflection during operation .
equip with a blade mounted semirigidly on the frame within the middle third of the longitudinal span .
remove the screed from the paver when used with the leveling frame .
mount the paver ahead of the blade .
num .
type b .
a plant mix paver with a minimum num ft num m electronic reference system or a minimum num ft num m traveling string line .
if the contract does not specify which type of leveler to use either is acceptable .
num pgab storage tanks equip pgab storage tanks with a sampling valve that is similar to those specified in aashto t num meets the requirements of the pgab supplier and is mounted on the discharge line from the tank .
the department provides drawings of suggested mountings in the materials testing manual .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num construction num general before beginning any paving operations schedule a prepaving conference with the engineer at a mutually agreeable time to discuss the materials equipment and procedures .
num weather and seasonal limitations place plant mix pavement surface courses between may num and october num .
in writing the engineer may extend paving start or finish dates .
do not place plant mix on wet surfaces when weather prevents proper handling compaction or finishing or when the base temperature surface temperature or air temperature is lower than specified in table num air temperature limitations .
table num air temperature limitations num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num laboratory and personnel requirements for quality control testing quality acceptance testing and performing mix designs use a laboratory and personnel in accordance with section num laboratory personnel and correlation .
num num compacted thickness of surface course being placed air temperature compacted thickness num in num mm num ºf num ºc num in num mm compacted thickness num in num mm num ºf num ºc compacted thickness num in num mm num ºf num ºc leveling num ºf num ºc num num num correlation correlation of laboratories field testing and mix design and personnel for aggregate tests and density tests is required in accordance with section num laboratory personnel and correlation .
num resolution of testing discrepancies resolve discrepancies involving mix designs or field tests in accordance with section num laboratory personnel and correlation .
num quality control testing num general perform quality control testing .
num performance graded asphalt binder ensure that the pgab supplier performs the quality control procedures specified in subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and provide documentation in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
if pgab is contaminated or mixed with other asphalt materials during storage test the pgab at no additional cost to the department .
select an independent thirdparty testing laboratory jointly with the engineer .
the laboratory will num .
obtain three random pgab samples from the storage container in accordance with aashto t num num .
test samples for the applicable properties in subsection num binder properties .
use averaged test results for each property and num .
provide test results to the contractor and the engineer .
num plant mix provide and maintain a quality control system .
ensure the quality of the plant mix pavement materials and constructed pavements whether produced and constructed by the contractor or procured from subcontractors or vendors .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num if during virgin aggregate production or mix production the result of a test performed in accordance with table num testing requirements falls outside the specification limits retest the material immediately .
if the result again falls outside the limits adjust production until test results show the material is within limits .
num quality acceptance testing num general the engineer is responsible for acceptance of the materials however quality acceptance testing is the responsibility of the contractor except as specified in the following subsections .
the engineer will determine when to take a sample for quality acceptance determine the sample location by random numbers and mark location for acceptance tests .
the engineer will not use samples or test results from samples taken in the engineers absence and will not accept materials represented by such samples .
obtain samples for the acceptance of materials used in the production of plant mix in accordance with subsection num point of sampling and the materials testing manual .
num performance graded asphalt binder the department is responsible for pgab quality acceptance testing .
the materials program will randomly select and test one sublot sample per lot for all applicable properties described in subsection num binder properties .
if a sample fails to meet the contract requirements it is either invalid or non specification .
num .
invalid samples are any one of the following conditions num .
mass change percentage exceeds the range from num to num when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
num .
contains any visible distillate when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
num num num num num .
no sample submitted or samples have insufficient quantity of pgab to perform required tests .
the materials program will test all other samples in the lot for validity .
num .
nonspecification samples are valid but the lowest resulting pay factor is less than num .
the materials program will test all other samples in the lot only for the properties failing specification .
when the difference between specified high and lowgrade temperatures is at least num and the sample fails to fully elongate in accordance with aashto t num the elastic recovery test equals zero .
the contractor may use at no additional cost to the department recovered pgab for the samples of record when original samples indicate removal and replacement of plant mix pavement .
select an independent thirdparty laboratory jointly with the engineer .
the laboratory will num .
obtain three to five core samples in accordance with astm d num from the appropriate portion of plant mix pavement corresponding to the original pgab sample num .
extract and recover pgab from core samples in accordance with aashto t num with the test procedure modified to use a tolueneethanol mixture as the solvent from beginning to end of the extraction .
the ethanol will consist of num percent ethyl alcohol and num percent water num .
test recovered pgab as rtfo residue for the applicable properties in subsection num binder properties without additional rtfo aging .
use averaged test results for each property and num .
provide test results to the contractor and the engineer .
results for each lot will be used to determine acceptance of that lot .
if tested samples meet contract requirements the materials program will dispose of all samples including referee samples .
if not the materials program will keep referee samples for a maximum of num months from issue date of the test results .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num in case of a discrepancy the referee samples will be available if requested within the time frame specified above for testing by an independent laboratory .
the department will consider thirdparty testing if the contractor provides certified test data from the supplier that differs statistically from department test results .
for this purpose statistically different results are those greater than the difference between the specification value and the value in the row for pay factor num in table num pgab pay factors .
if thirdparty testing is justified select the laboratory jointly with the engineer the department will only consider results for the property in question and will consider as binding only those results that differ statistically from its ownin which case it will use the thirdparty results to recalculate the pay factor in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
if the recalculation produces an increase in the pay factor the department will pay for the testing otherwise the contractor will pay for the testing .
num plant mix the contractor is responsible for quality acceptance testing as required by table num testing requirements and table num inplace density test requirements for the level of control specified .
before using contractor test results for quality acceptance the department will perform procedures for correlation as described in section num laboratories personnel and correlation .
perform quality acceptance testing using the following procedure num .
aggregate gradation .
collect two samples .
test one sample for quality acceptance and the engineer may test the other sample for verification .
num .
inplace density .
collect two cores at each location designated by the engineer .
test one sample for quality acceptance and the engineer may test the other sample for verification .
num .
mix volumetrics .
testing for mix volumetrics may be completed offsite at an aashtoaccredited laboratory using the department procedure for reheated samples in accordance with the materials testing manual .
if a mobile field lab is used ensure that it is properly equipped to perform the required testing .
when using a laboratory other than the original mix design laboratory ensure the availability of records documenting the calibration of equipment in accordance num num with the aashto accreditation program and yearly correlation with an aashtoaccredited laboratory prior to testing .
ensure that technicians performing the testing adhere to department procedures and include the following tests and parameters num .
extracted gradation num .
extracted asphalt binder content num .
voidless unit weight num .
percent vma and num .
percent air voids .
use extracted gradation and extracted asphalt binder content for quality control purposes .
report results including evaluation comments and recommendations to the engineer and the wydot materials program no later than two calendar days after sampling .
num .
moisture content of plant mix and virgin aggregatehydrated lime .
the engineer does not need samples for verification .
num lot sizes the department will define lots as follows num .
pgab .
generally one lot is num ton num t and a sublot is num ton num t. for quantities with numerical values not evenly divisible by num the lot sizes may vary from num ton to num ton num t to num t with the number of sublots adjusted accordingly .
num .
plant mix .
aggregate gradation inplace density and asphalt binder content will be accepted based on a quality analysis for individual lots of material .
each property will be analyzed independently .
num .
virgin aggregate gradation .
the quantity of produced plant mix generally represented by five tests with a tonnage as shown for the specified level of control from table num testing num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num requirements .
a sublot is the quantity represented by one test .
tonnage controls lot size and a lot may span several days of production because exact tonnage may vary due to production suspension construction schedules or other acceptable reasons .
when necessary due to changes in production quantities changes in jmf or production suspension lots consisting from three to seven samples may be used .
include partial lots with less than three samples with the previous lot for analysis .
include the material for the test strip as required by subsection num test strip in the first lot .
include material placed for approaches in the lot unless it has a different gradation than the mainline material .
num .
inplace density .
the quantity of produced plant mix represented by seven tests with a tonnage as shown for the specified level of control from table num inplace density test requirements .
although the quantity of material represented may be changed if necessary because of changes in production changes in the jmf or production suspension always represent a lot with seven samples .
tonnage controls lot size and a lot may span several days of production .
for the purposes of acceptance and determination of a pay factor the test strip is a lot .
num .
virgin asphalt binder content .
a lot is a days production of plant mix .
include material placed for approaches unless its asphalt binder content or grade differs from the mainline material .
do not include material for the test strip .
num sampling the engineer will direct sampling as follows num .
pgab .
obtain random pgab samples from the line between the storage tank and the mixer as directed .
before taking samples draw and discard at least num gal num l of pgab from the sampling valve .
the department defines a sample as two numquart num l containers representing num ton num t or one sublot of pgab incorporated into the plant mix .
only sample pgab incorporated into the plant num mix including plant mix supplied by commercial plants sample randomly and in accordance with aashto t num .
the engineer will keep all samples for a lot until receipt of the last sample and will then submit them together to the materials program .
from each sample the materials program will keep one container as a referee sample .
do not take samples for projects of less than num ton num t. num .
plant mix .
obtain a split sample for the engineers use in verifying plant mix specified as levels of control num or num and inplace density i at the same time when sampling for acceptance .
num .
virgin aggregate gradation .
collect one sample to represent each sublot .
the engineer will determine timing of the sample procurement at random .
collect samples from the belt or conveyor in accordance with the materials testing manual .
if using a mechanical sampler correlate with belt samples in accordance with the materials testing manual procedure .
num .
inplace density .
perform core sampling and testing in accordance with the applicable procedures in the materials testing manual .
the engineer will mark the sample location for the quality acceptance and verification cores with a num in num in num mm num mm square painted at least num in num mm from the pavement or ribbon edge .
obtain the samples from within the painted square .
num .
virgin asphalt binder content .
if required in accordance with table num testing requirements determine the volume of asphalt binder remaining in the storage tank at the end of the day in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer will convert to weight mass using methods from the materials testing manual .
num mix volumetrics .
the engineer will determine the location for random sampling .
samples may be obtained from the paver auger the windrow or the paver hopper .
collect three samples of plant produced material from each location .
test one and give two to the engineer .
the engineer may test one for verification and will keep the other as a referee sample .
after the first four sample locations collect two or three samples thereafter as required by num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements the engineer .
test one for quality acceptance the engineer may test one for verification and if requested retain the third sample as a referee sample .
num verification the engineer or an aashtoaccredited laboratory contracted by the department will perform the verification testing using different personnel from those performing the quality control and quality acceptance testing .
if specified supply one field laboratory in accordance with subsection num field laboratory for use by department personnel in verification testing .
keep this laboratory independent of the laboratory used for quality control and quality acceptance testing do not share equipment .
the engineer will verify testing procedures by testing one sample randomly from the sublot samples obtained to represent each acceptance lot .
the differences between the contractors quality acceptance test result and the engineers corresponding verification test result will be evaluated in accordance with the values in the materials testing manual and applied as follows num .
equal to or less than the allowable difference the contractors test results will be used for quality acceptance or num .
exceeds the allowable difference the engineer will test the remaining verification samples from the lot .
once the tests have been completed the results will be evaluated using the statistical evaluation procedures for the correlation of testers to decide if both groups represent the sample population .
if the contractors and engineers results represent the same sample population the contractors test results will be used for quality acceptance .
if the contractors and the engineers results do not represent the same sample population the engineers verification test results will be used for acceptance for the lot and a new correlation will be performed on the next lot .
the contractors test results will not be used for quality acceptance until the correlation is completed and is acceptable .
num num num num num independent assurance the engineers office will make independent assurance tests results available .
num .
aggregate gradation inplace density and asphalt binder content .
the materials program will conduct an independent assurance program in accordance with the current wydot independent assurance manual .
differences between quality acceptance verification and independent assurance tests will be evaluated and findings of bias will be investigated immediately .
num .
mix volumetrics .
the department may perform mix volumetrics testing if so it will use the same methods specified in subsection num quality acceptance testing and if required subsection num corrective action plan .
respond to the results as specified in these two subsections .
num documentation and reporting submit all quality control and quality acceptance test results to the engineer .
use department forms in accordance with the materials testing manual .
num quality control charts provide quality control charts that include the control limits each individual quality control test result and the moving average of the last four tests in the control charts .
num .
testing requirementsall levels of control .
make control charts accessible to the engineer at the field lab if available otherwise at a mutually agreeable location .
record quality control test results on the control chart immediately after completing the test .
density results may be recorded at the end of the day .
record the following parameters on the control chart num .
gradation of the control sieves in the jmf num .
virgin asphalt binder content num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num .
total asphalt binder content and num .
inplace density .
num .
testing requirementslevel of control num and num only .
in addition to the above parameters record the following on the control chart num .
percent voids in the mineral aggregate and num .
percent air voids .
num quality acceptance submit results of quality acceptance tests to the engineer the day after sampling .
prepare a weekly summary depicting results of all tests performed during the week and give it to the engineer the following monday or tuesday if monday is a holiday .
num corrective action plan take immediate corrective action when the production of material falls outside of specification parameters .
do not continue producing material that does not meet specifications .
num .
aggregate gradation density and asphalt binder content .
if two consecutive lots have a pay factor less than num in accordance with subsection num determination of pay factors make changes and adjustments to produce the specified material .
for the following properties take the indicated actions if a single quality acceptance test in accordance with subsection num quality acceptance testing exceeds specification limits num .
mix volumetrics .
immediately resample and retest .
if the resample exceeds specification limits begin valid corrective actions immediately .
after corrective action immediately resample and retest .
suspend production if two corrective actions fail to result in the production of specification material .
obtain the engineers approval of further proposed actions before resuming production num num num the department considers the following as valid corrective actions num .
a change in the percentage of aggregate addition from any one storage bin by at least num percent num .
a change in the target asphalt binder content by at least num percent num .
a change in the minus no .
num num µm material in the mix by at least num percent or num .
other actions approved by the engineer .
notify the engineer immediately when test results are outside mix design limits for percent air voids dusteffective asphalt binder film thickness in accordance with table num marshall and superpave plant mix properties vma in accordance with table num percent voids in mineral aggregate or the gradation is outside of the narrow bands established by the jmf .
corrective action may require a new mix design in accordance with subsection num mix design a new jmf in accordance with subsection num job mix formula or both .
request that the engineer evaluate the mix verification voidless unit weight tests for density control in accordance with the materials testing manual when there are at least four test results available and the current voidless unit weight is in question .
if approved by the engineer the department will adjust the voidless unit weight using all available test results .
for increases adjustments will become effective for material produced subsequent to the receipt of the results .
for decreases the adjustment will be applied retroactively back to the beginning of production of that paving mixture .
num .
liquid limit and plastic index .
reprocess until the material is within limits .
num .
moisture content of virgin aggregatehydrated lime .
adjust moisture immediately .
num .
moisture content of plant mix .
adjust mix production immediately .
num .
coarse and fine aggregate angularity .
adjust mix production immediately .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num testing requirements num performance graded asphalt binder subsection num testing applies to the supplier of the pgab .
num plant mix table num testing requirements and table num inplace density test requirements show the departments testing requirements for quality control quality acceptance verification and density .
for plant mix placed as temporary surfacing in accordance with subsection num temporary surfacing use the tables requirements for levelofcontrol num and inplace density ii .
quality control quality acceptance and verification tests may be performed by a qualified technician but a certified technician is required to review and sign all test results .
num num num num table num testing requirements num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements test procedure level of control num num num num quality controlvirgin aggregate production gradation liquid limit ll plasticity index pi coarse aggregate angularity fractured faces fine aggregate angularity flat elongated num num ton num t min .
num ton num t min .
num ton num t min .
num test min .
num ton num t min .
num test min .
if using existing stockpiles numstockpile la abrasion contractor furnished sources only num num ton num num t min .
num ton num num t min .
once each construction season once each construction season soundness mgsonum contractor furnished sources only num num num ton num num t min .
num ton num num t min .
once each construction season no tests required sand equivalent contractor furnished source only num num ton num t min .
num ton num t min .
once each construction season no tests required num table num testing requirements continued num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements test procedure level of control num num num num quality acceptancemix productionnum mix volumetrics num locations on first day num location each num ton num t thereafter num locations on first day num location each day thereafter until no further corrective actions are required no tests required no tests required virgin aggregate gradation num lotnum ton num lotnum t num lotnum ton num lotnum t num lotnum ton num lotnum t num no tests required asphalt binder content numday numday numday no tests required virgin aggregatell pi coarse aggregate angularity fractured faces fine aggregate angularity flat elongated num num ton num t min .
num ton num t min .
no tests required no tests required moisture content of virgin aggregate hydrated lime moisture content of mix numday min .
numday min .
no tests required no tests required verificationmix production mix volumetrics split sample required but no test frequency specifically required split sample required but no test frequency specifically required no tests required no tests required virgin aggregate gradation numlot numlot no tests required no tests required asphalt binder content no tests required no tests required no tests required no tests required virgin aggregatell pi coarse and fine aggregate angularity moisture content of virgin aggregate hydrated lime moisture content of mix flat and elongated nummix design num nummix design num no tests required no tests required num num testing frequencies shown are minimum quantities .
example num minnum ton num minnum t num if the first three tests for coarse aggregate angularity fine aggregate angularity and flat and elongated are within specification and there are no changes in the crushing process test at a frequency of num ton num num t. num test frequency refers to the total combined aggregate weight produced .
the total combined aggregate weight includes the total weight of coarse aggregate fine aggregate and filler if applicable combined at the anticipated rates .
testing that applies only to material passing the no .
num num mm sieve sand equivalent will be performed on the combination of fines and filler combined at the anticipated rates and tested at the frequency determined by the total combined aggregate weight .
num soundness mgsnum will be tested on the coarse and fine aggregate separately .
the specification for soundness applies to the coarse aggregate only .
num quality acceptance tests may be used for quality control purposes .
num the department will perform acceptance testing .
num if during aggregate production the test results for ll pi coarse aggregate angularity fine aggregate angularity and flat and elongated were within specification the department will not require retesting .
num ll pi and coarse and fine aggregate angularity only .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num table num inplace density test requirements num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num requirement inplace density designation i ii iii iv v inplace density num num lotnum ton num lot num t of produced material .
all in place mix compacted to num of voidless unit weight .
num passes num of a pneumatic tire and num passes num of a steel wheel roller in accordance with subsection num roller and until a nuclear density gauge indicates the mix no longer increases in compaction .
num passes num of a pneumatic tire and num passes num of a steel wheel roller in accordance with subsection num roller .
num passes num of a steel wheel roller in vibratory mode in accordance with subsection num roller .
test strip required not required not required not required not required quality acceptance testing num lotnum ton num lotnumt num testnum ton num testnum t no tests required no tests required no test required verification testing numlot no tests required no tests required no tests required no test required num compact temporary surfaces in accordance with inplace density designation ii unless otherwise noted in the contract .
num the department defines one pass with a roller as a forward or backward movement over the full length of the area to be compacted .
num composition of plant mix num general develop the construction mix design .
obtain the design from a qualified laboratory in accordance with section num laboratory personnel and correlation .
contact the materials program if questions on procedures or specifications occur during the mix design process .
num the department will provide available information on material properties for specified departmentfurnished sources .
the provision of such information does not imply that contractorproduced material will meet design criteria .
when such information is not available evaluate the materials and mix design properties .
at least num calendar days before the start of paving give the engineer a job mix formula mix design and documentation of aashto accreditation for required testing procedures .
for each aggregate fraction and rap when specified submit samples of the produced material collected at the same time as those collected when sampling for the mix design .
when rap is specified submit samples collected by a production milling machine .
include in the submitted data for the mix design the mixture properties specified in subsection num mix design .
do not start paving until the engineer approves the mix design .
num job mix formula supply the jmf and have it approved by the engineer .
for each plant mix type establish in the jmf a single value for num .
percentage of virgin aggregate passing each required sieve size num .
target rap percentage when used num .
target asphalt binder content num .
percentage of asphalt binder added num .
lab mix and lab compaction temperature and num .
field mixing temperature .
ensure that the jmf and allowable tolerances are within the broad band specified .
for level of control num and num mixes do not reintroduce a greater percentage of baghouse fines than the difference between the wide band upper limit percent on the no .
num num µm sieve and the total percent passing the no .
num num µm sieve defined as the sum of the jmfs no .
num num µm percent value and the percent lime .
if reintroducing baghouse fines for a level of control num and num mixes perform mix volumetric testing in accordance with subsection num quality acceptance testing for level of control num .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num when a recycled plant mix is specified use rap for at least num percent of the total aggregate .
the amount of rap may be increased or decreased up to num percent by weight mass of total aggregate from the amount specified .
adjustment of the percent of rap may result in an adjustment of the virgin aggregate gradation .
do not furnish mix with virgin aggregate fractions that exceed the wide band limits or the tolerance ranges from the target jmf in accordance with table num virgin aggregate tolerance .
table num virgin aggregate tolerance num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements for recycled mixes ensure that combined rap and virgin aggregate gradations are within the specified wide band .
do not change the jmf without the engineers written approval .
the engineer will approve a change of the jmf gradation limits without requiring a new mix design if the gradation on each control sieve of the original design remains within the new limits .
the new limits become effective at the time of approval and are not retroactive except if the jmf is adjusted during the second lot the adjustment will apply to the first lot .
issue a new jmf when changing the asphalt binder content when performing a new mix design or when significantly changing the mineral aggregate split to maintain proper air voids vma or both .
virgin aggregate fractions sieve size range passing no .
num num mm and larger num to num passing no .
num num mm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num num num num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num mix design num general design superpave and marshall mixes in accordance with the materials testing manual .
test to determine each of the properties specified in table num marshall and superpave plant mix properties and table num percent voids in mineral aggregate .
for the specified class of pavement compose the plant mix of virgin aggregate rap when specified asphalt binder and hydrated lime and meet the requirements of the tables for the class of pavement specified .
num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements table num marshall and superpave plant mix propertiesnum property class im iim iiim is iis iiis number of marshall blows num num num marshall stability lbs n minimum num num num num num num num num marshall flow num in num mm num num num num num num number of superpave gyrations num num num voids in laboratory mix voids in production mix num num num num num num num num num num num num dusteffective asphalt binder num num num num num num minimum asphalt binder num num num num num num minimum tensile strength retained num num num num num num film thickness µmnum num num num num num num voids filled with asphalt binder vfa num num num aggregatelime moisture content minimum num num num num num num mixture moisture content maximum num num num num num num num the requirements are for properties obtained from laboratorybatched and mixed samples of the plant mix except for air voids and vma which are for laboratory batched and production mix requirements .
num this test is not required when the plant mix contains rap .
num table num percent voids in mineral aggregate num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num class voids in mineral aggregate maximum nominal size num in num mm in num mm num in num mm d in num mm laboratory mix im iim is iis num num num num iiim iiis num num num num production mix im iim is iis num num num num iiim iiis num num num num if submitting a request to reference a mix design in accordance with subsection num mix design referencing criteria give supporting test data to and obtain approval from the engineer before use .
the engineer will evaluate the need for and may require a new mix design if relative to the approved mix design there are changes in the grade of asphalt binder or changes in aggregate splits the jmf or material sources .
num mix design referencing criteria num .
level of control num .
the department requires a full mix design do not reference .
num .
level of control num and num .
the mix design may be referenced if num .
using the same virgin aggregate source as the reference mix design and the jmf is within num percent for no .
num num mm and larger sieves and num percent for sieves smaller than the no .
num num mm of the reference design num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num .
the percentage and source of rap is the same as the reference design and the engineer receives data on extraction and gradation properties for at least two samples that are representative of the source or stockpile num .
using departmental procedures a voidless unit weight is determined and it is within num lbft³ num kgm³ of the reference design use the reference design voidless unit weight for density control num .
the reference mix design was completed during the same construction season and num .
placing less than num ton num t of plant mix .
num .
level of control num .
the mix design may be referenced if num .
using for sieves smaller than the no .
num num mm num .
the percentage and source of rap is the same as the reference design and the engineer receives data on extraction and gradation properties for at least two samples that are representative of the source or stockpile num .
the reference design was completed within the past two years num .
along with the reference request the engineer receives two gradation analyses per stockpile of coarse and fine aggregate material and their specific gravities and absorptions and num .
placing less than num ton num t of plant mix .
num adjustment of baghouse fines if the amount of baghouse fines being reintroduced changes by more than num percent during production of level of control num and num mixes verify that the plant mix meets the mix design volumetric control limits .
with the engineer choose at least two randomly selected sampling locations and perform testing in accordance with subsection num quality acceptance testing for mix volumetrics properties .
if the samples with baghouse fines meet the mix design control limits fines may be reintroduced .
num num cold milling plant mix pavement remove the existing pavement specified as the source of the rap in accordance with subsection num milling plant mix and profile milling plant mix .
weigh and stockpile the removed material in the designated plant site area .
num leveling of existing surface if specified use a leveler in accordance with subsection num paving leveler to level pavement before placing the first layer of plant mix .
spot fill depressions and swales separately to meet the profile gradeline .
when specified seal longitudinal and transverse joints and random cracks and remove excess sealant before placing the leveling course .
clean the surface of vegetation loose materials dirt mud and other extraneous material before placing the leveling course .
place layers of a compacted thickness no greater than num in num mm compact the plant mix using rollers as specified in subsection num rollers operated at num mph num kmh .
meet the require ments for inplace density iv in accordance with table num inplace density test requirements .
operate the steel wheel roller in vibratory mode unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num mixing num general at least one week before delivery of binder give the engineer the recommended mixing and compaction temperatures .
if the correlation testing for aggregate gradation has not been completed test a split aggregate sample in accordance with subsection num aggregate gradation prior to beginning production .
dry the aggregate lime mixture and heat to the required temperature .
mix the materials until the aggregate is completely and uniformly coated and the asphalt binder is uniformly distributed throughout the aggregate .
produce the plant mix within the temperatures specified in subsection num asphalt binder .
when using the batch plant process introduce the asphalt binder and aggregate into the mixer within the specified temperature range and within num ºf num ºc of each other .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num set time intervals for batch plants in the presence of the engineer .
keep the case covering the timing device locked until changing the timing periods .
determine the mixing temperature at the point of discharge from the mixer and give the engineer a continuous record of the temperatures each day .
num asphalt binder num general heat the asphalt binder to the specified temperature without local overheating and provide a continuous supply to the mixer at a uniform temperature .
store and handle all pgab to prevent contamination or mixing with other asphalt materials of different grades types or sources .
if pgab is contaminated or mixed with other asphalt materials during storage num .
stop using pgab from the storage tank num .
notify engineer and num .
test the pgab in accordance with subsection num quality control testing .
num modified asphalt binders for modified binders obtain from the supplier recommended mixing and compaction temperatures for its use .
num unmodified asphalt binders for unmodified binders base the mixing and compaction temperature ranges for the plant mix on the viscositytemperature curve provided by the supplier .
use temperature ranges for mixing and compaction that correspond to those required to produce binder rotational viscosities of num num pas and num num pas respectively .
num hauling provide weigh tickets in accordance with subsection num documentation .
num num num if using a truck bed release agent ensure that it does not adversely affect the plant mix .
the engineer may reject plant mix hauled in truck beds that have been sprayed with a solvent or petroleum based release agent .
do not dump material on the ground and reload into trucks or directly into the paver .
num test strip num general if required by table num inplace density test requirements construct a test strip to evaluate the mix design and rollers and to determine the rolling pattern .
construct the strip as follows num .
the first num ton num t of plant mix pavement placed at the specified depth constitute the test strip .
produce the material at the normal plant rate .
do not place additional pavement of the type in the test strip until the engineer accepts the strip as necessary construct additional test strips for no additional pay for the item test strip until specifications are met .
upon acceptance the test strip will remain in place and become part of the pavement .
num .
determine the type and number of rollers needed to provide enough compaction to obtain the specified density .
begin compaction immediately after placing the plant mix compact continuously and uniformly over the entire test strip .
num .
from the last num ton num t of placed and compacted plant mix the engineer will randomly select sample locations for density tests and will apply test procedures and statistical evaluation in accordance with subsection num .
correlation .
num .
in accordance with subsection num virgin aggregate gradation the engineer will include the test strip in the first lot .
in accordance with subsection num inplace density the test strip is one lot .
num .
if significant changes occur in the mix the jmf or placing operations construct a new test strip for no additional pay for the item test strip .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num .
the engineer will determine acceptability of the test strip within num hours of an acceptable correlation in accordance with subsection num acceptance of test strip materials .
num .
after the engineer has accepted the test strip place and compact the remaining plant mix using the methods and procedures established from the test strip .
num acceptance of test strip materials the engineer will use the contractors quality acceptance tests for acceptance of the test strip if the engineers and contractors tests correlate .
the engineer will determine the pay factor for the seven density samples from the test strip in accordance with subsection num num inplace density .
the engineer will accept the test strip if the pay factor is num or greater .
for pay factors less than num and greater than or equal to num the pavement may be left in place as approved by the engineer at the reduced price determined by the pay factor and construct a new test strip for no additional pay for the item test strip .
for pay factors less than num remove the test strip from the roadway and dispose of it at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will analyze aggregate gradation to determine a pay factor in accordance with subsection num virgin aggregate gradation .
the engineer may reject the test strip if the asphalt binder content varies more than num percent from the target established in the jmf .
num spreading and finishing clean the surface of vegetation loose materials dirt mud and other extraneous material before placing plant mix .
for any one lift do not exceed a compacted thickness of num in num mm or twice the maximum aggregate size whichever is greater .
handle and place the plant mix to minimize segregation .
produce finished pavement with a uniform and dense appearance .
remove and replace segregated areas at no additional cost to the department .
when pavement is placed adjacent to curb and gutter construct the top of the final lift of surfacing flush with the top of the front edge of the gutter or as num num num num directed by the engineer .
if paving over a slotted drain cover the openings to prevent foreign material from entering the slot and ensure the slot does not extend above the paving .
use plant mix pavers to distribute the plant mix to the established grade and transverse slope over the entire width or a partial width .
use a screed to produce the specified finished surface without tearing shoving segregating or gouging the plant mix .
except on tapers narrow median areas shoulders and similar areas of irregular shape limited length or restrictive width control the paver screed by the automatic screed control .
the engineer will set references for line and grade control if required at reasonable intervals .
provide place and maintain materials devices and equipment required to provide specified independent line grade control references and other controls needed for proper execution of the work .
control the placement of the first layer of pavement material by the independent control reference .
subsequent layers may be controlled by the mobile reference or a joint shoe if satisfactory results are obtained .
position the longitudinal construction joint in the top lift of plant mix pavement on the lane lines unless a plant mix wearing course is specified in which case offset the joint num in num mm from the lane lines .
offset the longitudinal construction joint in subsequent layers of plant mix num in num mm and stagger so that no two coincide .
place longitudinal construction joints within num in num mm of the specified lane lines .
form transverse joints by cutting back on the previous run of plant mix to expose the full depth of the course .
before placing additional plant mix apply tack coat material in accordance with section num tack coat to join contact surfaces .
in areas where irregularities or obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impractical place the material to produce a uniform surface finish and the required compacted thickness without tearing shoving gouging or segregating .
when constructing pavements thicker than num in num mm under traffic do not leave a longitudinal exposed vertical dropoff between adjacent travel lanes at days end .
a continuous integral taper with a slope no greater than numvnumh may be constructed the entire length of the face of the exposed longitudinal joint between adjacent travel lanes .
do not construct more than one days paving run num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num num num with a taper before completing the plant mix pavement course on the adjacent travel lane .
taper transverse joint dropoffs with a slope of at least numvnumh .
in case of failure of the control system operate the paver by mechanical control only until the material produced prior to the failure is placed .
if paving is suspended because of bad weather equipment breakdown or other reason and a longitudinal vertical dropoff greater than num in num mm exists between adjacent travel lanes place temporary traffic controls in accordance with section num temporary traffic control .
if the suspension is expected to last longer than num hours construct a temporary taper with stable material and a slope of numvnumh along the dropoff .
at no additional cost to the department remove the taper before placing plant mix pavement on the adjacent travel lane .
provide and maintain temporary traffic control required because of negligence breakdown of equipment or convenience at no additional cost to the department .
do not open the new pavement to traffic before the plant mix has cooled to num ºf num ºc or less .
num compaction num general roll plant mix immediately after placement and until thoroughly and uniformly compacted .
continue rolling until density is reached and while the mix is workable .
ensure that compactive effort does not result in distress to the pavement .
provide rollers of sufficient number weight and types to obtain the required compaction without displacement cracking or shoving operate with the drive wheels or drums nearest the paver .
do not use equipment that results in excessive crushing of the aggregate and do not operate or park rollers in a manner that adversely affects the surface of the pavement .
when placing plant mix against previously placed material begin rolling at the joint then follow the pattern established from the test strip .
on superelevated curves begin rolling at the low side and progress to the high side using overlapping longitudinal passes parallel to the centerline .
along forms curbs headers walls and other areas not accessible to the rollers compact plant mix with hot hand or mechanical tampers .
in depressed areas a trench roller or cleated compression strips may be used under the roller to transmit compression .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num num num approaches compact approaches in accordance with the requirements of table num inplace density testing requirements for inplace density v. use inplace density ii requirements for approaches specified as major .
num temporary surfacing if placement of plant mix pavement has not been finished by october num or work on the project is suspended for any reason provide and place temporary plant mix pavement on uncompleted portions and designated approaches before suspending work .
use temporary material with a mix design equivalent to the mainline paving mix or from a commercial source if approved by the engineer .
place material at least num in num mm thick or the design thickness whichever is less and at the specified width .
compact temporary surfaces in accordance with the requirements of table num inplace density testing requirements for inplace density ii .
the department will assess liquidated damages in accordance with table num schedule of liquidated damages for each working day after it has been determined that the project will be suspended until the roadway is open to unrestricted traffic .
maintain the temporary surfacing except for snow removal until the engineer allows removal .
provide place maintain remove and dispose of temporary surfacing at no additional cost to the department including associated traffic control costs .
num surface tolerances the engineer will test the final surface using a numfoot num m straightedge at selected locations .
do not allow variation of the surface from the straightedge between any two contacts with the surface greater than num in num mm in both transverse and longitudinal directions .
repair defective work before placing chip seal or plant mix wearing course by milling diamond grinding or fulldepth removal and replacement of the plant mix pavement .
core areas that require corrective action before repairing the surface deviation .
if the newly placed pavement thickness is inadequate to allow grinding and maintain the design thickness within num in num mm of the thickness designated in the contract or if the surface deviation is a dip remove the defective area of pavement and replace it .
to repair dips after removal of the appropriate depth of surfacing place a tack coat and at least num in num mm of hot plant mix .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num num num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num provide poweroperated milling equipment with a numfoot num m mobile reference ski .
ensure the milling machine has a drum with a triplescroll micromill pattern and is operated at a slow forward speed to ensure the scroll pattern is not overrun .
ensure milling and grinding equipment have a positive means of controlling cross slope elevations .
run the milling or grinding as a continuous operation to produce the best overall pattern .
ensure grinding equipment is capable of establishing a profile grade by referencing from either the existing pavement or from the independent grade control .
ensure the vertical difference between adjacent peaks and valleys of the milled or ground surface does not exceed c in num mm .
conduct milling and diamond grinding parallel to the travel lanes .
do not mill or grind where it will adversely affect roadway drainage .
continue the repair areas through the shoulders with the same method as the adjacent travel lane repair .
do not leave ridges .
feather grind edges if required .
complete corrective work before placing the fog seal chip seal or plant mix wearing course and before suspension of work for winter shutdown .
corrective action on defects that develop during the winter will not be required .
if corrective work is not completed before winter shutdown correct all defects when work resumes .
apply a fog seal and a blotter to surfaces that have been milled or ground with the exception of surfaces that will receive a fog seal chip seal or plant mix wearing course before winter shutdown .
place the fog seal and blotter in accordance with section num chip and fog seals .
perform the corrective work on travel lanes and adjacent shoulders and provide the necessary traffic control at no additional cost to the department .
num disposal of baghouse fines dispose of baghouse fines properly .
if using the plant site for disposal scarify the soil to a depth of num in num mm .
spread the fines thinly over the area and disc thoroughly into the soil .
water may be added to reduce dust .
when reclaiming the site place topsoil or overburden over the disposal area .
ensure that the size of the area within the plant site used for disposal is in accordance with table num baghouse fines disposal area .
num num num num num num num table num baghouse fines disposal area num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num fines produced ton t disposal area acre hectare num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num num num num reclaiming scrubber ponds before placing topsoil and using the methods described in subsection num disposal of baghouse fines spread residue from the pond over the plant site area in layers from num in to num in num mm to num mm deep scarify and disc immediately .
a dewatering pad may be constructed by extending the pond liner so that soils can be placed next to the pond to allow water to drain back into the pond .
after mixing residue with subsoil spray scrubber pond water finely over the reclaimed site .
then till the site to mix subsoil and water .
spread topsoil or overburden over the area where scrubber pond residue and water have been disposed .
dispose of scrubber pond liners in an approved landfill .
num acceptance the engineer may isolate and reject obviously defective material without regard to testing procedures .
otherwise the engineer will accept or reject materials as follows num .
pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials and subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
if contaminated or mixed pgab in a storage tank fails specification as described in subsection num performance graded asphalt binder the engineer will reject all pgab from the storage tank .
num num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num the engineer will reject lots represented by invalid samples in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
num .
plant mix num .
aggregate gradation .
levels of control num num and num mixes in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and level of control num mixes based on the tests taken during production .
num .
inplace density i .
in accordance with subsection num num inplace density and inplace density ii iii iv and v in accordance with table num inplace density test requirements .
num .
asphalt binder content .
for levels of control num num and num mixes in accordance with subsection num num asphalt binder content .
num .
moisture content of virgin aggregatehydrated lime .
based on each individual test and the quantity of water added .
num .
based on each individual test for num .
liquid limit and plastic index num .
moisture content of plant mix num .
coarse and fine aggregate angularity and num .
mix volumetrics .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
asphalt binder pg __ __ by the short ton metric ton in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
asphalt binder incorporated in level of control num mix will not be measured directly for payment .
no payment will be made for the asphalt binder in excess of the approved contractor mix design value plus num percent .
when num the department allows a change from an available material source in accordance with subsection num available material sources no payment will be made for the asphalt binder in excess of the mix design shown in the contract plus num percent or the approved contractor mix design plus num percent whichever is less .
num .
hot plant mix hot plant mix approaches hot plant mix leveling hot plant mix superpave hot plant mix approaches superpave hot plant mix leveling superpave hot plant mix recycle and hot plant mix leveling recycle by the short ton metric ton .
the cumulative weight mass of all batches of plant mix incorporated will be used for payment .
the use of batch scales will be allowed .
num .
test strip by the each .
the department will pay as follows num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest asphalt binder pg ___ ___ ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix approaches ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix approaches superpave ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix leveling ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix leveling superpave ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix recycle ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix leveling recycle ton t num ton num t num ton num t hot plant mix superpave ton t num ton num t num ton num t test strip ea ea ea ea ea ea num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
milling plant mix in accordance with section num removal .
num .
hydrated lime in accordance with section num hydrated lime .
num .
contractor testing to perform the sampling quality control and quality acceptance testing and mix design requirements in accordance with subsection num contractor testing .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num determination of pay factors num general if warranted a bonus will be paid when the engineers verification test results are used for acceptance for the first lot that the results of the contractors quality acceptance tests and the engineers verification tests differ .
a bonus will not be paid on subsequent lots when verification tests differ from the contractors quality acceptance tests if correlation has not been completed and accepted .
num performance graded asphalt binder pgab placed on the project which does not meet the contract requirements for the designated grade may be accepted and the price adjusted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
for each lot the engineer will compute a pay factor for each applicable property and will use the lowest resulting pay factor for the entire lot .
the applicable properties and corresponding pay factors in accordance with table num pgab pay factors form the basis for acceptance .
num num num num num table num pgab pay factors num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements dynamic shear gsinδ original pgab high grade temp .
kpa dynamic shear gsinδ rtfo residue high grade temp .
kpa creep stiffness s pav residue low grade temp .
num c mpa creep slope mvalue pav residue low grade low grade temp .
num c unitless elastic recovery rtfo residue num f pay factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject if elastic recovery is applicable and test result equals zero pay factor for elastic recovery equals num .
for nonspecification pgab with pay factor less than num the engineer will split the original lot into separate lots each sample representing a single lot .
num num num num plant mix the engineer will determine a pay factor for aggregate gradation and asphalt binder content for level of control num num and num mixes and a pay factor for inplace density for inplace density i pavements as follows num .
virgin aggregate gradation .
the engineer will compute the quality level analysis in accordance with procedures in subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
a pay factor will be calculated for each lot .
num .
inplace density .
for each core density determined by the contractors quality acceptance tests in accordance with subsection num quality acceptance testing the engineer will determine the percentage density in accordance with the materials testing manual and round to the nearest num percent .
determine the average and sample standard deviation of the lot or test strip using the following formulas average density s where xi the percentage density of individual cores n the number of core densities the average percentage density s the sample standard deviation of the percentage density summation n i num xi n num n num n i num xi num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num calculate the quality index as follows qi where qi the quality index rounded to the nearest num if the average density exceeds num percent the pay factor will be the lesser of num and the pay factor determined from table num inplace density pay factors .
if the quality index equals or exceeds num and the percent density is less than or equal to num percent determine the pay factor from table num inplace density pay factors .
num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num s num num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements table num inplace density pay factors quality index pay factor quality index pay factor quality index pay factor from to from to from to num reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
asphalt binder content will be determined by the engineer for each lot and by determining asphalt binder used as a percentage of plant mix produced .
the binders weight mass will be determined from delivery invoices and the quantity of material remaining in the storage num tank at the end of a days production .
the calculation to determine content will include all material used during the days production of plant mix including asphalt binder and plant mix not incorporated into the project .
a pay factor will be determined in accordance with table num asphalt binder content pay factors .
table num asphalt binder content pay factors num num variance of asphalt binder content from design content pay factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject the engineer will use a pay factor of num for lots of less than num short tons metric tons .
the pay factor for an accepted test strip will be num .
num pay adjustments the engineer will calculate pay adjustments for aggregate gradation inplace density and asphalt binder content as follows aggregate gradation paa num pmp pfa num lsa apq paa num pmpap pfa num lsa mlq num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num num num aggregate gradation paa num rpmp rpf num lsa apq for recycle paa num pmpap rpf num lsa mlq inplace density pad num pmp pfdnum lsd asphalt binder paac num pmp pfac num lsac apq content paac num pmpap pfac num lsac mlq where paa pay adjustment for aggregate gradation dollars pad pay adjustment for inplace density paac pay adjustment for asphalt binder content pmp unit contract price for the respective plant mix pavement pay item pmpap unit contract price for the respective plant mix pavement approaches pay item rpmp recycled hot plant mix pavement unit contract price pfa aggregate gradation pay factor for evaluated lot rpf virgin aggregate gradation pay factor for evaluated lot pfd inplace density pay factor for evaluated lot pfac asphalt binder content pay factor for evaluated lot lsa lot size for aggregate gradation evaluated lot short ton metric ton lsd lot size for inplace density evaluated lot short ton metric ton lsac lot size for asphalt binder content evaluated lot short ton metric ton apq quantity of plant mix pavement from the lot placed as approach pavement short ton metric ton mlq quantity of plant mix pavement from the lot placed as mainline pavement short ton metric ton for the hot plant mix leveling hot plant mix leveling superpave and hot plant mix leveling recycle pay items the engineer will make pay adjustments for aggregate gradation and asphalt binder content but not for inplace density .
plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements num section num vacant num vacant num section num plant mix pavement crack sealing num description this section describes the requirements for sealing cracks in plant mix pavement .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for blotter num backer rod num hotpoured elastic sealant num other materials may be used as blotter material including portland cement fly ash sawdust blotter paper or biodegradable nontoxic nonhazardous compounds designed to form a temporary protective barrier over the sealant to prevent tracking .
num equipment num removing existing sealant provide a plow ripping tooth wire brush saw or other equipment to remove existing sealant from cracks .
use carbidetipped blades or better .
num routing provide mechanical powerdriven routing equipment that produces a reservoir with vertical sides and a flat bottom to the required dimensions .
do not use star bit type routers or equipment designed to plow the cracks to size .
use carbide tipped blades or better .
num cleaningdrying provide an air compressor that produces clean oilfree compressed air with an output of at least num ft³min num m³min equip with a inch num mm diameter or smaller nozzle .
do not use backpack blowers .
provide compressed air heat num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num num num num num num lances that produce clean oilfree compressed air at least num ºf num ºc at a velocity of at least num fts num ms. do not use direct flame driers .
num sealing provide a melting machine with a melting capacity of at least num galh num lh while continuously maintaining the recommended sealant application temperature .
equip to continuously agitate and mix the sealant during application .
apply sealant with a pressuretype applicator equipped with a wand with the outlet tip attached to a fixedsize nozzle or an inside diameter cup of num in num in num mm num mm or an approved equal .
provide a compressed air heater if required by conditions .
provide a ushaped squeegee for smoothing the sealant .
num construction num general seal cracks between the dates specified .
provide the engineer access to equipment and storage area at all times .
dispose of cartons as sealant is installed as approved by the engineer .
do not use equipment that damages pavement including spalling and overcutting .
remove and replace improperly installed sealant at no additional cost to the department .
for the construction type specified use the operations in table num requirements for crack sealing .
num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num num num num num num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num table num requirements for crack sealing type required construction operations removing existing sealant routing crack cleaning and drying crack sealant configuration flush recessed i x x x ii x x iii x x x iv x x v x x x x vi x x x vii x x x x viii x x x num removing existing sealant when specified remove existing sealant from cracks without damaging the pavement .
num routing rout no more than can be sealed each day and in accordance with table num num routing dimensions .
num table num routing dimensions num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num crack width sealant aashto m num type num wy modified aashto m num type iv wy modified c in num mm does not need routing or sealing c in to less than num in num mm to less than num mm rout to num in wide in deep num mm wide num mm deep rout to in wide in deep num mm wide num mm deep num in to in num mm to num mm does not need routing in num mm does not need routing num cleaningdrying use compressed air to clean cracks and reservoirs of dust dirt and other deleterious materials .
prepare cracks by using compressed air heat lances but do not overheat the pavement .
before applying sealant clean and dry cracks exposed to precipitation .
the engineer will inspect prepared cracks before sealing .
before reopening the roadway to traffic remove debris using a power broom or other approved means .
remove swept material from curb and gutter areas .
num lot sizes sampling and testing num quantity equal to or less than num lb num num kg or incidental submit written certification num calendar days before sealing .
ensure certification from sealant manufacturersupplier specifically states compliance with appropriate aashto specification either m num type num wy modified or m num type iv wy modified .
include quality control data from sealant manufacturersupplier for the production run of crack sealant .
the department defines a production run as the weight mass of sealant produced during one cycle from startup to shutdown of the manufacturers equipment .
for quality control data use format num num and units described in table num hotpoured elastic sealant specification limits .
report results for the bond test as the sum of successful extensions for all three specimen blocks for the required number of complete cycles specified in table num hotpoured elastic sealant specification limits .
num quantity greater than num lb num num kg one test series is one sample tested for each applicable property for the type of sealant as shown in table num hotpoured elastic sealant specification limits .
the engineer will test all samples .
partial lots of less than three samples will be combined with previous lot for analysis .
analysis will not exceed five samples per lot .
the department defines a lot as the quantity represented by three test series or no more than num lb num num kg a sublot is the quantity represented by one test series or no more than num lb num num kg .
if the exact quantity in a lot varies due to changes in production or construction schedules three to five samples may represent a lot .
as directed take samples of crack sealant in the presence of the engineer do so directly from the applicator nozzle during sealing and once the melting equipment has stabilized for temperature and agitationmixing .
provide two boxes that have a silicone release coating on the inside surfaces each filled with num lb num kg of sealant .
document the sample with the contractors name sealant manufacturers name and address lot and sublot number total sublot quantity type of sealant department project number and project location .
from each sample the engineer will keep one box of sealant as a referee sample .
num sealing num general before starting give the engineer two copies of the sealant manufacturers recommendations for preparation handling mixing and application .
seal cracks only in dry weather .
ensure that pavement inside the crack is at least num ºf num ºc unless the manufacturer requires a higher temperature if necessary heat the pavement .
keep the sealant at the manufacturer recommended application temperature .
do not begin installing sealant until the equipment has stabilized for temperature and agitationmixing .
num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num num num num num seal cracks or portions of cracks greater than c in num mm wide unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
apply sealant from the bottom up .
when using the cup attachment hold it firmly against the roadway surface during application .
when using squeegees smooth sealant tightly against the pavement .
center the squeegeed band on the crack so that the width on either side of the crack is no more than num in num mm .
seal cracks so that the finished cured surface is to the configuration specified num .
flush configuration .
flush with the pavement and is not recessed into the crack by shrinkage .
num .
recessed configuration .
recess below the pavement num in num mm .
do not use squeegees or wands with a num in num mm inside diameter cup .
if sealant flows out the end of the crack plug or dike the end as approved by the engineer .
remove spilled sealant and reseal properly .
remove excess sealant from roadway while it is still liquid .
if sealant pulls out or tracking occurs apply blotter material to minimize damage .
replace sealant damaged by tracking at no additional cost to the department .
do not mix sealant from different manufacturers in the sealing machine .
purge the machine empty the kettle hoses etc .
of sealant before switching sealants .
follow manufacturer recommendations for mixing sealant from different production runs .
num backer rod install backer rod only when num .
aashto m num type iv wy modified sealant is specified num .
final width of crack or reservoir exceeds d in num mm and num .
full depth of crack including routed reservoir if applicable exceeds num in num mm .
install backer rod with the top edge recessed in num mm below the pavement .
install aashto m num type iv wy modified sealant .
num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num num num num num num num plant mix pavement crack sealing num num num crack seal acceptance the engineer will accept crack sealant material as follows num .
quantity equal to or less than num lb num num kg or incidental to other pay items .
based on the written certification of production sealant in accordance with subsection num lot sizes sampling and testing .
num .
quantity greater than num lb num num kg .
based on random samples and a quality analysis to determine a pay factor for each lot when tested in accordance with subsection num lot sizes sampling and testing .
if the pay factor for a lot is less than num the engineer will evaluate the material for acceptance in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt material paragraph num .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure crack seal plant mix by the pound kilogram of sealant .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest crack seal plant mix lb kg lb kg lb kg num num determination of pay factor and pay adjustment num general for projects with a quantity greater than num lb num num kg the engineer will determine a pay factor for each property and the lowest pay factor of all the properties will be the pay factor for the lot .
num num num for appropriate test procedures and measurement units see table num hot poured elastic sealant specification limits .
if the average relative density is greater than the compliance limit the engineer will calculate the pay factor as follows rounding to the nearest num pay factor pfquality analysis the greater of num or where pf quality analysis pay factor as determined from quality analysis with an obtainable pay factor no greater than num average relative density clu upper compliance limit for relative density the engineer will evaluate the sealant using the compliance limits in accordance with table num hotpoured elastic sealant compliance limits to establish the pay factor .
table num hotpoured elastic sealant compliance limitsnum num plant mix pavement crack sealing property compliance limits aashto m num type num wy modified aashto m num type iv wy modified lower upper lower upper cone penetration num num num flow num num bond num bond num extension num relative density num num softening point ºf ºc num num num num clu clu num for lots with a pay factor less than num the engineer will keep corresponding referee samples for num year from the issue date of report .
referee samples will not be kept for lots having a pay factor of num or greater .
num quality level analysis except bond test the engineer will compute quality level analysis for each lot except for the bond test as follows note for relative density only the arithmetic mean will be computed .
num .
determine the arithmetic mean rounded to the nearest num num for softening point num for relative density .
where arithmetic mean summation xi individual test value from each test series n total number of test values num .
compute the sample standard deviation s rounded to the nearest num num for softening point .
s where s sample standard deviation arithmetic mean summation xi individual test value from each test series n total number of test values num plant mix pavement crack sealing num n i num xi n num n num n i num xi num num num .
compute the upper quality index qu rounded to the nearest num .
qu where arithmetic mean qu upper quality index clu upper compliance limit or maximum s sample standard deviation num .
compute the lower quality index ql rounded to the nearest num .
ql where arithmetic mean ql lower quality index cll lower compliance limit or minimum s sample standard deviation num .
determine pu theoretical percentage below the upper compliance limit corresponding to a given qu from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method .
if a clu is not specified then pu num .
num .
determine pl theoretical percentage above the lower compliance limit corresponding to a given ql from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method .
if a cll is not specified then pl num .
num .
determine the quality level the total theoretical percentage within the compliance limits rounded to the nearest whole number .
quality level pu pl num num plant mix pavement crack sealing clu s cll s num where pu theoretical percentage below the upper compliance limit corresponding to a given qu pl theoretical percentage above the lower compliance limit corresponding to a given ql num .
determine the pay factor from table num pay factor corresponding to the quality level and number of sublot samples .
num quality level analysis bond test for the bond test the engineer will compute quality level analysis for each lot as follows num .
calculate the quality level which is equal to the percentage of completed bond cycles for all sample blocks rounded to the nearest whole number .
quality level num where summation of completed cycles for test blocks num through n includes all test series n total number of test blocks in the lot or number of sublots in lot num blocks per sublot cll lower compliance limit or minimum num .
determine the pay factor corresponding to the quality level and number of sublot samples using table num pay factor .
num num plant mix pavement crack sealing completed bond cycles n cll block n block num num num table num pay factor pay factor minimum required quality level sample size number of sublots n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num plant mix pavement crack sealing num the engineer will compute payment adjustment for each lot separately using the following equation pa pfnum contract unit price actual quantity where pa pay adjustment pf pay factor from table num pay factor num num plant mix pavement crack sealing num section num plant mix wearing course num description this section describes the requirements for the construction of a plant mix wearing course on a prepared surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for wearing course num asphalt binder num emulsified asphalt num hydrated lime num water num provide asphalt binder as specified and in accordance with subsections num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
use emulsions ssnum cssnum ssnumh or cssnumh .
num equipment num seal coat provide an asphalt distributor for heating and applying emulsified asphalt that meets the requirements of subsection num equipment .
provide poweroperated rotary brooms for cleaning the roadway .
num plant mix wearing course provide equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction num general follow the construction requirements in section num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements except as modified .
num plant mix wearing course num num num num num num num num num plant mix wearing course place plant mix wearing course between june num and september num .
the engineer may give written approval to extend these dates .
schedule a prepaving conference before placement to discuss materials equipment and procedures .
num quality requirements construct wearing course using quality control and quality acceptance procedures in accordance with the following subsections as applicable based on testing requirements in table num testing requirements .
laboratory and personnel num correlation num resolution num quality control testing num quality acceptance testing num verification num independent assurance num documentation and reporting num except that no testing or results are required for items num num and num corrective action plan num the department does not require recorrelation before placement if correlation testing for aggregate tests has already been performed with placement of plant mix pavement and the contractors and departments personnel and equipment have remained unchanged .
perform quality acceptance testing in accordance with table num testing requirements .
num testing requirements before placement test a split aggregate sample in accordance with subsection num aggregate gradation .
test for quality control quality acceptance and verification in accordance with table num testing requirements .
num num num num num num num table num testing requirements num plant mix wearing course test procedure test frequency num quality controlvirgin aggregate production gradation liquid limit ll plasticity index pi coarse aggregate angularity fractured faces fine aggregate angularity flat elongated num num ton num t minimum la abrasion contractorfurnished sources only num ton num num t minimum soundness mgsnum num num contractorfurnished source only num ton num num t minimum sand equivalent num contractorfurnished source only num ton num t minimum quality acceptancemix production num virgin aggregate gradation num lotnum ton num lotnum t asphalt binder content numday virgin aggregatell pi coarse aggregate angularity fractured faces fine aggregate angularity flat elongated num num ton num t minimum moisture content of virgin aggregatehydrated lime num ton num t minimum moisture content of mix numday verificationmix production virgin aggregate gradation numlot asphalt binder content no tests required virgin aggregatell pi coarse aggregate angularity fractured faces moisture content of virgin aggregatehydrated lime moisture content of mix flat elongated no tests required aggregatehydrated lime moisture content of mix flat elongated num num plant mix wearing course num num testing frequencies shown are minimum quantities .
example num minnum ton num minnum t. num if the first three tests for ll pi and coarse aggregate angularity fine aggregate angularity and flat and elongated are within specification and there are no changes in the crushing process test at a frequency of num ton num num t. num not required if these tests were performed and found acceptable during production of the plant mix pavement .
num soundness mgsonum will be tested on coarse and fine aggregate separately .
the specification for soundness will apply to the coarse aggregate only .
num quality acceptance tests may be used for quality control purposes .
num not required if the results for these tests performed during aggregate production were within specification .
num job mix formula jmf at least num calendar days before starting the placement of plant mix wearing course submit a jmf with samples of produced material for each aggregate fraction to the engineer for approval .
ensure that the jmf and allowable tolerances are within the broadband specified in subsection num aggregate for plant mix wearing course .
use the jmf to establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size and a single mixing temperature .
the materials program will specify the percentage of asphalt binder to be added .
furnish mix with aggregate fractions within the wide band limits and the tolerance ranges above and below the target job mix formula as shown in table num aggregate tolerances .
table num aggregate tolerances sieve size range passing no .
num num mm sieve num to num passing no .
num num mm sieve num to num passing no .
num num µm sieve num to num mixing temperature num f degrees num c degrees do not change the jmf without the engineers written approval .
num num num mix design the materials program will perform laboratory testing to establish the optimum asphalt content for the wearing course based on the contractors jmf .
num seal coat place seal coat when the application surface is dry and the air and pavement surface temperature are at least num ºf num ºc .
submit emulsified asphalt samples and certification documents in accordance with subsection num sampling procedures .
the application rate specified for emulsified asphalt is for specification material before additional dilution for field application .
emulsified asphalt used for seal coat may be diluted in the field at a ratio of num part emulsified asphalt to num part water num .
before mixing heat the dilution water and the emulsion to at least num ºf num ºc dilute by introducing the water into the emulsified asphalt .
apply the seal coat so that there is uniform complete coverage and within the temperature range specified in table num emulsion application temperatures for tack coat .
do not apply more seal coat to the surface area than can be covered by that days production of plant mix wearing course .
num compaction compact the plant mix wearing course with three passes of a steel wheel roller in static mode .
the department defines one pass with a roller as a forward or backward movement over the full length of the area to be compacted .
num surface tolerances test the surface using a numfoot num m straightedge at selected locations .
do not allow variation of the surface from the straightedge between any two contacts with the surface greater than num in num mm .
remove and replace defective work with new material .
num num num num plant mix wearing course num num num num num num plant mix wearing course num num num num acceptance the engineer may isolate and reject obviously defective material without regard to testing procedures otherwise the engineer will accept or reject materials as follows num .
emulsified asphalt in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num .
pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num .
aggregate gradation in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
num .
asphalt binder content in accordance with subsection num num asphalt binder content .
num .
moisture content of virgin aggregatehydrated lime based on each individual test and the quantity of water added .
num .
based on each individual test for num .
liquid limit and plastic index num .
moisture content of plant mix and num .
coarse and fine aggregate angularity .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
plant mix wearing course by the short ton metric ton including the weight mass of the aggregate performance graded asphalt binder and hydrated lime .
the cumulative weight mass of batches of plant mix wearing course incorporated in the work will be used for payment .
num num .
seal coat by the short ton metric ton of specification product in accordance with subsection num measurement methods .
the weight mass of seal coat will include the weight mass of water specified for mixture at the refinery as part of the designated type of emulsified asphalt .
the department will pay as follows num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest plant mix wearing course ton t num ton num t num ton num t seal coat ton t num ton num t num ton num t num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
asphalt binder pg __ __ in accordance with section num plant mix pavements and recycled plant mix pavements .
num .
hydrated lime in accordance with section num hydrated lime .
num .
contractor testing in accordance with subsection num contractor testing to perform the sampling and quality control and quality acceptance testing requirements .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num determination of pay factors the engineer will determine pay factors as follows num .
pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
num .
virgin aggregate gradation for each lot in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
num num plant mix wearing course num num .
asphalt binder content in accordance with subsection num asphalt binder content .
num price adjustment num emulsified asphalt if the samples for a truckload are not received by the materials program within seven calendar days of sampling in accordance with subsection num construction the engineer will reduce the payment by as much as num percent for that load .
the engineer may reduce the payment for emulsified asphalt that does not meet specifications but is accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num plant mix wearing course the engineer will calculate pay adjustments for aggregate gradation and asphalt binder content using the following formulas aggregate gradation paa num pmwc pfa num lsa asphalt binder content paac num pmwc pfac num lsac where paa pay adjustment for aggregate gradation dollars pmwc plant mix wearing course contract unit price dollars pfa aggregate gradation pay factor for evaluated lot lsa lot size for aggregate gradation evaluated lot short ton metric ton paac pay adjustment for asphalt binder content dollars pfac asphalt binder pay factor for evaluated lot lsac lot size for asphalt binder content evaluated lot short ton metric ton num num num plant mix wearing course num num vacant num section num vacant num num num num num num num section num plant mix pavement commercial mix num description this section describes the requirements for providing hauling and placing one or more courses of commercial plant mix on a prepared foundation .
num materials provide plant mix pavement composed of a mixture of aggregate and asphalt binder from a commercial source .
obtain the engineers approval before adding natural fillers or commercial additives .
num equipment provide equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction observe weather and temperature restrictions in accordance with subsection num weather and seasonal limitations .
at least num calendar days before use submit the name of the proposed commercial source and a proposed mix design for the plant mix pavement to the engineer for approval .
the mix design may be referenced to an approved design used within the past two years .
spread and finish the mix in accordance with subsection num spreading and finishing .
compact the mix to ensure an inplace density that equals or exceeds num percent of maximum density .
ensure surface tolerances are in accordance with subsection num surface tolerances .
plant mix pavement commercial mix num num num num plant mix pavement commercial mix num num num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure plant mix commercial by the short ton metric ton .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest plant mix commercial ton t num ton num t num ton num t num tack coat num num num num num num section num tack coat num description this section describes preparing and coating an existing bituminous or concrete surface with emulsified asphalt .
num materials use emulsions ssnum cssnum ssnumh or cssnumh .
provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection emulsified asphalt num water num num equipment equip tank trucks delivering emulsified asphalt to the project and onsite storage tanks with a sampling valve similar in design to those shown in aashto t num .
mount the valve on the truck or tanks discharge line .
consult the materials testing manual for drawings of suggested mountings .
provide an asphalt distributor that is equipped maintained and operated to apply bituminous material uniformly at variable widths .
equip with a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents a power unit for the pump full circulation spray bars capable of being adjusted laterally and vertically and a positive cutoff for the spray bars .
num construction num surface preparation clean the surface of extraneous material including vegetation dirt mud and loose material .
clean edges of existing pavements that will border new pavement to allow adhesion of tack coat .
obtain the engineers approval before applying the tack coat .
num num sampling procedures notify the supplier that emulsified asphalt samples are required for each conveyance at the time of loading .
the department requires the supplier to collect numquart num l samples in widemouth highdensity polyethylene hdpe plastic containers numeinch num mm outside diameter with numinch num mm inside diameter opening by num in num mm total height including screw on lid in accordance with astm dnum ship them directly to the materials program in cheyenne ensure arrival no later than seven calendar days after sampling and accompany each sample with a clearly identified copy of a certificate of compliance that shows the following num .
invoice number or bill of lading number num .
project number num .
tonnage num .
date num .
type and grade num .
producer and num .
type of modifier .
ensure that the supplier of the emulsified asphalt submits each sample with quality control test results for the applicable tests specified in subsection num emulsified asphalt and that the test results submitted are for a production sample taken from the same production run and sales tank .
give the certification documents including the invoice certificate of compliance weigh ticket quality control tests results etc .
to the engineer at the time of each tank delivery .
num application apply tack coat in accordance with subsection num weather and seasonal limitations and at the rate specified or approved .
the specified application rate is for specification material before additional dilution for field application .
tack coat num num num num num num num tack coat num num num num num num emulsified asphalt used for tack coat may be diluted in the field at a ratio of num part emulsified asphalt to num part water num .
before mixing heat the dilution water and emulsified asphalt to a minimum temperature specified by the supplier .
dilute by introducing the water into the emulsified asphalt .
apply the tack coat at a uniform temperature in accordance with table num num emulsion application temperatures for tack coat .
table num emulsion application temperatures for tack coat emulsified asphalt temperature nonpolymer modified emulsions num to num f num to num c num maintain pressure so that the application rate varies no more than num galyd² num lm² .
apply the emulsified asphalt so that there is uniform complete coverage at the rate specified .
correct deficiencies and areas not covered .
before placing tack coat place a section in the presence of the engineer to verify the application rates and the uniformity and completeness of coverage make available the distributor manufacturers instructions for calibrating an accurate spray pattern .
limit application to the area that can be covered by that days production equal in width to a single paving ribbon of plant mix pavement .
when traffic is present in construction areas apply tack coat on one half of the application surface at a time .
do not allow traffic on the tack coat until it has cured sufficiently to prevent picking up or tracking .
num acceptance the engineer will accept emulsified asphalt in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure tack coat by the short ton metric ton in accordance with subsection num measurement methods and will include the weight mass of water specified for mixture at the refinery as part of the designated type of emulsified asphalt .
water added at the refinery or processing plant to dilute the emulsified asphalt will not be measured for payment .
quantities in excess of those specified or approved will not be measured directly for payment .
the department will pay as follows num price adjustment if the samples for a truckload are not received by the materials program within seven calendar days of sampling in accordance with subsection num construction the engineer will reduce the payment by as much as num percent for that load .
the engineer may reduce the payment for emulsified asphalt that does not meet specifications but is accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
tack coat num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest tack coat ton t num ton num t num ton num t num num num prime coat num num num num num section num prime coat num description this section describes the requirements for preparing and coating an existing surface with prime coat and if required blotter .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for blotter num liquid asphalt num provide liquid asphalt type mcnum .
provide blotter material from a specified departmentfurnished or contractor furnished source .
num equipment provide tank trucks asphalt distributor and onsite storage tanks in accordance with subsection num equipment .
provide mechanical spreading equipment for applying the blotter material do not use hand tools unless approved by the engineer .
num construction num general ensure an application surface shaped to the required grade and section free of ruts corrugations segregated material and other irregularities and uniformly compacted .
reprocess or reshape damaged areas caused by delays in applying the prime coat .
obtain the engineers approval of the surface before applying prime coat .
provide samples and certification documents for the liquid asphalt in accordance with materials testing manual section num liquid asphalt sampling .
num num num num num apply prime coat when the application surface is damp and both the air and surface temperatures are above num ºf num ºc .
apply the liquid asphalt in accordance with table num application temperatures for liquid asphalt .
table num application temperatures for liquid asphalt prime coat num num num num num num num liquid asphalt type and grade temperature f c mcnum num to num num to num mcnum num to num num to num apply the prime coat so that there is uniform complete coverage at the rate specified or approved .
correct deficiencies and areas not covered .
when traffic is present in construction areas apply prime coat on one half of the application surface at a time .
do not allow traffic on the surface until the prime coat has been sufficiently absorbed to prevent picking up or tracking .
cover unabsorbed quantities with blotter material spread the material without operating the equipments tires on the exposed newly applied liquid asphalt .
num acceptance the engineer will accept liquid asphalt in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt material .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
prime coat by the short ton metric ton in accordance with subsection num measurement methods .
num .
blotter by the short ton metric ton or cubic yard cubic meter .
num num num num num num prime coat the engineer will not measure for payment quantities exceeding those specified or approved .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest prime coat ton t num ton num t num ton num t blotter ton cy t mnum num ton ft num t num m num ton cy num t mnum num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for haul in accordance with section num haul .
num payment adjustment the engineer may reduce the payment for liquid asphalt that does not meet specifications but is accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num section num chip and fog seals num description this section describes the requirements for placing chip seal and fog seal which the department defines as follows num .
chip seal .
an application of emulsified asphalt followed by an application of aggregate and when specified an emulsified asphalt overshoot .
num .
fog seal .
an application of emulsified asphalt and where required a blotter cover .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for blotter and chip seal num emulsified asphalt num for fog seals and overshoots use emulsions ssnumh or cssnumh .
ensure that the emulsion and aggregate are compatible for chip seals .
if necessary change the emulsion type or the aggregate source to ensure compatibility .
if a polymermodified emulsion is specified do not change to a nonpolymer modified emulsion .
when the contract allows and the contractor elects to use a departmentfurnished source as a contractorfurnished source for the chip seal aggregate meet the applicable requirements of subsection num contractorfurnished .
num equipment num general ensure that equipment meets the following num .
poweroperated rotary brooms and a pickup broom for curb and gutter sections .
chip and fog seals num num num num num num num num num chip and fog seals num num num num .
tank trucks asphalt distributor truck and onsite storage tanks in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num chip seal in addition to the equipment required above provide the following equipment for the application of a chip seal num .
a type ii light pneumatic roller a type vi vibratory roller or both in accordance with subsection num roller .
num .
one selfpropelled aggregate spreader supported by at least four wheels fitted with pneumatic tires on two axles and equipped with positive controls so that the specified quantity of material is deposited uniformly over the width of the surface .
other types of aggregate spreaders that produce equivalent results may be used .
num fog seal provide mechanical spreading equipment for the blotter material do not distribute blotter with hand tools unless approved by the engineer .
num construction num weather and seasonal limitations place chip and fog seal coats from june num to august num unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer .
place seal only on a dry surface .
place the applicable seal in accordance with the following criteria num .
chip seal num .
air and pavement surface temperatures at least num ºf num ºc or higher num .
no fog num .
precipitation not expected within num hours and num .
applied seal material not at risk of freezing within num hours .
num .
fog seal .
air and pavement surface temperatures at least num ºf num ºc .
num num num sampling procedures provide emulsified asphalt samples and certification documents in accordance with subsection num sampling procedures .
for liquid asphalt other than emulsified asphalt provide samples and certification documents in accordance with the materials testing manual section num liquid asphalt sampling .
num emulsified asphalt application clean surface of extraneous material including vegetation dirt mud and loose materials before applying the emulsified asphalt .
provide a daily log of the usage of emulsified asphalt using daily emulsion application rate record form enum .
submit the form to the engineer no later than the working day following placement .
apply the emulsified asphalt so that there is uniform complete coverage at the rate established chip seal or specified fog seal .
correct deficiencies and areas not covered .
apply the emulsion in accordance with table num emulsion application temperatures for chip and fog seals .
table num emulsion application temperatures for chip and fog seals chip and fog seals num num num emulsions spray application temperature range f c set grade unmodified polymer modified rapid quick rsnum cqsnumh num to num num to num num to num num to num rsnum hfrsnum crsnum num num to num num to num num to num num to num medium slow msnum hfmsnum ssnum numh cssnum numh num to num num to num num to num num to num msnum numh hfmsnum numh nums numss num cmsnum numh num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num chip and fog seals num num chip seal num general provide the engineer with the results of compatibility tests performed for the aggregate and emulsified asphalt .
perform the homogeneity test in the presence of the engineer in accordance with the materials testing manual .
ensure that longitudinal joints coincide with the specified locations of lane lines edge lines or the center of traveled ways .
use of a type vi vibratory roller will only be allowed by the engineer if the chip seal is placed during the same construction season as the plant mix pavement and the plant mix pavement has been in place less than num calendar days .
operate the roller in static mode .
do not use the roller if it causes the aggregate to break down .
if necessary wet the aggregate to eliminate or reduce the dust coating or to improve cohesion .
ensure an aggregate embedment depth of num to num percent .
num quality requirements construct the chip seal using quality assurance procedures and perform quality control of the aggregate during production and placement .
do not continue producing material that is out of specification .
provide the following num .
quality control charts .
maintain and display charts at the contractors laboratory .
ensure their accessibility to the engineer .
num .
testing requirements .
perform aggregate gradations and la abrasion tests in accordance with the materials testing manual .
before placement test a split aggregate sample in accordance with subsection num aggregate gradation .
quality control quality acceptance and verification tests may be performed by a qualified technician but a certified technician is required to sign all test results .
num num num num num num num num test for quality control and quality acceptance as required by table num chip seal test requirements .
table num chip seal test requirements chip and fog seals num test procedure test frequency compatibility tests required quality controlchip seal aggregate production gradation num ydnum num num mnum num minimum la abrasion contractor furnished sources only num ydnum num num mnum quality control during placement aggregate gradation and la abrasion not required quality acceptance aggregate gradation num lotnum ydnum num num mnum num .
laboratory and personnel requirements .
for quality control testing use a laboratory and personnel in accordance with subsection num field testing laboratory and personnel requirements .
num .
correlation of field testing laboratories and personnel .
to avoid equipment or procedural bias in test results correlate aggregate tests in accordance with subsection num correlation .
the procedure will be repeated if the possibility of bias arises during production or if new equipment or personnel are introduced during testing .
the department does not require recorrelation before placement if correlation testing for aggregate tests has already been performed with placement of plant mix pavement and the contractors and departments personnel and equipment have remained unchanged .
num num num chip and fog seals num num num num .
resolution of testing discrepancies .
follow procedures in accordance with subsection num resolving field testing discrepancies .
num .
out of specification material .
base quality control on each individual test .
if test results are outside the specifications make appropriate adjustments retest material and make additional adjustments if necessary .
num quality acceptance testing the department is responsible for quality acceptance testing and will test in accordance with the requirements in table num chip seal test requirements .
quality acceptance test results are required prior to beginning chip sealing operations .
aggregate lots that meet or exceed a pay factor level of num are acceptable for incorporation into the project at the pay factor calculated in accordance with subsection num determination of pay factors .
lot size is defined by the department as the number of square yards square meters placed represented by five tests as shown in table num chip seal test requirements .
a sublot is the quantity represented by one test .
the engineer will determine the exact lot size which may vary due to project length production suspension construction schedules material source changes or other acceptable reasons .
except in unusual situations the engineer will use lots consisting of five samples .
when necessary due to production project size material source changes or suspension lots of from three to seven samples may be used .
partial lots with less than three samples will be included with the previous lot for analysis .
lot size will be controlled by the project size or changes in the material source and may span several days of production .
obtain aggregate gradation samples in accordance with subsection num num point of sampling and the materials testing manual at random locations determined by the engineer and in the presence of the engineer .
num test section before full production construct a test section num mi num km long or less as approved by the engineer for each type of surface upon which the chip seal is to be placed to establish the following num .
rates of emulsion and aggregate application to ensure aggregate embedment and coverage num num .
time frames to complete each phase of the chip sealing operations to meet the requirements for opening the roadway to traffic and num .
roller pattern roller type and number of passes .
use the roller pattern and type determined as effective during test section placement for the remainder of the chip seal placement .
place another test section when changing roller type and pattern .
do not continue chip sealing operations until the test section has been in place for num hours or as approved by the engineer .
num application apply the emulsified asphalt and the chip seal aggregate as follows num .
emulsified asphalt and when specified overshoot in accordance with the suppliers recommendations and subsection num emulsified asphalt application .
if the texture of the surface allows the emulsified asphalt to penetrate too rapidly spray the roadway again at a rate specified by the engineer .
use a strip of building paper num ft num m wide to form a uniform edge at the beginning of each spread .
make junctions of spreads to ensure a smooth riding surface .
do not spread the emulsified asphalt beyond the width of the chip seal aggregate application or allow cooling or setting before application of the aggregate .
avoid delays that could impair retention of the aggregate .
num .
chip seal aggregate immediately after the application of emulsified asphalt spread and seat the cover coat aggregate .
spread the material without operating the equipments tires on the exposed newly applied emulsified asphalt .
immediately after spreading cover deficient areas with additional material .
after the emulsion used to seal the road and bond the aggregate has cured thoroughly broom the entire surface .
remove excess aggregate .
do not remove imbedded aggregate .
when specified apply an overshoot after placing the chip seal coat .
when using a rapid set emulsion for the overshoot have it diluted by the emulsified asphalt chip and fog seals num num num num num num chip and fog seals num num num num supplier at its facility .
overshoot the chip seal at the rate established during the test section production .
do not allow traffic on the surface until the overshoot has sufficiently cured to prevent picking up or tracking .
cover excess quantities with blotter material .
num opening to traffic open roadways as follows num .
chip seal without overshoot .
do not allow unrestricted traffic on the chip sealed surface before removing excess cover coat aggregate .
if placing traffic on the chip seal before the removal of excess flyrock pilot the traffic through the work at num mph num kmh or less .
open the roadway to full unrestricted traffic flow within num hours of the beginning of aggregate placement .
num .
chip seal with overshoot .
do not allow traffic on the chip sealed surface until the blotter is applied and the overshoot has cured .
num fog seal the specified application rate is for specification material before additional dilution for field application .
emulsified asphalt used for fog seal may be diluted in the field at a ratio of num part emulsified asphalt to num part water num .
before mixing heat the dilution water and emulsified asphalt to a minimum temperature specified by the supplier .
dilute by introducing the water into the emulsified asphalt .
apply at a temperature range in accordance with table num emulsion application temperatures for chip and fog seals .
cover areas where the emulsified asphalt would be picked up or damaged by traffic with a uniform protective coat of blotter .
sweep and remove loose blotter cover from the roadway surface no more than num hours after the emulsified asphalt has cured .
num acceptance the engineer will accept num .
emulsified asphalt in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt material .
num num num num .
aggregate gradation in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
if a chip seal with or without overshoot experiences chip loss or bleeding within two weeks of placement repair it at no additional cost to the department .
provide and maintain temporary traffic control required on the project to repair areas of failing seal coat at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
chip seal and chip seal overshoot by the square yard square meter based on the length placed and the lesser of the measured or specified width placed .
num .
emulsified asphalt emulsified asphalt modified emulsified asphalt overshoot by the short ton metric ton in accordance with subsection num measurement methods .
quantities of water to dilute the emulsified asphalt for application will not be measured and paid for as emulsified asphalt .
the department will pay as follows chip and fog seals num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest chip seal sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum chip seal overshoot sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum emulsified asphalt ton t num ton num t num ton num t emulsified asphalt modified ton t num ton num t num ton num t emulsified asphalt overshoot ton t num ton num t num ton num t fog seal ton t num ton num t numton num t num chip and fog seals num num determination of pay factors the engineer will evaluate the gradation for chip seal aggregate in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and adjust payment accordingly .
num price adjustment num emulsified asphalt if the samples for a truckload are not received by the materials program within seven calendar days of sampling in accordance with subsection num construction the engineer will reduce the payment by as much as num percent for that load .
the engineer may adjust the price for emulsified asphalt that does not meet specifications but is accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num chip seal the engineer may reduce payment as follows num .
operations .
if the roadway is not open to unrestricted traffic flow as specified the engineer will assess liquidated damages of num per hour for each hour or partial hour after num hours .
these damages will be added to and simultaneous with other specified liquidated damages .
num .
aggregate .
the payment for chip seal will be reduced based on the following equation paa pfa num lsa cs where paa pay adjustment for aggregate gradation pfa aggregate gradation pay factor for evaluated lot lsa lot size for evaluated lot sy mnum cs contract unit price of the chip seal pay item sy mnum num num num num num section num microsurfacing num description this section describes the requirements for applying microsurfacing material .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for microsurfacing num cement num hydrated lime num polymermodified emulsified asphalt num water num provide polymermodified quickset cqsnumhp emulsified asphalt commercially available type i or type ii portland cement or hydrated lime and other additives as needed to accelerate or retard the breaking point and set times or improve the resulting finished surface .
num equipment num emulsified asphalt provide tank trucks and onsite storage tanks in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num microsurfacing provide a selfpropelled continuous load paver manufactured exclusively for microsurfacing application that is a continuousflow mixing unit capable of accurately delivering proportionate amounts of aggregate emulsified asphalt cement additives and water to a revolving multiblade twinshafted mixer and of discharging a continuous flow of thoroughly mixed product .
equip the machine with microsurfacing num num num num num num num microsurfacing num num num num num num num num .
sufficient storage capacity for aggregate emulsified asphalt cement additives and water to maintain an adequate supply to the proportioning controls during nurse vehicle exchange num .
selfloading devices that provide for the loading of materials while continuously applying microsurfacing num .
oppositeside driving stations to optimize longitudinal alignment num .
a water pressure system and nozzletype spray bar to provide a fine mist immediately ahead and outside of the spreader box num .
a fines feeder to deliver a uniform positive accurately metered and predetermined amount of cement at the same time and place the aggregate is incorporated and num .
means to allow the operator full control of the forward and reverse speed and movement during application .
ensure that the selfloading devices oppositeside driving stations and forward and reverse controls are of the original manufacturers design .
do not use individual slurry trucks .
provide individual volume or weight mass controls and a visible means of observation of the meters for proportioning each material added to the mix .
calibrate each proportioning device and properly mark for identification .
equip the aggregate feed to the mixer with a revolution counter or similar device to determine the amount of aggregate used at any time .
provide a positive displacement type emulsion pump and equip with a revolution counter or similar device to determine the amount of emulsion used at any time .
for spreading the microsurfacing mixture provide a mechanical type spreader box attached to the paver and equip with rotating paddle shafts or spiral augers to agitate and spread the material throughout the box .
provide a leading edge seal and an adjustable trailing edge seal that acts as a final strikeoff .
design and operate the unit to ensure a free flow of material to the trailing edge seal .
provide the spreader box with suitable means to shift the box .
provide rubber squeegees sized to match the width of material placed .
provide a rut filling box when required in accordance with subsection num transverse depressionscracks and longitudinal rutscracks .
num provide truck platform scales in accordance with section num weighing procedures and equipment .
the engineer may approve the use of hopper scales .
num construction num general arrange for a representative of the emulsifiedasphalt supplier to meet with the engineer and the microsurfacing contractors field personnel before placing the test section .
ensure that the representative is present on the first day of placement .
address at a minimum production materials supply and calibration of the continuousload paver .
provide weigh tickets in accordance with subsection num documentation for documenting the weight mass of the aggregate in the transfer trucks at the time and place of loading into the mixing machine .
with the approval of the engineer invoices may be accepted in lieu of the weigh tickets .
before beginning microsurfacing operations calibrate the mixing unit in the presence of the engineer .
before loading into the hauling units the engineer will test aggregate gradation to ensure it meets the requirements of subsection num aggregate for micorsurfacing at the stockpile .
carry enough material in the spreader to ensure complete coverage but avoid overloading .
do not allow lumping balling or unmixed aggregate .
ensure that the material is num .
workable and of uniform consistency upon leaving the mixer num .
of uniform surface texture and color after placement num .
sufficiently stable to prevent premature breaking in the spreader box num .
homogenous during and after mixing and spreading num .
free of excessive water or emulsion and num .
not subject to segregation .
do not spray water directly into the spreader box while placing material .
microsurfacing num num num num num num num num num num microsurfacing num num num num formulate the material to allow use by traffic within one hour of application without damaging the surface or vehicles .
stop application early enough each day to allow safe travel over the work before dark .
stop production if two corrective actions fail to result in the production of material as specified .
num weather and seasonal limitations place microsurfacing material from june num to september num .
apply when pavement temperature is at least num ºf num ºc or higher and the air temperature is num ºf num ºc and rising .
do not apply in fog or rain when the finished product is at risk of freezing within num hours or if weather conditions will prevent use by traffic in one hour .
num quality control plan the department requires a written quality control plan .
give the engineer two copies at the preconstruction conference .
nonadherence to the plan may cause the engineer to suspend work .
include the following minimum information num .
descriptive information and calibration records .
for production facilities including those for crushing hauling and stockpiling provide the make type location frequency of inspection frequency and procedures for calibrating weighing and metering devices and all certifications issued for the facility .
for placing operations provide the make and type of equipment frequency of inspection and maintenance frequency of and procedures for calibrating control devices frequency of and procedures for verifying calibration and all certifications issued for the equipment .
num .
personnel and responsibilities .
provide an organizational chart indicating lines of authority for quality control in all aspects of microsurfacing including crushing and stockpiling .
include the names phone numbers and qualifications of the people responsible for quality control .
num .
sampling procedures .
indicate the proposed procedure for obtaining aggregate samples for the mix design the method for determining sampling times and locations during production collection procedures and the testing and reporting of results .
num num .
mix design process .
include the parameters to determine at what stage of aggregate production the laboratory mix design is performed the qualifications of the organization performing the design and the name address and phone numbers of the person responsible .
num .
documentation and reporting .
document observations records of inspection adjustments to mixture and test results on a daily basis .
record field observations inspections and measurements as they occur in a permanent duplicating field book or diary .
make copies of daily entries and records available to the engineer upon request .
num .
corrective action process .
provide rules for determining what actions are necessary when the material does not meet specifications .
as a minimum include in the process a written notification to the engineer of what will be done when a problem is identified .
num .
test section construction .
provide information on the location and construction procedures of the test section .
num .
notification of startup .
the process for notifying the engineer of the intent to start each aspect of the work including crushing stockpiling mix design and placement of material .
num quality acceptance the department is responsible for quality acceptance testing .
aggregate gradation lot size is defined by the department as the quantity of produced aggregate represented by five tests or a maximum of num ton num t a sublot is the quantity represented by one test .
the exact tonnage may vary due to production suspension construction schedules or other acceptable reasons .
except in unusual situations the engineer will use lots consisting of five samples .
when necessary because of production changes or suspension lots of from three to seven samples may be used .
partial lots with less than three samples will be included with the previous lot for analysis .
lot size will be controlled by tonnage and a lot may span several days of production .
obtain aggregate gradation samples in accordance with subsection num num point of sampling .
to determine lot size measure tonnage by belt scale or another method approved by the engineer .
microsurfacing num num num num microsurfacing num num num num sieve size job mix formula tolerance passing no .
num num mm num to num passing no .
num num mm num to num passing no .
num num mm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num passing no .
num num µm num to num num job mix formula jmf submit a completed mix design developed by an approved testing laboratory to the engineer for approval at least num calendar days before placing microsurfacing .
address in the mix design the proportions of aggregate polymermodified emulsified asphalt cement water and other additives required to achieve maximum stability astm d num at a minimum emulsion content .
include with the mix design report the manufacturer brand type and percentages of the aggregate asphalt emulsion and additives to both mix and emulsion and aggregate test results for sand equivalent la abrasion and when required results in accordance with table num polishresistant aggregate requirements .
provide a new mix design if any of these characteristics are changed .
with the mix design submit to the engineer an aggregate sample and jmf in accordance with table num aggregate jmf tolerance .
table num aggregate jmf tolerance ensure the tests shown in table num testing requirements meet the requirements at the minimum emulsion content .
because some systems require longer times for the emulsified asphalt to adhere to the stone a modified marshall stability test issa tbnum may be used to determine emulsified asphalt content .
num table num testing requirements microsurfacing num num test procedure description specification issa tbnum wet cohesion num minutes set minimum num minutes traffic minimum num kgin num kgcm num kgin num kgcm or near spin issa tbnum excess asphalt by lwt sand adhesion maximum num gft² num gm² issa tbnum wet stripping num minimum pass issa tbnum wet track abrasion loss one hour soak maximum six day soak maximum num gft² num gm² num gft² num gm² issa tbnum lateral displacement maximum num specific gravity after num cycles of num lb num kg maximum num issa tbnum classification compatibility minimum num grade points aaa baa issa tbnum mix time num ºf num ºc minimum controllable to num seconds num surface preparation immediately before applying material thoroughly clean the roadway surface of extraneous materials including vegetation dirt mud and loose material and prewet as necessary .
application may begin when there is no standing water present and the surface is damp .
num microsurfacing num num num num num num num num num test section construct a test section of enough quantity to evaluate the mix design for initial and final set curing times surface appearance and final profile obtain the engineers approval before beginning normal placement .
include all aspects of the specified work in the test section including transverse depression and crack filling longitudinal rut and crack filling strikeoff pass and finish pass .
ensure that the depth of material placed for the transverse depression and crack filling and longitudinal rut and crack filling portions of the test section are equal to the projects maximum specified depth .
construct another test section if a new mix design is required in accordance with subsection num mix design or if either breakdowns or stops and starts in operations exceed five per day .
num application num general provide a leading edge seal that allows no loss of the mixture at the contact point with the roadway surface .
center the material placement over the depression rut crack or lanewidth .
if specified perform transverse depression and crack filling and allow time to cure completely before performing longitudinal rut and crack filling strikeoff or finish passes .
keep to a minimum the use of hand squeegees to achieve the required surface tolerance and appearance .
do not leave excess buildup uncovered areas or an unsightly appearance .
place longitudinal joints on lane lines .
provide straight lines along the shoulder edges with no runoff .
ensure straight lines at intersections .
if necessary use a suitable material to maskoff the end of streets to provide straight lines .
do not let edges vary horizontally more than num in num mm in any numfoot num m length .
num transverse depressionscracks and longitudinal ruts cracks where longitudinal rut depth exceeds d in num mm spread the material with a rut box to fill ruts .
fill both ruts if one rut exceeds d in num mm .
num overfill transverse depressions and cracks and longitudinal ruts and cracks to c in num mm per num in num mm of material as a crown to provide for consolidation by traffic .
for material used in transverse depression and crack filling longitudinal rut and crack filling and strikeoff passes reduce the asphalt emulsion content num percent from the design emulsion content .
taper the material onto the existing pavement on both edges of the rut to provide a smooth transition .
create a smooth uniform seam wherever two passes join between the rut .
remove rough and uneven seams and apply new material at no additional cost to the department .
at the end of each pass taper the mixture and construct a transition to the existing pavement .
fill one rut only with each pass of the surfacing machine .
let traffic compact the material to fill transverse depressions and cracks and longitudinal ruts and cracks for at least five calendar days before placing additional material .
num strikeoff pass where rut depths are less than d in num mm make a fullwidth strikeoff pass with a full width spreader box using a metal strikeoff plate .
apply only enough material to fill the surface voids and level the surface .
extend material num in num mm from lane edges and taper onto the existing pavement to form a smooth transition .
at the beginning and end of each pass taper and apply the mixture to form a transition with the adjacent microsurfacing or existing pavement .
num finishing pass when specified make a fullwidth finish pass with a fullwidth spreader box once the individual ruts are filled or the strikeoff pass is completed .
taper the material onto the existing pavement at both edges of the lane to form a smooth transition .
at the beginning and end of each pass taper the mixture and form a transition to the adjacent microsurfacing or existing pavement .
num final surface immediately cease operations and make appropriate adjustments if surface appearance or tolerance criteria are not met .
num .
appearance .
do not leave visible streaks such as those caused by dragging oversized aggregate or spreader box residue in the finished microsurfacing num num num num num num num num microsurfacing num num num num surface .
if excessive streaking defined as more than four drag marks greater than num in num mm wide and num in num mm long or num in num mm wide and num in num mm long in any num ft² num m² area develops stop placement until corrected .
obtain the engineers approval before restarting .
num .
tolerance .
do not allow ripples equal to or greater than num in num mm deep as measured by placing a numfoot num m straightedge over the surface .
construct transverse and longitudinal joints where microsurfacing passes meet to be uniform in appearance and level with the adjacent microsurfacing .
do not overlap longitudinal joints more than num in num mm .
do not allow an elevation difference between joints and the adjacent surface greater than num in num mm deep as measured by placing a numfoot num m straightedge over the joint .
num final cleanup remove microsurfacing material and debris from areas not treated such as gutters intersections and shoulders on a daily basis .
num acceptance the engineer will reject material placed without an approved mix design .
remove by milling and replace at no additional cost to the department .
repair completed microsurface that is damaged by traffic at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will accept num .
emulsified asphalt in accordance with subsectionnum acceptance of asphalt material .
num .
aggregate gradation in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate .
num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure microsurfacing aggregate by the short ton metric ton in the transfer trucks at the time and place of loading into the mixing machine as documented on the weigh tickets or invoices no deduction will be made for moisture in the aggregate .
the engineer will measure microsurfacing emulsified asphalt by the short ton metric ton in accordance with subsection num measurement methods .
the department will pay as follows microsurfacing num num num num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest microsurfacing aggregate ton t num ton num t num ton num t microsurfacing emulsified asphalt ton t num ton num t num ton num t num pay adjustment num emulsified asphalt if the samples for a truckload are not received by the materials program within seven calendar days of sampling in accordance with subsection num construction the engineer will reduce the payment by as much as num percent for that load .
the engineer may reduce the payment for emulsified asphalt that does not meet specifications but is accepted in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num aggregate the engineer will evaluate the gradation for microsurfacing aggregate in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate and adjust payment accordingly .
num paving fabric num num num num num section num paving fabric num description this section describes the requirements for providing and placing performance graded asphalt binder and paving fabric .
this applies to fabric membranes used for full coverage of the pavement or as strips over transverse and longitudinal pavement joints .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection glass fiber reinforced paving fabric num paving fabric num performance graded asphalt binder num use a qualified source of pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection asphalt distributor num tank trucks num storage tanks num provide an asphalt distributor that has a singlenozzle hand spray with a positive shutoff valve .
provide mechanical or manual laydown equipment to lay the fabric smoothly and a pneumatic roller if required .
provide stiff bristle brooms or squeegees to smooth the fabric scissors or blades to cut the fabric and brushes to apply pgab at fabric overlaps .
num num num num num construction num general store fabric rolls so that they are protected from the weather .
if stored outdoors store the rolls elevated above the ground and protected with a waterproof covering .
install fabric when pavement and air temperatures are num ºf num ºc and rising and the surface is dry .
do not use more than one paving fabric product .
do not expose fabric to traffic except for emergency and construction traffic .
leave no more than num ft num m of the paving fabric installation exposed to traffic at the end of the days work .
at no additional cost to the department provide specified temporary traffic control including flagging to route traffic through the construction area where fabric is in place and not covered with a lift of plant mix pavement .
num application of pgab before applying the pgab and fabric clean the roadway surface of extraneous material including vegetation dirt mud and loose material .
apply the pgab to the prepared surface so that there is uniform complete coverage at the rate and width specified .
use a distributor spray bar and keep hand spraying to a minimum .
for pgab the minimum application temperature is num ºf num ºc and the maximum temperature in the distributor is num ºf num ºc .
apply in widths equal to that of the fabric width plus num in num mm .
do not apply pgab any farther in advance of fabric placement than the distance that can be maintained free of traffic .
clean pgab spills from the road surface .
num fabric placement ensure the presence of a representative of the fabric manufacturer during initial placement of the fabric .
before the pgab cools and loses tackiness place the fabric into the pgab with minimum wrinkling .
cut and lay flat wrinkles or folds greater than num in num mm .
use brooming to maximize fabric contact with the pavement surface .
use a pneumatic roller when the air temperature is lower than num ºf num ºc or the wind speed is greater than num mph num kmh .
paving fabric num num num num num num num num num num sufficiently overlap fabric joints to ensure full closure but not more than num in num mm .
lap transverse joints in the direction of paving to prevent edge pickup by the paver .
if necessary apply pgab to fabric overlaps a second time to ensure proper bonding of the double fabric layer .
ensure that paving equipment and hauling units do not wrinkle fold or displace the fabric .
replace damaged fabric at no additional cost to the department .
keep the plant mix overlay at a temperature in accordance with the fabric manufacturers recommendations .
if the pgab bleeds through the fabric and causes construction problems before placement of the overlay blot the areas by spreading washed sand or hotmix .
num additional requirements for glass fiber reinforced paving fabric fill cracks greater than num in num mm in width or holes greater than num in num mm in diameter in the existing pavement with bituminous filler material that contains no solvents .
obtain approval from the engineer regarding the bituminous filler material and the proposed composite material placement method before work begins .
apply the asphalt binder at a rate of num to num galydnum num to num lmnum depending upon the roughness of the existing surface before placing the composite material .
ensure the temperature of the asphalt binder during application is within the asphalt suppliers recommended mixing temperature range for the performance grade being used .
follow the composite material manufacturers representatives temperature recommendations if they are different from the asphalt suppliers .
ensure the width of the asphalt binder application is num in num mm greater than the width of the composite material to be placed .
coordinate the application of the asphalt binder and the placement of the composite material to ensure complete bonding of the composite material to the substrate surface .
ensure the composite material exceeds the size of the cracked area by at least num in num mm in all directions .
place the composite material with the grid side up .
place the composite material using continuous pieces wherever possible .
ensure individual pieces overlap num in to num in num mm to num mm .
ensure end joints and joints from the repair of wrinkles overlap or shingle in the direction that the pavement overlay will be placed .
apply a uniform layer of asphalt binder between overlaps .
perform brooming rubber tire rolling or both to maximize composite material contact with the substrate surface .
paving fabric num num num num num num num num paving fabric num num correct any excess asphalt binder that bleeds through the composite material by broadcasting blotter material meeting the requirements of subsection num aggregate for blotter or place hot mix over the bleed spots as approved by the engineer .
if it rains on the composite material before the new plant mix pavement is placed allow the composite material to dry completely before placing the pavement .
num acceptance the engineer will accept pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure paving fabric by the square yard square meter of surface area complete and in place with no allowance for overlaps .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest glass fiber reinforced paving fabric sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum paving fabric sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure pay and price adjust for asphalt binder pg __ __ in accordance with section num plant mix pavement .
the measurement will not include quantities of pgab applied in excess of the application rate .
num num num num plant mix surface appurtenances num num num num num num section num plant mix surface appurtenances num description this section describes the requirements for constructing curbs spillways median pavings bike paths or other minor items constructed of plant mix .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for plant mix num emulsified asphalt num hydrated lime num performance graded asphalt binder num use a qualified source of pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num performance graded asphalt binder .
construct appurtenances of plant mix of the type specified .
when both a inch num mm maximum and a numinch num mm maximum nominallydimensioned aggregate are specified use either .
num equipment provide equipment in accordance with the requirements of subsection num equipment .
num construction num general construct appurtenances only when the air temperature is num ºf num ºc or higher and the weather is dry .
construct on firm foundations shaped and compacted to coincide with the bottom surface of the appurtenance .
num num num immediately before construction clean existing concrete or plant mix surfaces on or against which the appurtenance will be placed and lightly coat with tack coat in accordance with section num tack coat .
when machine forming is not feasible handplace and shape the material .
where practical supplement handplacement by the use of outside forms or screed guides to obtain smooth even lines and grades .
compact appurtenances to form a smooth dense and watertight surface .
correct irregular curb or curb that deviates noticeably from the established line and grade by removing and replacing defective areas with new material at no additional cost to the department .
num acceptance the engineer will accept num .
pgab in accordance with subsection num performance graded asphalt binder and subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num .
emulsified asphalt in accordance with subsection num acceptance of asphalt materials .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
bike path plant mix by the short ton metric ton or square yard square meter .
num .
curb plant mix and spillway plant mix by the foot meter along the flow line of the top surface .
num .
median paving plant mix sidewalk plant mix or other minor paved surfaces not included with the roadway items by the square yard square meter of top surface area parallel to the paved surface .
plant mix surface appurtenances num num num num num num num num num plant mix surface appurtenances num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bike path plant mix ton sy t mnum num ton ft num t num m num ton sy num t mnum curb plant mix ft m num ft num m ft m median paving plant mix sy m² num ft num m sy m² sidewalk plant mix sy m² num ft num m sy m² spillway plant mix ft m num ft num m ft m the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure pay and price adjust for num .
asphalt binder pg __ __ in accordance with section num plant mix pavements .
num .
hot plant mix in accordance with section num plant mix pavements under the appropriate pay item except for plant mix used for the pay item bike path plant mix .
num .
tack coat in accordance with section num tack coat .
num .
hydrated lime in accordance with section num hydrated lime .
num .
haul in accordance with section num haul .
num hydrated lime num num num num num num num num section num hydrated lime num description this section describes the requirements for adding dry lime to a wetted aggregate .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection hydrated lime num water num num equipment provide a mechanical mixing device that creates a uniform and homogeneous mixture with all aggregate particles coated with hydrated lime as approved by the engineer .
equip the mixing plant with facilities to weigh check samples and to calibrate gate openings and metering devices .
equip with weighing or metering devices such as a vane feeder with a calibrated revolution counter to determine the rate of hydrated lime introduced into the aggregate while the plant is in full operation .
do not use belt scales .
use a spray bar or other approved method to wet the aggregate uniformly .
equip the plant with devices that meter the water and hydrated lime into the mixer .
interlock and synchronize the metering devices and feeders to maintain a constant rate of hydrated lime and water to the aggregate .
to control the daily quantity of hydrated lime added to the aggregate and to facilitate calibration of the metering devices place the bulk storage container from which hydrated lime is metered on scales or equip with load cells to enable the accurate measurement of the remaining weight mass in the container at the end of each day .
do not use strain gages .
use a pug mill with a mixing chamber to mix the hydrated lime and water with the aggregate .
keep the materials in the chamber until obtaining a uniform and num hydrated lime num num num num num num homogeneous mixture of lime water and aggregate .
do not use devices that allow the materials to drop directly through the mixing paddles .
locate the pug mill to allow inspection of the mixture during mixing and after discharge from the mixer .
make the belt from the pug mill to the dryer accessible for sampling .
provide a template of the belt for taking a sample to determine moisture content .
num construction mix the hydrated lime and water with the aggregate before they enter the dryer .
prior to entering the dryer ensure the moisture content of the mixture meets the requirements in accordance with table num marshall and superpave plant mix properties .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure hydrated lime by the short ton metric ton .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest hydrated lime ton t num ton num t num ton num t num section num portland cement concrete pavement num description this section describes the requirements for construction of portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared subgrade base course or other prepared surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num dowel bars and tie bars num fly ash num joint sealer num portland cement num water num if using fly ash incorporate only preapproved fly ash as listed in the materials testing manual .
do not use class c fly ash .
if using hot poured elastic joint sealant ensure material meets aashto m num type iv .
ensure tie bars are epoxy coated with the exception of the bar ends .
ensure dowel supporting units baskets are specifically manufactured for this purpose .
dowel bars may be arc or resistance welded to the basket assemblies at alternating ends of the bars .
welded areas on dowel bars need not be field epoxy coated .
ensure the basket assemblies are manufactured such that the dowel bars do not slip during concrete placement .
when specified provide aggregate in accordance with subsection num polish resistant aggregate .
for dowel bars use approved graphite lubricant or other approved release agent .
ensure the graphite lubricant contains at least num percent graphite and is certified by the manufacturer .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num num num equipment num proportioning batching and mixing provide equipment meeting the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num ensure the central mixing plant has a manufacturers capacity plate or operating instructions to clearly show the capacity and mixing speeds and a nonresettable batch counter to show the number of batches proportioned .
num scales ensure scales conform to the requirements of subsection num weighing procedures and equipment .
when beam type scales are used provide provisions such as a telltale dial to indicate that the required load in the weigh hopper is being approached .
provide a device on the weighing beams to indicate the critical positions clearly .
for level of control i furnish a plant with bins and hoppers for each type of aggregate cement and fly ash .
provide separate scales for the aggregate and the cement .
if cement and fly ash are weighed in the same hopper ensure the cement is weighed first .
weigh material using an automated weighing and charging system with a printed ticket showing the following num .
project number num .
truck number num .
time batched num .
total yards batched per load num .
total yards batched per day num .
aggregate weights num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num .
aggregate moisture num .
cement and fly ash weight num .
admixtures and amount added and num .
water added at the plant .
num hauling placing and finishing equipment transport concrete in truck mixers truck agitators or nonagitating dump bodies .
provide an adequate number of vehicles to ensure a steady forward progress of the paver .
provide nonagitating truck bodies with a smooth mortar tight metal container capable of discharging the concrete at a controlled rate without segregation .
bed vibrators are required .
provide finishing machines in accordance with subsection num placing and finishing equipment .
do not use steel trowels steel floats or fresnos .
for texturing pavement in locations with a design speed limit less than or equal to num mph num kmh provide carpet drag brooming or tining equipment .
for texturing locations with a design speed limit greater than num mph num kmh provide tining equipment .
when employing carpet drag provide a dense indooroutdoor carpet material .
ensure equipment uses an independent work bridge with automatic line and grade control to produce a straight consistent longitudinal texture .
provide carpet material that will create an acceptable surface texture as directed by the engineer and does not roll or tear the surface .
for a broomed finish use a mechanical broom device that drags stiff bristles transversely across the surface .
for longitudinal tining use an independent work bridge with automatic line and grade control to produce a straight and consistent texture meeting the specified straightness .
ensure a maximum of in num mm spacing between tines and a tine width of num in to c in num mm to num mm .
for transverse tining provide a tine width of num in to c in num mm to num mm and a random spacing of tines .
provide random transverse tine spacing with a minimum spacing of num in num mm and a maximum spacing of num in num mm with no more than num percent of the spaces exceeding num in num mm .
use a transverse tining rack with a minimum width of num ft num m. portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num num dowel bar insertion a mechanical dowel bar inserter dbi may be used with approval of the engineer .
lubricate dowels in accordance with subsection num dowel joints .
submit details and specifications of the proposed slipform paver with bar inserter to the engineer at least num calendar days before the concrete pre paving conference .
ensure the slipform paver is specifically manufactured with dowel bar insertion capabilities .
assist the engineer with the inspection of the equipment relating to its condition and operation to determine if it is suitable to perform the work within the required tolerances .
approval of the use of the proposed inserter equipment will be based upon the information submitted and the engineers inspection of the equipment .
the conditions of approval include but are not be limited to num .
performing needed repair and maintenance work if required .
the engineer will then reinspect the slipform paver num .
requiring a manufacturers technical representative be present during the initial concrete placement to ensure proper equipment operation and num .
during the test section placement achieving satisfactory performance in meeting tolerances of final dowel position and concrete pavement smoothness as specified in the contract .
if the insertion performance during the test section is not satisfactory demonstrate to the engineer that corrective actions have been taken by placing an additional test section .
if the insertion performance is not satisfactory during the second test section the equipment will be rejected for use in placing dowel bars .
either propose a different slipform paver with dbi capabilities or use basket assemblies .
the department will not pay for delays and costs associated with the engineers rejection of proposed equipment .
provide a pachometer for use by the engineer .
ensure the pachometer is in good working order and available during all concrete placement operations and subsequent monitoring by the engineer .
the engineer and the materials program will review the quality and effectiveness of an individual pachometer .
if the results are not satisfactory provide a new pachometer .
provide a core drill and operator at no additional cost to the department .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num smoothness evaluation and correction provide a computerized profilograph or a class num inertial profiler .
ensure the class num inertial profiler output simulates a mechanical profilograph output using a nummile num km long blanking band template .
provide a numfoot num m straightedge designed specifically for evaluating smoothness .
provide a diamond grinder for corrective action .
ensure the grinder is a power driven selfpropelled machine with a minimum numfoot num m wide cutting head and an effective wheelbase of not less than num ft num m. ensure grinding equipment does not cause excessive raveling aggregate fracturing or spalling .
do not use bush hammers or other impact devices .
num construction num general before beginning any paving operations schedule a prepaving conference with the engineer at a mutually agreeable time to discuss the materials equipment and procedures .
num levels of control the extent of quality control and quality acceptance will be defined by the level of control which will be shown in the contract .
testing requirements for each level of control are shown in table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control .
num num num num num num level i level ii level iii level iv qc testing contractor coarse aggregate gradation num num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t moisture content num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day fractured faces num test min .
per num t num test min .
per numt num test min .
per num t num test min .
per num t num test min .
num test min .
fine aggregate gradationnum fineness modulus num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t num test per num t moisture content num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day watercementitious ratio num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day deleterious substances num ea .
gradation test min .
num ea .
gradation test min .
num test min .
num test min .
dowel bar placement num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day air contentslump at startup num and num min .
per num sy at startup num and num min .
per num mnum at startup num and num min .
per num sy at startup num and num min .
per num mnum at startup num and num min .
per num sy at startup num and num min .
per num mnum at startup num and num min .
per num sy at startup num and num min .
per num mnum texture straightness num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day num test min .
per day table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control portland cement concrete pavement num num table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control continued portland cement concrete pavement num level i level ii level iii level iv qa testing contractor gradation lots lot size num sy max .
lot size num mnum max .
lot size num sy max .
lot size num mnum max .
lot size num sy max .
lot size num mnum max .
lot size num sy max .
lot size num mnum max .
gradation num per sublot num per sublot num per sublot num per sublot qa testing wydot paved lots lot size num sy max .
num sublots num lot size num mnum max .
num sublots num lot size num sy max .
num sublots num lot size num mnum max .
num sublots num lot size num sy max .
num sublots num lot size num mnum max .
num sublots num na air content num per sublot num per sublot num per sublot num per num sy num per num mnum strength tests num set per sublot num set per sublot num set per sublot num set per num sy num per num mnum thickness num per sublot num per sublot num per sublot num per num sy num per num mnum num conduct air and slump tests on the first load then two times within one hour of startup and after any shutdown exceeding num minutes .
num num lot minimum in all cases .
num sublots per lot each comprising onethird the lot surface area .
num conduct gradation quality control testing during aggregate production .
num num weather and seasonal limitations provide adequate lighting when paving during dawn or dusk or at night .
do not place pavement during rainy weather .
ensure the concrete temperature is between num f and num f num c and num c during placement .
provide uniform cooling or heating of the aggregate to maintain the mix in this temperature range .
do not place concrete when the ambient temperature is below num f num c. cover and heat the pavement if the temperature drops below num f num c and ensure a minimum pavement surface temperature of num f num c for num hours and above num f num c for an additional num hours .
ensure fieldcured concrete test cylinders achieve num psi num mpa before removing covering and heating .
do not place pavement on frozen subbase or base .
do not place concrete when wind speeds exceed a sustained num mph num kmh unless approved by the engineer .
num laboratory and personnel requirements ensure laboratories performing mix design obtain and maintain aashto accreditation in accordance with subsection num laboratory .
provide field testing personnel in accordance with subsection num field testing laboratory and personnel requirements .
ensure that technicians testing concrete hold a current certification in concrete from the wyoming materials technician certification program .
ensure test equipment to determine compressive strength is calibrated annually by an independent agency using calibration equipment traceable to the national institute of standards and technology nist .
provide calibration documentation to the engineer .
before testing provide to the engineer documentation for all profilograph or inertial profiler operators that shows their experience or training .
prohibit personnel with no experience or prior training in equipment operation from pi testing .
num correlation for slump air content and unit weight tests use correlation testing performed by the technicians responsible for the quality control tests and quality acceptance tests to ensure results are free from equipment or procedural bias .
conduct correlation testing of aggregate gradation in accordance with subsection num correlation .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num num num slump air content and unit weight tests before placing concrete perform correlation of slump unit weight and air content tests on a batch of at least num ydnum num mnum .
ensure the differences do not exceed the values in table num slump air content and unit weight tests .
table num slump air content and unit weight tests portland cement concrete pavement num test value slump when num in num mm num in num mm slump when num in num mm num in num mm air content num unit weight num lbftnum num kgmnum if any one pair of the test results exceed the above limits perform an inspection calibration or both on the equipment review test procedures and repeat the correlation .
incorporate different equipment if the correlation fails a second time and conduct a third correlation .
continue this process until the cause for bias is identified and corrected .
perform additional correlation tests if either the contractor or the department suspects equipment or testing bias .
perform new correlation tests if new equipment or personnel department or contractor are introduced during testing .
num dispute resolution resolution of disputes will be conducted in accordance with subsection num resolving test discrepancies .
num proportioning portland cement concrete mixes num .
all levels of control .
a new mix design is required if there are any changes in material source admixtures cement type or fly ash source .
num num num num num the fine aggregate may be adjusted up to num percent by weight based on the total weight of aggregate without requiring a new mix design .
ensure the fine aggregate fraction does not exceed num percent of the total aggregate mass .
original mix designs may be resubmitted for later jobs as long as the mix design is not more than num years old .
adjust for changes in aggregate absorptions specific gravities or both since the original mix design was conducted .
ensure the coarse and fine aggregate gradations of the samples submitted with the mix design are within num percent on all specification sieves of those shown on the mix design and the fineness modulus of the fine aggregate is within num of that shown on the mix design .
replacement of num to num percent of cement with class f fly ash by mass is allowed for concrete pavement mix designs .
num .
levels of control i ii and iii .
determine the proportions of the materials including admixtures to be used for producing a workable mix having the required properties .
prepare a mix design in accordance with procedure no .
num contractor concrete mix design procedure of the materials testing manual .
design concrete pavement mixes using a cement content or combined cement plus fly ash content between num lbydnum and num lbydnum num kg mnum to num kgmnum .
for mixes incorporating fly ash ensure a minimum cement content of num lbydnum num kgmnum .
provide a mix within a slump range of num in to num in num mm to num mm for concrete placed using a slip form paver or a maximum of num in num mm num in num mm if using a water reducer for concrete placed in forms .
ensure an entrained air content of num to num percent and a water to cementitious materials ratio not to exceed num .
for level of control i a substitution of num to num percent of cement with class f fly ash is required .
provide a concrete pavement mix that meets a design numday flexural strength of num psi num mpa unless shown differently in the contract .
portland cement concrete pavement num num concrete strength testing requires the use of cylinders for compressive strength .
correlate the mix design compressive strength to flexural strength using procedure no .
num correlation of compressive strength to flexural strength of the materials testing manual .
submit the mix design for review to the engineer at least num calendar days before the start of concrete placement .
use the mix design only following approval from wydots materials program .
as part of the review process the department may run a test batch using the proposed mix design proportions .
document all concrete placements and include mixture proportioning and water to cementitious materials ratio .
num .
level of control iv .
request a mix design in accordance with procedure no .
num wydot concrete mix design procedure of the materials testing manual .
the department will complete two concrete mix designs at no cost to the contractor .
do not make changes in materials sources suppliers or mix proportions without the written approval of the department .
ensure the concrete meets the requirements of class a concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
num use of admixtures as applicable use stabilizers slump enhancers air enhancers and accelerators in accordance with section num of the materials testing manual .
num alkali silica reactivity asr asr testing is required when specified in the contract .
test concrete aggregate in accordance with aashto tnum astm cnum accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkalisilica reaction or when fly ash is used in the mix test in accordance with astm cnum standard test method for determining the potential alkali silica reactivity of combinations of cementitious materials and aggregate accelerated mortarbar method .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num conduct the aashto tnum astm cnum or astm cnum test using a combined sample of fine aggregate and coarse aggregate in the same proportions that will be used in the concrete mix design and using the cementitious material that is to be used in final concrete mix design .
ensure the test results indicate an expansion at num days from casting of num percent or less mitigate sources that indicate reactive through the use of a class f fly ash approved for asr mitigation in accordance with the materials testing manual lithium nitrate additive or both .
ensure the aashto tnum astm cnum and astm cnum tests are performed within num months before the submittal date .
the departments materials program maintains the option to conduct aashto tnum astm cnum and astm cnum testing for verification .
num quality control num general perform quality control testing .
ensure all concrete materials mixtures and constructed concrete pavements submitted for acceptance conform to the contract and either bring into compliance or reject outofspecification material .
ensure all concrete materials mixtures and constructed concrete pavements meet the requirement of the contract .
num quality control plan provide a quality control plan for projects involving level of control i or ii paving .
submit two copies of the quality control plan to the engineer at least num calendar days before the prepaving conference .
the engineer must accept and approve the quality control plan before concrete is placed .
the engineer will suspend operations when the quality control plan is not followed .
provide a quality control plan that contains the following information at a minimum num .
an organizational chart indicating lines of authority for quality control for all aspects of the concrete construction .
the names phone numbers and qualifications of the individuals responsible for the contractors num num num num num quality control program including the quality control supervisor and a listing of the certified technicians responsible for the quality control testing are to be shown .
num .
document general mix design and trial batch information including the organization that will perform the mix design and trial batch .
num .
description of the plan for collecting quality control samples .
num .
document specific products anticipated for use as onsite admixtures in the mix design .
include names and titles of personnel who have the authority to redose trucks on site .
num .
describe installation of dowel bar tie bar or both including the method of dowel placement type of supporting units method of anchorage and how the location and alignment is to be verified to meet tolerances .
num .
provide a description of curing equipment curing compounds to be used rates and procedures for application .
num .
describe the plan for control joint sawing and sealing with specific timing of both the sawing and sealing .
num .
describe the timing of smoothness testing equipment to be used equipment settings and equipment calibration data .
num control chart designate a display location for the quality control chart .
record quality control tests results on the control chart immediately upon completion of the test or receipt of the test results but no later than the end of the day on which the test is completed .
record the following parameters on the quality control chart num .
coarse aggregate gradation num .
fine aggregate gradation num .
fine aggregate fineness modulus num .
slump measurements portland cement concrete pavement num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num .
air content measurements and num .
water to cementitious materials ratio .
include the specification limits and each individual quality control test result .
ensure the control chart is displayed and accessible to the engineer at all times .
num smoothness quality control testing for levels of control i and ii test each lane of pavement as soon as possible to monitor placement .
summarize the pi of each days production and list defect areas .
cease paving operations if any days pi average exceeds three times the level specified until the cause can be determined and corrected .
provide the engineer with pi traces within num hours after the measurements are taken .
for level of control iii test each lane of pavement as soon as possible to monitor placement .
for continuous paved sections exceeding num ft num m test for pi and summarize the pi and list defect areas within num week of paving .
cease paving operations if the pi average exceeds three times the level specified until the cause can be determined and corrected .
provide the engineer with pi traces within num hours after the measurements are taken .
for paved lengths shorter than num ft num m verify paving quality using a straightedge as directed by the engineer .
num independent assurance the departments materials program will conduct an independent assurance program in accordance with the wydot independent assurance manual .
the differences between quality control and independent assurance tests will be evaluated to determine conformance with aashto or astm multilaboratory precision statements or cement and concrete reference laboratory proficiency sample results .
if biases are shown the department will conduct an immediate investigation .
num paving num general for level of control i provide a test section of between num ft and num ft num m and num m in length .
the test section is subject to all contract specifications .
employ paving practices as specified in this section .
during placement of the num test section the engineer and contractor must both be present to inspect paver operation .
correct any paver problems during the test section placement .
following placement of the test section shut down paving operations for the remainder of the day and the entire following working day to conduct a quality inspection of the placement .
the engineer and contractor must be present during inspection .
inspection will include review of dowel bar placement if applicable joint sawing texturing quality curing compound application and profile index for smoothness .
the profile index of the last num ft num m of the test section must meet the acceptance criteria of the contract with no corrective action .
provide an additional test section if num .
the previous test section does not meet the acceptance criteria num .
the paving operation is shut down for the season or num .
the equipment is changed modified or moved offsite .
begin fullscale paving operations only after an inspecification test section is placed and approved by the engineer .
use a slipform paver for level i pavements .
for small or irregular placements the engineer must agree that a slipform paver can not be used and must approve the new method .
ensure the full width paving of traffic lanes including shoulders is placed with one pass unless otherwise shown in the contract .
provide longitudinal joints for all types of paving on lane lines unless otherwise shown in the contract .
num mixing and delivery produce concrete for slipform pavement in a central mixing plant at or near the project site .
ensure the plant is of a size and capacity to provide a uniform flow of material at the paving machine .
replace blades that exceed wear limits .
ensure the flow of water is uniform and controlled so that a portion of the water is in the mixer ahead of the cement and aggregate .
ensure that all of the water is added to the batch within the first num seconds of the mixing time .
introduce admixtures in accordance with the mix design .
ensure mixing time is in accordance with the plant manufacturers recommendations but not less than num seconds .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num if the concrete consistency does not meet the requirements of aashto m num additional mixing time may be required to conform with this specification .
mixing time begins when all the dry materials are in the drum and ends with the start of the discharge .
during the charging and mixing phases run the mixer at operation speed .
do not exceed the manufacturers rated capacity of the mixer .
ensure nonagitated concrete is placed within num minutes from the time mixed and within num minutes of the start of mixing if truck agitators are used .
truck mixers and batch plants meeting the requirements of subsection num mixing and delivery will be allowed for projects less than one mile in length or urban streets .
provide batch weights for each load delivered .
provide copies of batch tickets to the engineer upon request .
num onsite mix adjustment do not make more than two onsite mix adjustments defined as the addition of water or an onsite admixture .
do not redose partial loads .
adjusting the mix onsite does not increase the allowable placing time requirements .
do not use air reducing admixtures .
employ additional mixing revolutions in accordance with the admixture manufacturers recommendations .
mix for at least num additional revolutions at mixing speed if water is added at the site .
adjust the mix onsite while the concrete is plastic and within num minutes of the start of initial mixing .
do not add water or other materials to concrete that has started to set .
document all redosing actions on the batch ticket .
num base preparation provide base or subgrade in accordance with section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material .
for projects that overlay concrete or plant mix pavements provide the required preparatory work as shown in the contract .
do not operate hauling units that cause rutting or displacement of the base or subgrade .
repair rutteddisplaced surfaces as directed by the engineer prior to concrete placement .
ensure the subgrade or base is uniformly moist when the concrete is placed unless waterproof subgrade or base course cover num num material is specified .
sprinkle the subgrade or base course if the surface becomes dry .
do not allow water to form mud or to pool .
num forming and grade line the engineer will provide grade hubs at a maximum of num ft num m on one line for paving control unless otherwise stated in the contract .
set grade lines from the hubs provided .
unless manual or hand placed and finished provide steel forms with sufficient base width to support the paving machine without settling more than c in num mm .
do not allow the form grade line to vary more than c in num mm in grade .
use steel stakes to secure the forms at a spacing not to exceed num ft num m. clean and oil forms before each use .
remove forms in accordance with subsection num forms .
num slipform method ensure the paver is automatically controlled from sensing devices for line and grade .
ensure concrete placement that results in a uniform distribution with minimal handling and segregation .
ensure placement is continuous and provides for an even flow rate .
ensure the slipform paver operation will spread consolidate grade and finish the pavement so that there is a minimal amount of hand finishing required .
do not use loaders or other equipment in front of the paver to spread the concrete .
repair damage to the subbase or base materials before placing concrete .
provide internal type vibrators operating from arms spaced not more than num ft num m apart across the width of the paver .
vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth .
operate vibrators between num to num impulses per minute .
provide electronic instrumentation for displaying the frequency of each vibrator to the operator .
vary the frequency with the rate of travel to result in a uniform density and air content .
suspend the paving operation when a vibrator becomes inoperable until repairs are made .
ensure vibrators automatically stop when the forward motion of the paver is stopped .
do not allow vibrators to come in contact with the reinforcing steel .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num ensure the previously placed pavement is at least num hours old or the concrete has reached num percent of the design strength as determined from field cured samples when paving adjacent to previously placed concrete .
ensure the paver is equipped with protective pads and does not damage or mar the surface .
num form method when formed paving is allowed under levels of control i ii and iii provide a selfpropelled mechanical spreader finisher and float .
a machine may be used that combines these operations if the desired results can be achieved .
ensure the spreading machine uniformly spreads the concrete between the forms as it is placed .
verify that the concrete finishing machine is equipped with an approved screed .
ensure the spreading or finishing machine has internal vibrators that vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth .
operate vibrators at between num to num impulses per minute .
do not allow vibrators to come in contact with the reinforcing steel or forms .
ensure vibrators stop when the finishing head or motion of the machine is stopped .
manual or hand placement and finishing methods will be permitted for small or irregular areas and level of control iv paving .
use hand held vibrators for internal vibration .
screed surface to meet the required cross section with an even and smooth surface .
num texturing provide a burlap drag on the surface before texturing of the surface is started .
begin texturing as soon as the finishing operations have been completed .
provide texture type in accordance with the contract .
unless otherwise shown in the contract provide transverse tining .
texturing options are as follows num .
carpetdrag .
where carpetdrag is used ensure the texture is parallel to the centerline and adequately straight to ensure no deviations exceeding num in num mm parallel to the centerline in any numfoot num m length .
ensure the surface texture is maintained and approved by the engineer on the test section .
shut down paving operations and clean the carpetdrag material at least once per num ydnum num mnum .
shut down paving operations and review texturing operations if texture depth or straightness does not meet specifications .
num num .
broomed .
where broomed surface is employed provide striations that are num in to c in num mm to num mm deep parallel to the transverse joints .
num .
tined .
where tining is employed provide tine grooves that are num num mm num in num mm deep .
ensure tining provides the specified grooves without undue surface damage .
hand tining may be done if approved by the engineer .
ensure transverse tining is parallel to the transverse joints .
ensure longitudinal tining is parallel to the paved direction and adequately straight to ensure no deviations exceeding num in num mm parallel to the centerline in a numfoot num m length .
ensure longitudinal tining stops at the edge of the traveled lanes .
shut down operations and determine a corrective measure in the presence of the engineer if tining straightness or dimensions are out of specification .
num curing apply a premium white impervious curing compound within num minutes after the surface texturing operations are completed .
apply the compound at the rate of num ftnumgal num mnuml .
apply the compound with a mechanical sprayer covering the entire width and sides of the pavement .
if delays occur in applying the curing compound apply a fine mist of water or an approved evaporation retardant to the surface .
continue misting until the curing compound has been applied .
do not spray the curing compound on free standing water .
apply curing compound to the edges of the pavement upon removal of the forms .
do not apply curing compound to exposed reinforcing steel .
if weather conditions do not allow uniform placement of the curing compound immediately place wet burlap followed by plastic sheeting over the pavement and halt paving operations until conditions improve .
num joints concrete pavement joints are designated as transverse expansion and weakened plane joints longitudinal weakened plane joints and construction joints .
ensure joints are placed in accordance with and are of the type shown in the contract .
unless otherwise specified construction joints will have tie or dowel bars .
secure tie bars by chairs or supports or insert them during the paving operation to ensure placement within num in num mm of the midpoint of the pavement portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num section .
insert the tie bars in drilled holes when the pavement is being placed adjacent to an existing concrete pavement as shown in the contract .
anchor with an approved epoxy resin grout .
provide sawed joints of num in num mm width for all liquid applied sealants .
do not chamfer edges unless elastomeric compression joint seals are used .
ensure joints are sawed in a timely manner .
remove and replace areas with uncontrolled cracking .
provide standby saws on the project site when work is in progress .
if using a conventional wet sawing method saw to a depth of tnum where t slab thickness where t is greater than num in num mm or to a depth of tnum where t is less than or equal to num in num mm .
if an earlyentry drycutting system is used perform the work in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as approved by the engineer .
saw joints to a depth of numt unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer .
replace saw blades in accordance with the manufacturers recommended frequency .
replace the antiraveling skid plate each time the saw blade is replaced .
end earlyentry saw cuts before free edges to avoid spalling .
ensure the longitudinal joints are cut on the lane and shoulder lines unless otherwise shown in the contract .
ensure transverse joints are perpendicular to centerline .
install joints at the spacing shown in the contract .
ensure construction joints are not within num ft num m of transverse weakened plane or expansion joints .
install a construction joint if concrete placement is interrupted for more than num minutes .
repair spalls or overcut joints .
construct transverse expansion joints as shown in the contract .
ensure the preformed expansion joint filler is continuous through the pavement .
furnish preformed expansion joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the width of one lane .
ensure the joint filler is held in a vertical position during concrete placement operations .
use an installing bar to secure the joint filler at the proper grade and alignment during placement and finishing of the pavement .
ensure there are no gaps or holes in the joint filler that would allow concrete to penetrate .
ensure expansion dowels are held in position parallel to the surface and the centerline .
secure the dowels with a device that assures a free movement of the num num num num num num num num slabs .
coat the expansion dowels with a lubricant as required by subsection num dowel bar release agent .
ensure the expansion sleeves fit the dowels tightly .
num dowel joints construct joints as shown in the contract .
mark the location of all joints .
center transverse saw cuts over the doweled joints .
place dowels using dowel supporting units baskets or use a mechanical dowel bar inserter .
ensure the basket assemblies are installed so that the dowel bars do not slip during concrete placement .
ensure no portion of the dowel support assembly crosses the transverse joint .
submit shop drawings to the engineer and the materials program num calendar days before use of the proposed dowel baskets and proposed method of anchoring .
the engineer will provide comments within num calendar days after submittal but final acceptance of the baskets and anchoring will be based on performance during concrete placement operations .
provide a basket manufacturer representative on the project during initial placement if requested by the engineer .
within num hours before placing concrete coat each dowel with a thin coating of an approved graphite lubricant or other approved release agent .
submit a numpint num l sample of release agent and the manufacturers product literature to the engineer at least num calendar days before the anticipated paving date .
apply the graphite lubricant or other approved release agent so that it will result in a thorough thin even covering of the entire dowel including ends .
clean and recoat with the approved lubricant any dowel bars that are contaminated with any foreign material or with an uneven coating before concrete placement .
securely anchor and construct the dowel bar assemblies to firmly hold all the dowel bars at a depth of tnum concrete thicknessnum parallel to each other and parallel to the pavement grade and alignment .
remove or cut spacer wires after the assemblies are staked in position .
ensure dowels are the only nonconcrete material crossing a joint .
place dowels in accordance with the following tolerances num .
horizontal location spacing between dowels or the edge of the slab num in num mm .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num .
vertical position distance from the slab midpoint to the center of the dowel num in num mm .
num .
skew from parallel horizontal and vertical planes measured from the end of the dowel to the end of the dowel d in num mm .
num .
joint location midpoint of dowel to actual sawn joint num in num mm .
suspend operations after the placement of the concrete pavement test section until the engineer has completed the dowel positioning evaluation .
the engineer will provide a written report of the evaluation within num working day after the initial placement .
core the concrete pavement placed in the test section as directed by the engineer as a part of the dowel placement tolerance verification .
core at least num bars .
provide additional cores throughout the project as directed by the engineer to confirm pachometer readings .
if the pachometer provides unsatisfactory results provide additional coring throughout the project to confirm dowel placement .
provide a work bridge for inspection of dowel and reinforcing steel placement at all times .
the engineer will randomly check dowel and rebar positioning during placement operations using the pachometer coring or other methods as required .
joints not meeting tolerances will be rejected .
replace rejected joints by sawing the slab full depth and replacing the joint and slab as shown in the contract .
no additional payment will be made by the department for replacement slabs and joints required due to joints not meeting the specified tolerances .
removed undamaged dowels may be reused if recoated with lubricant and inspected and approved by the engineer prior to reusage .
if baskets are used num ft num m of assembled baskets must be inplace and approved before paving .
stop paving at any time that less than num ft num m of assemblies are inplace and approved in advance of the concrete placement operation .
approval of the initial placement of basket assemblies will not constitute acceptance of the final position of the dowel bars .
suspend the paving operation if dowels are found to be installed improperly .
before the operation proceeds demonstrate to the engineer that the problem which caused the improper dowel positioning has been corrected .
num num num sealing joints ensure the joints comply to the contract dimensions before sealing .
install the joint sealant material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish copies of the manufacturers installation procedures and specifications to the engineer num calendar days before the joint sealing work is started .
provide a manufacturers technical representative on the project for the initial sealing operations for silicone and elastomeric sealing materials .
flush the joints after the final saw cut using wash water with sufficient pressure and volume to remove all of the cement dust and debris from the joints .
do not use water after initial flushing .
ensure the pavement and saw cuts are dry before the final cleaning is done .
coordinate the joint sawing cleaning and sealing operations so that other work does not contaminate or cause water to flow into the joints .
clean the joints with oil and moisture free compressed air .
ensure incompressible materials are removed from joint immediately before sealing .
seal joints within num hours after cleaning otherwise repeat cleaning immediately before sealing .
for any liquid applied sealant fill the joint until the sealant is c in num mm below the top surface of the pavement and ensure it does not spill over on the surface of the pavement .
if overfilled remove all material spilled on the surface of the concrete pavement and clean the pavement surface .
seal joints with selfleveling silicone sealant unless otherwise specified .
joint sealant procedures are as follows num .
silicone sealant .
use selfleveling silicone sealant .
place num in num mm backer rod at a minimum depth of num in num mm before installation of sealant .
install the joint sealant when the weather is dry and the ambient temperature is above num f num c. do not seal joints until the pavement is at least num days old .
use a poweroperated pressure system to install sealant .
provide finished sealant that does not vary by more thannum in num mm from the dimensions shown in the contract .
do not allow traffic on the pavement until the sealant has cured for at least num hours .
num .
elastomeric compression joint seal .
ensure the materials are certified by the manufacturer as to the shelf life and compliance with the specifications .
ensure the work is completed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation including placement machine portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num weather limitations concrete temperature width and depth of the saw cuts joint intersections and installation depth .
ensure the seal for each joint is a single piece for the full width and depth required for the joint unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
when more than one piece is used in a joint fasten the abutting ends securely and hold accurately to shape by stapling or other means approved by the engineer .
ensure the saw cut widening is done when the concrete temperature is between num f and num f num c to num c. provide seal at least num in num mm wide .
do not stretch seal during installation .
submit a numfoot num m sample of the seal from each lot with the lubricant to the engineer at least num calendar days before the sealing work is to be started .
submit computations that show the material will be in compression over the temperature ranges for the project location .
num .
hot poured elastic joint seal .
backer rod is optional .
if backer rod is used install a dinch num mm backer rod to a minimum depth of num in num mm .
do not seal joints until the pavement is at least num days old .
seal the joints when the weather is dry when the ambient temperature is above num f num c and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide finished sealant that does not vary by more than num in num mm from the dimensions shown in the contract .
ensure the equipment used to apply the sealant has a minimum melting capacity of num galhr num lhr is capable of heating the sealant mixture to at least num f num c and has a positive means of keeping the sealant mixture agitated and thoroughly mixed during sealing operations .
ensure the temperature of the sealant mixture does not exceed num f num c. additional sealant may be added to the mixing tank as long as the manufacturers recommended minimum temperature is maintained .
do not allow traffic on the pavement until the sealant has cured for at least num hour .
num smoothness before collecting data perform equipment verification in accordance with procedure no .
num profilograph verification or num inertial profiler verification of the materials testing manual .
obtain and use manufacturers num num num portland cement concrete pavement num recommended filter settings to simulate a mechanical profilograph output using a nummile num km long blanking band template .
the vertical displacement total for each wheelpath trace in units or counts of num in num mm outside a numinch num mm blanking band to obtain the pi .
perform verification daily or as recommended by the manufacturer .
test all paved lanes for smoothness .
calculate pi using a numinch num mm blanking band .
conduct pi testing across mainline bridge approaches and decks and analyze pi for all areas except the bridge deck .
exclude from pi testing all paving num .
falling under level of control iv num .
shoulders parking lanes medians width transitions acceleration or deceleration or turning lanes less than num ft num m in length num .
intersections with posted secondary direction speed num mph num kmh in the secondary traffic direction only num .
side roads num .
pavement on horizontal curves with centerline radius of curvature less than num ft num m and within num ft num m of drainage transitions and num .
manholes or inlets .
use a straightedge to test locations excluded from pi testing .
conduct straightedge testing in each wheel path over the entire paved surface length at num ft num m from the lane edge or centerline unless otherwise shown in the contract .
conduct pi testing and analysis for all other locations .
obtain profilograph traces in each wheel path measured at num ft num m from the lane edge or centerline unless otherwise shown in the contract .
operate profilograph at less than num mph num kmh .
operate lightweight inertial profiler according to manufacturers recommendations .
ensure machine settings and filter settings meet the requirements of subsection no .
num profilograph verification or num inertial profiler verification of the materials testing manual .
include a header showing machine settings for all pi traces .
the department may perform independent pi testing for verification .
if the verification testing results produce an average pi that differs by more than num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num plus or minus num percent over any section of at least num ft num m in length the department and contractor will attempt to resolve the differences .
submit a letter to the engineer outlining the agreed upon resolution within num working days of the meeting .
options for resolution include review of filter settings recalibration repeat testing or thirdparty referee testing .
if referee testing is mutually agreed upon the cost of the thirdparty testing will be paid by wydot if the contractors profiler results are confirmed by the thirdparty testing however the contractor will pay for the thirdparty testing if wydots profiler results are confirmed by the thirdparty testing .
num quality acceptance the engineer may isolate and reject obviously defective material and pavement without regard to testing procedures .
quality acceptance testing and pay adjustments are based on two different types of lots paved lots and gradation lots .
see table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control for more information .
provide gradation qa testing during concrete production .
gradation lots are independent of other paved lots .
for gradation lots there will be at least one lot in all cases with num to num sublots per lot .
collect and test aggregate gradation quality acceptance samples in accordance with table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control .
the engineer will determine when to collect gradation quality acceptance samples by using random numbers .
collect two samples .
test one sample for quality acceptance and the engineer may test the other sample for verification .
collect samples from the belt or conveyor in accordance with the materials testing manual and in presence of the engineer .
if using a mechanical sampler correlate with belt samples in accordance with the materials testing manual .
submit results of aggregate gradation quality acceptance tests to the engineer the day after sampling .
the engineer or an aashtoaccredited laboratory contracted by the department will verify aggregate gradation testing in accordance with subsection num verification .
the engineer will perform quality acceptance testing for air content strength and pavement thickness based on paved lots .
quality acceptance pay factors num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num apply to paved lots for levels of control i ii and iii .
test requirements and paved lot sizes are outlined in table num qcqa testing requirements versus level of control .
ensure paved lots are divided into num sublots with each comprising onethird of the surface area of the lot .
the wydot materials program or an independent third party under contract with the department will conduct strength tests .
thickness measurements are to be made in accordance with procedure no .
num measuring length of drilled concrete cores of the materials testing manual using pavement cores .
concrete with strength results failing to meet at least num percent of the design flexural strength will be rejected .
paved sections with thickness of less than the design thickness minus in num mm will be rejected .
num quality acceptance testing for air content strength and thickness num levels of control i ii and iii the department will perform acceptance tests on each paved lot of concrete based on independent samples .
provide the core samples for determining thickness .
any sublot with an entrained air content less than num percent will be rejected .
any paved lot with an average entrained air content of less than num percent will be rejected .
for strength tests the engineer will collect one set of cylinders per sublot with a set defined as three cylinders .
the compressive strength value for the sublot will be the average of the three cylinders test results .
this compressive strength value will then be converted to flexural strength by using the established correlation constant .
any sublot with a flexural strength less than num percent of design flexural strength will be rejected .
take cores at the locations marked by and in the presence of the engineer .
obtain one core per sublot for thickness determination .
num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num level of control iv quality acceptance for level of control iv paving is not based on paved lots .
test results will determine acceptance or rejection .
concrete with air content results below num percent will be rejected .
num quality acceptance testing for smoothness num pibased acceptance upon paving completion divide the project into segments as directed by the engineer and analyze each segment for pi .
define a segment as a continuous paved length that is num ft num m wide and approximately num mi num km long .
when shorter paved lengths less than or equal to num mi num km long occur include these with an adjacent segment to make a continuous segment of up to num mi long .
define paved lengths greater than num mi num km and less than num mi num km long as separate segments .
conduct quality acceptance pi testing for each segment in the presence of the engineer as soon as possible after completion of paving operations .
results of tests made without direct engineer supervision will not be accepted .
this testing will determine acceptability of the surface and pay factor adjustments when applicable .
additional corrective measures may be required .
provide pavement meeting pi acceptance requirements and mustgrind limits shown in table num mustgrind and pi acceptance levels .
num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num table num mustgrind and pi acceptance levels num grind all segments with pi exceeding this level in their entirety to a consistent finish .
num segments with pi in this range are acceptable with no pay adjustment .
num segments with pi meeting this level without corrective action are eligible for bonus .
apply corrective action to remove bumps and dips and to correct outof specification segments .
a segment is outofspecification if either wheel path exceeds the acceptance pi .
evaluate each individual pi trace or wheel path within the outofspecification segments to determine the areas where corrective actions are needed .
acceptance will be determined for each segment following successful completion of any necessary corrective actions .
num straightedgebased acceptance for locations tested by straightedge ensure surface deviations do not exceed num inch in num ft num mm in numm .
speed limit mph bumpsdips full segment grind pinum acceptance pinum bonus pinum s num num inch in num ft num mm in numm num num num num num s num interstate ramps num inch in num ft num mm in numm num num num num num s num num inch in num ft num mm in numm num num num num s num num inch in num ft num mm in numm num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num corrective actions make corrections using an approved grinding device or by removing and replacing the pavement .
grind the full lane width .
ensure the corrected area has uniform texture and appearance .
keep the beginning and end of the corrected area squared normal to centerline of the paved surface .
feather edges of corrected areas .
diamond groove all ground locations to match adjacent concrete pavement texture including tine spacing and straightness requirements .
num repair of defective pavement replace areas with uncontrolled cracking corner cracks rough areas that grinding does not correct or other unacceptable pavement sections .
replace full panels to the existing joints .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
concrete pvmt __ in by the square yard square meter based on the actual length placed and the lesser of the actual or specified width placed .
the length will be the linear measurement along the centerline of each roadway .
num .
portland cement and fly ash will be measured but will be considered incidental to the contract pay item concrete pvmt __ in .
num .
contractor testing by the lump sum .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest concrete pvmt __ in sy num ft sy contractor testing num ls ls ls num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num payment for contractor testing will be made at the contract lump sum bid price and as follows num percent of the lump sum bid price for contractor testing will be paid on the first monthly estimate num percent of the lump sum bid price will be paid on the monthly estimate for the month in which the testing begins and the final num percent will be paid upon completion of the contractor testing pay item .
additional compensation will not be made for additional testing required due to minor increases in quantities of contract items in this specification.changes in quantities meeting the changed condition requirements specified in subsection num contract amendment will be sufficient justification for further adjustment .
num payment adjustment num concrete pavement payment for concrete pavement will be determined as follows num .
levels of control i ii and iii .
apply the overall pay factor pf found in subsection num determination of pay factors for levels of control i ii and iii for each paved lot to determine the pay for that lot in accordance with the following lot pay pf lsp up where pccp pay total pay for concrete placement pf individual pay factor lsp paved lot size square yard up unit contract price for the concrete pavement the total project payment will then be determined by summing all lot payments .
num .
level iv .
no pay factor adjustment applies .
payment will be based on the unit contract price .
num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num aggregate gradation all levels of control an independent lump sum pay adjustment for aggregate gradation will be made .
the total gradation pay adjustment will be made by summing all individual gradation adjustments total gradation adjustment pag where pag for each gradation lot determined as defined in subsection num determination of pay adjustment for aggregate gradation .
num smoothness all levels of control an independent lump sum pay adjustment for smoothness bonus will be made .
the total smoothness pay adjustment will be made by summing all individual segments smoothness adjustment segsum as defined in subsection num determination of pay adjustment for smoothness .
num joint sealant installation quality all levels of control an independent lump sum pay adjustment for liquid joint sealing will be made .
a num penalty will be applied to each transverse joint and any numfoot num m length of a longitudinal joint with more than num percent of its length overfilled .
a summation of all joints falling under this penalty will comprise this pay adjustment .
num determination of pay factors for levels of control i ii and iii pay factor adjustments are based on air content strength and thickness .
pay factors will be determined per paved lot for each variable then combined for the final assessed pay factor for the lot as described in the following list .
the engineer will determine pay factors on each paved lot as follows num num .
determine the lot mean for strength and thickness .
the lot mean is determined as σxn where σ summation x individual sublot test value n total number of test values round strength mean to nearest num psi num mpa .
round thickness mean to nearest num in num mm .
num .
determine individual pay factors calculate pay factors for each variable as follows num air content pfa pfa num num num acnum num acnum num acnum where acnum air content for sublot num in percent etc .
if any sublot acn num use acn num in equation .
max pfa num sublots with ac num percent will be rejected and not included in this calculation .
lots with average air content of less than num percent will be rejected .
num strength pfs the strength pay factor for any lot is based on the ratio of the mean flexural strength of the concrete supplied to the project and the design flexural strength .
portland cement concrete pavement num num pfs num num scsd where sc cc csnum cc established correlation constant per subsection num proportioning portland cement concrete mixes cs mean num day compressive strength of delivered concrete sd design flexural strength max pfs num if the mean flexural strength of any sublot is less than num percent of the design flexural strength the sublot will be rejected .
num thickness pft the thickness pay factor depends on the lot mean thickness and the design thickness .
thickness pay factors are determined using the following equation for tc td pft num num td tc for tc td pft num num tc td where tc as constructed measured lot mean thickness inches td design thickness shown in the contract inches .
max pft num if any sublot thickness is less than design thickness max pft num .
reject if pft num .
for individual sublots where tc td the sublot will be rejected if tc td num .
num portland cement concrete pavement num num .
determine overall pay factor pf per paved lot the pay factor for each paved lot will be assessed as follows if pfs pft num and pfa num then pf pfs pft num .
if either pfs pft num num or pfa num then pf minimum of pfs pft num and pfa .
num determination of pay factors for aggregate gradation aggregate for all levels of control are subject to pay factors as determined by subsection num acceptance of aggregate with a maximum allowed pay factor of num .
the engineer will determine gradation pay factors pfgc pay factor for coarse aggregate gradation and pfgf pay factor for fine aggregate gradation in accordance with subsection num acceptance of aggregate with a maximum value of num allowed .
pay adjustments will then be applied based on gradation lots .
gradation lots are independent of other quality acceptance paved lots .
the gradation lot size will be the same for coarse and fine aggregate and is referred to as lsg .
a minimum of five test results and a maximum of seven will be required to represent a lot .
the total lot size can not represent more than num sy of concrete placed .
for each gradation lot the pay adjustment will be as follows pag pac paf where pag pay adjustment for the gradation lot pac num up c pfgc num lsg paf num up f pfgf num lsg and num portland cement concrete pavement num num num pac pay adjustment for coarse aggregate paf pay adjustment for fine aggregate up concrete pavement unit price dollars c percent coarse aggregate of total aggregate in mix design f percent fine aggregate of total aggregate in mix design pfgc pay factor for coarse gradation for lot max num pfgf pay factor for fines gradation for lot max num lsg gradation lot size in square yards num determination of pay adjustment for smoothness pay adjustments apply only to locations accepted based on pi and are assessed per pavement segment as defined in subsection num quality acceptance testing for smoothness .
segments with no corrective action may be awarded a bonus based on the average pi of both wheel paths within the segment .
a pay potential will be applied for each segment with pi meeting the bonus pi prior to corrective actions in accordance with table num pay potential per segment .
table num pay potential per segment corrections in segment bonus for segment none num spec pitest pi grinding required no bonus num num num portland cement concrete pavement num where spec pi is the lower limit of the acceptance pi .
test pi is the pi average of both wheel paths for the segment .
test pi must meet bonus pi level to be eligible .
maximum pay potential per segment num .
the engineer will determine the sum of all segment pay potentials referred to as segsum .
the engineer will determine overall smoothness pay adjustment using table num overall smoothness pay adjustment .
table num overall smoothness pay adjustment iss pay adjustment num num num segsum num num num iss num segsum num num where iss is the percentage of all segments that meet acceptance criteria prior to corrective action minimum pay adjustment num .
concrete pavement num num section num concrete pavement repair num description this section describes the requirements for removing and replacing existing concrete pavement slabs full depth repair repairing spalled locations in concrete pavement partial depth repair and grinding and texturing the surface of existing concrete pavement .
num materials num slab replacement provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num dowel bars and tie bars num epoxy resin grout num fly ash num joint materials num portland cement num water num num spall repair provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection concrete patching material num curing materials num joint materials num water num provide bonding agents in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations of the spall repair material .
num num num num num concrete pavement repair num num equipment num slab replacement provide equipment in accordance with section num structural concrete including a vibrating screed unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
provide a numfoot num m computerized californiatype profilograph or class num inertial profiler in accordance with subsection num grinding and texturing if there are repair locations that include four or more contiguous slabs to be replaced .
num spall repair provide the following num .
a concrete saw with a saw cut depth of at least num in num mm num .
a milling head capable of stopping at a preset depth pneumatic grinding tools hand tools or combination capable of removing concrete num .
jack hammers no larger than the nominal numpound num kg class num .
a sandblaster and an air compressor able to produce oilfree compressed air num .
a mobile continuous mixer or a small portable motordriven batch type mixer at the placement site that accurately proportions materials for the mixture discharges a uniform mixture and maintains a continuous steady flow of mixture and num .
if necessary a scale accurate to the nearest pound kilogram and other equipment to charge the mixer with the correct proportions of materials .
num grinding and texturing provide grinding equipment with diamond blades mounted on a minimum numfoot num m wide head mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing concrete pavements .
num num num num concrete pavement repair num num provide an approved and calibrated numfoot num m computerized california type profilograph with a trusstype frame or an approved class num inertial profiler .
ensure that the computer num .
smooths the profile with a third order butterworth filter with a cutoff wavelength of num in num mm num .
generates a profile index with a num in num mm blanking band num .
allows adjustments of the bump threshold to identify corrective action locations and num .
does not recenter the blanking band more often than once every num mile num km .
num construction num general repair damage caused by the work to existing concrete pavement reinforcing bars and joints outside the limits of the slab replacement spall repair or grinding and texturing area at no additional cost to the department .
haul dispose of and furnish waste locations for removed concrete pavement excavated material and slurry from grinding operations .
num slab replacement num general follow the weather limitations in subsection num weather limitations .
use the approved mix design and place concrete pavement that achieves a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa in num hours .
num mix design submit the following to the engineer for approval at least num calendar days before the placing concrete pavement num num num num concrete pavement repair num num num num num .
the proposed mix design meeting requirements for class a concrete and the specified early strength gain and designating proportions of all materials num .
sufficient quantities of materials to trial batch a confirmation mix at the materials laboratory in accordance with subsection num mix design and num .
a completed concrete mix design form enum available in the materials testing manual documenting the project number manufacturer source type and brand for the materials .
num replacement procedures sawcut fulldepth the existing concrete slabs and partial slabs for removal .
cut along the existing longitudinal and transverse joints to remove fulllength fullwidth slabs and along an engineerdesignated outline for partial slabs .
for transverse joints with existing load transfer dowel bars cut fulldepth through the dowel bars .
alternatively cut down to the top of the dowel bars only in which case the bars may be reused in their present position if they remain undamaged and firmly embedded in the undisturbed slab .
in areas specified or determined by the engineer for excavation and backfill level and consolidate existing subgrade and base material to num percent of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num for subgrade and aashto tnum for base material .
mix place and cure concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete .
ensure at least num days concrete curing time before sealant placement unless otherwise recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
seal longitudinal and transverse joints for concrete slab replacements with silicone joint sealant hotpoured elastic sealant or preformed elastomeric compression sealant in accordance with section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks .
use silicone joint sealant if the sealant type is not specified .
num surface tolerance do not leave deviations in the traveled way greater than num inches in num ft num mm in num m when tested by a string line or straightedge .
num num num concrete pavement repair num num num if there are repair locations that include four or more contiguous new slabs measure the surface smoothness with a numfoot num m computerized california type profilograph or class num inertial profiler .
grind smooth deviations that exceed mustgrind values in accordance with table num mustgrind and pi acceptance levels .
table num mustgrind and pi acceptance levels num num num num concrete pavement repair num num num speed limit mph must grind bumps acceptance pi s num num in num mm in num ft num m num inmi num mmkm num s num num in num mm in num ft num m num inmi num mmkm num s num num in num mm in num ft num m num inmi num mmkm s num num in num mm in num ft num m num inmi num mmkm num repair of new slabs grind smooth or remove and replace new slabs that do not meet the surface tolerance specification .
replace areas with uncontrolled cracks corner cracks rough areas not corrected by grinding or other unacceptable pavement sections .
remove full panels to existing joints .
provide replacement panels of the same quality and dimensions specified .
num spall repair num general at least num calendar days before its expected use give to the engineer enough patching material including the extension aggregate for a num ft³ num m³ batch .
also provide the material safety data sheet .
do not place patching material if the air temperature is below num ºf num ºc or expected to fall below num ºf num ºc within num hours of placement .
use the bonding material and bonding procedure for the concrete patch recommended by the patching material manufacturer .
ensure the presence of the manufacturers technical representative for the initial placement .
num prepare for patching only those areas that can be completed and sufficiently cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to open to traffic by nightfall the same day .
do not open repaired areas to traffic before the repair material obtains a compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
if a mobile continuous mixer is used calibrate the proportioning equipment for each component of the mixture in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer may accept the previous calibration and require verification checks only at the settings indicated by the previous calibration .
during calibration checks and normal use operate proportioning equipment at the speed recommended by the manufacturer .
when a portable batch type mixer is used provide measuring devices and other necessary equipment .
num repair procedures the engineer will designate spall repair areas .
saw the outline of each area to a depth of at least num in num mm .
remove unsound concrete down to sound concrete or to a depth of at least num in num mm .
prepare square or rectangular repair areas at least num in num mm wide and long of uniform depth and with vertical sides .
after removing unsound concrete clean exposed surfaces by sandblasting and air blasting .
apply bonding material to exposed surfaces of the repair area in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and immediately place and consolidate patching material .
reapply bonding material if it cures and hardens before placement of the patching material .
place patching material continuously in each repair area until the entire area is finished to grade and sloped to match the adjacent pavement surface .
do not add water to the patching material surface until the material hardens .
cure in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if the repair area abuts or spans a working joint or crack continue the joint or crack through the repair .
this can be accomplished by inserting a temporary strip in the joint position before placing the patching material .
reestablish longitudinal and transverse joints throughout all repairs .
do not remove temporary insert material until num hours after patching .
after repairs have cured replace joint sealant in transverse and longitudinal joints and random working joints disturbed by patching in accordance with section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks .
num num concrete pavement repair num num num num num num num do not open repaired areas to traffic before examination by the engineer .
remove and replace any portion of the repair with cracks or inadequate bonding at no additional cost to the department .
num surface tolerance do not leave deviations in the traveled way greater than num inches in num ft num mm in num m when tested by a string line or straightedge by the engineer .
grind smooth or remove and replace spall repair locations that do not meet the surface tolerance specification .
num grinding and texturing num general submit a detailed grinding plan to the engineer for approval before starting work .
include a sequence to produce the desired surface ride qualities with the least grinding depth throughout the project .
grind in the longitudinal direction .
grind the entire surface width specified until the pavement surfaces on both sides of all transverse joints and random cracks are on the same plane and meet surface tolerance requirements .
use grinding equipment that does not strain or damage concrete pavement .
do not use grinding and texturing equipment that causes excessive raveling aggregate fracturing spalling or disturbance of the transverse or longitudinal joints .
leave neat rectangular ground areas with a uniform surface appearance uniformly tapered to adjoining pavement .
perform additional grinding as necessary to extend the ground area so that lateral limits of grinding are at a constant offset distance from and parallel to the nearest pavement edge .
feather vertical edges outside the area to be ground .
do not cause adverse drainage by grinding .
grind mainline pavement to produce a skidresistant surface consisting of grooves from num in to c in num mm to num mm wide spaced from num in to c in num mm to num mm apart and approximately num in num mm deep relative to the tops of the adjacent ridges .
remove grinding slurry and residue continuously and immediately leave pavement clean and dispose of slurry as approved by the engineer .
num num num num num num num concrete pavement repair num num num num num average profile index and corrective action provide a computerized profilograph or a class num inertial profiler .
ensure the class num inertial profiler output simulates a mechanical profilograph output using a nummile num km long blanking band template .
before use on the project and periodically thereafter check the calibration of the profilograph in the presence of the engineer .
before checking the calibration provide a document indicating the system specific measurement options for the profilograph to the engineer .
to check the horizontal scale run the profilograph over a known distance and scale the results on the profilograph trace .
to check the vertical scale put a block of known thickness under the profile wheel and scale the result on the profilograph trace .
correct the calibration as necessary before using the profilograph .
the engineer may spot check or retest areas with another profilograph or class num inertial profiler .
if a discrepancy exists determine the cause and reprofile the areas as requested by the engineer .
after grinding test surface roughness with a profilograph .
take profile traces at a distance of num ft num m from and parallel to the outside edge of the traveled way and num ft num m from the centerline joint .
in operation move the profilograph longitudinally along the pavement surface no faster than num mph num kmh .
calculate the profile index inmi mmkm as the summation of the individual vertical displacements outside of a num in num mm opaque blanking band centered on the profile trace .
convert the accumulated vertical displacement total for the length of the trace to inmi mmkm to obtain a profile index .
for purposes of calculating the average profile index and where additional pavement grinding is required determine the average profile index for each num mi num km segment for each lane separately and average both parallel traces within that lane .
combine segments that are less than num mi num km in length with an adjacent num mi num km segment for purposes of evaluation .
within num hours of testing give the engineer computergenerated profilograph or class num inertial profiler traces and printouts of the average profile index for each num mi num km segment evaluated along with printouts for areas with deviations greater than num inches in num ft num mm in num m num num concrete pavement repair num num num num num num num num surface tolerance leave the concrete pavement surface with an average profile index of num in mi num mmkm or less on travel lane pavement segments grind smooth deviations greater than num inches in num ft num mm in num m as determined by the profilograph .
ensure the concrete pavement surface meets mustgrind and profile index acceptance levels in accordance with table num must grind and pi acceptance levels .
in the transverse slope of the pavement do not leave deviations in the traveled way greater than num inches in num ft num mm in num m when tested by a string line or straightedge placed perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
regrind and texture the concrete pavement until all areas meet the surface tolerance requirements .
retest corrective action locations for surface tolerance and submit results to the engineer .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
conc pvmt spall repair by the square foot square meter or the cubic foot cubic meter measured in the plane of the existing concrete pavement surface .
num .
conc slab replacement by the square yard square meter measured parallel to the paved surface .
num .
grindtexture conc pvmt by the square yard square meter of pavement surface ground .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num concrete pavement repair pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest conc slab replacement sy m² num ft num m sy m² conc pvmt spall repair sf cf m² m³ num ft num ft num m num m sf cf num m² num m³ grindtexture conc pvmt sy m² num ft num m sy m² num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
crushed base in accordance with section num aggregate subbase base courses and bed course material .
num .
sealing for working joints or cracks in accordance with section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks .
num concrete pavement repair num num section num dowel bar retrofit num description this section describes the requirements for installing epoxycoated dowel bars into existing transverse joints in concrete pavement .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection bondbreaking compound num caulking filler num chairs num dowel bar retrofit concrete num dowel bars and tie bars num dowel bar end caps num foam core board num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following num .
a concrete saw capable of cutting at least three slots simultaneously at least num in num mm deep num .
jack hammers no larger than the nominal numpound num kg class num .
a sandblaster and an air compressor able to produce oilfree compressed air num .
a mobile continuous mixer or a small portable motordriven batch type mixer at the placement site that accurately proportions materials for the mixture discharges a uniform mixture and maintains a continuous steady flow of mixture and num .
if necessary a scale accurate to the nearest pound kilogram and other equipment to charge the mixer with the correct proportions of materials .
num num num num dowel bar retrofit num num construction num general submit a sample of each of the following items to the engineer for approval at least num calendar days before use num .
end caps num .
chair devices num .
caulking filler num .
foam core board filler num .
bond breaking compound and num .
enough patching material including the extension aggregate for a num ft³ num m³ batch .
provide sawcut dowels free of burrs or projections that restrict movement with tightfitting end caps .
repair damage to epoxy coating in the field .
place dowel bar retrofit concrete in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that samples acquired during production achieve a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa in num hours .
conduct quality acceptance sampling of the patching material at a minimum frequency of one slump test per num dowels placed and one set of three strength tests per num dowels placed .
any slump test exceeding num in num mm will be cause for rejection of all material placed since the previous slump test .
test each set of three numinch num mm cylinders for strength at between num and num hours after molding .
if the average of the three test results is less than num psi num mpa the num dowels the sample represents will be rejected .
this will include num joints before and num joints after the location of sampling .
test locations will be as directed by the engineer .
if a mobile mixer is used provide separate bins for cement fine aggregate and extension aggregate .
calibrate the proportioning equipment for each component of the mixture in the presence of the engineer .
during calibration checks and normal use operate proportioning equipment at the speed recommended by the manufacturer .
when a portable batch type mixer is used provide measuring devices and other necessary equipment .
num num num num dowel bar retrofit num num num test section provide a test section consisting of complete dowel bar retrofit to include at least num retrofits at a location determined by the engineer before start of major operations .
twentyfour hours after completing the test section take three numinch num mm diameter fulldepth cores at locations determined by the engineer to assess the installation .
take and inspect cores in the presence of the engineer .
ensure proper dowel placement and no voids around the bar circumference .
backfill core locations using the approved dowel bar retrofit concrete .
make visual observations of the backfill concrete and inspect for cracking .
after obtaining the engineers approval begin production operations and proceed on a performance basis .
num installation retrofit only existing type a weakened plane transverse joints with dowels .
cut slots in the pavement parallel to the centerline of the roadway to place the center of the dowel at middepth in the concrete slab .
simultaneously cut at least three slots per wheel path along the transverse joint or crack or as approved .
if necessary make multiple cuts in the slot parallel to the centerline to properly remove material .
collect and dispose of slurry and residue at an approved location .
close the lane if slots are sawn too far ahead of the operation and the fins formed by the saw cuts begin to break and become a traffic hazard or if traffic begins to cause corner breaks from cracks that develop between slots and the longitudinal shoulder or center line joint .
reopen the lane after the damaged areas are repaired and the retrofitting of the dowel bars is completed .
repair corner breaks or cracks caused by traffic on unfinished slots at no additional cost to the department .
use a numpound num kg jack hammer when breaking the concrete out of the slot if the numpound num kg hammer damages the pavement .
before installing dowel bars sandblast and clean the slot of saw slurry and loose concrete .
if the crack width of the transverse contraction joint equals or exceeds c in num mm fill the joint on the bottom and the sides of the slot with silicone .
minimize the amount of silicone on the side and bottom surfaces of the slot .
coat bars with a bond breaking compound place in the approved dowel chair and place as follows num num num num dowel bar retrofit num num num num num .
to the depth specified num .
parallel to the centerline num .
at the middle of the slot num .
with the midpoint of the dowel within num in num mm of the centerline of the transverse joint and num .
parallel to the pavement surface ensure that the bar does not deviate more than num in num mm from a plane parallel to the pavement surface when measured along the length of the bar .
do not allow movement of the dowel bar in the chair during placement of the grout .
the engineer will reject chairs that allow movement of the bar .
ensure that dowel bar sleeves do not collapse during construction .
place foam core board filler at the middle of the dowel to maintain the transverse joint or crack .
fit the board tightly around the dowel and edges of the slot .
cut or remove existing joint sealant to accommodate the board tabs which stabilize the board during placement of patching material .
place the board so that it remains vertical and tight against all edges during placement of the patching material .
fill the slot with the installed dowel bar with caps chairs foam core board and silicone in place with an approved patching material .
thoroughly moisten all surfaces of the slot immediately before filling .
do not allow standing water in the slot .
remove excess water with compressed air .
thoroughly consolidate the dowel bar retrofit concrete in the slot and around the dowel bar with a vibrator of appropriate size and ensure there are no voids .
trowel the material toward the hardened concrete to prevent voids at the edges of the patch .
cure the surface of the filled area immediately after finishing in accordance with the patching material manufacturers recommendations .
maintain joints by sawcutting the surface within num hours of placing the grout .
seal transverse contraction joints and cracks in accordance with section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks .
repair or replace damaged and nonfunctioning dowels at no additional cost to the department .
during production if cores indicate incomplete consolidation of the patching material under or around the dowel bars stop placement and take corrective action .
obtain the engineers approval before restarting .
if num num num num num num dowel bar retrofit num num cracks develop in the dowel bar retrofit concrete or if there is any separation or debonding between the dowel bar retrofit concrete and the existing concrete remove and replace at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure dowel bar retrofit by each dowel installed including dowels in the test section .
the department will pay as follows num num num dowel bar retrofit pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest dowel bar retrofit ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num description this section describes the requirements for removing existing joint sealant and sawing cleaning and sealing existing concrete pavement joints and random concrete cracks .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection backer rod num joint materials num num equipment provide if applicable to the work specified the following num .
a plow ripping tooth wire brush saw or other equipment for removing existing sealant from joints and cracks num .
powerdriven saws with diamond blades num .
high pressure water blaster to clean sawed joints and random cracks num .
a poweroperated pressure system for silicone joint sealing num .
automatic installation machine for preformed elastomeric compression sealant num .
air compressor in accordance with subsection num cleaning drying and num .
melting machine in accordance with subsection num sealing .
num num num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num num num construction num general seal joints and cracks when air and pavement temperatures are at least num ºf num ºc unless the sealant manufacturer requires a higher temperature and the weather and pavement are dry .
do not place silicone sealant if the engineer determines a risk of impending rain .
remove all existing sealant from sealed joints .
do not use equipment that causes spalling of concrete pavement surface beyond the limits of the proposed joint widths .
repair damage to the pavement such as spalling cracking breaking or overcutting caused by the work operations at no additional cost to the department .
do not allow traffic on freshly sealed joints for num hours unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num sawing num general for joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement completely remove the plant mix pavement from the concrete face during sawing .
remove raveled edges in the plant mix pavement with the saw cut .
num silicone sealant saw transverse joints longitudinal joints expansion joints and random cracks to the widths and depths specified .
if the engineer determines that the existing joint can be cleaned satisfactorily without sawing eliminate sawing and use the existing joint width .
for joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement saw the plant mix pavement adjacent to the concrete pavement to a width of num in num mm and a depth of in num mm .
num num num num num num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num num num num preformed elastomeric compression sealant saw when the concrete temperature is from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
to accommodate the designed sealant size ensure that the final joint width and depth are in accordance with the sealant manufacturers recommendations .
num hotpoured elastic sealant saw cracks to at least c in num mm larger than the initial width and to a depth of three times the final width .
for joints between concrete pavement and plant mix pavement saw the plant mix pavement adjacent to the concrete pavement to a width of num in num mm and a depth of num in num mm .
num cleaning thoroughly clean each sawed joint or random crack and the adjacent pavement surface immediately after sawing with a water wash not exceeding num psi num num kpa .
remove cement dust and debris .
after the initial cleaning do not use more water to clean or prepare for sealing .
immediately before placing joint sealant sandblast and clean the sawed joints and random cracks with oilfree compressed air .
ensure that the joints and cracks are free of dirt dust moisture or other foreign material that may prevent bonding of the joint sealant .
the engineer will inspect and approve prepared sawed joints and random cracks before allowing joint sealing .
space the final cleaning far enough behind the joint sawing to avoid contaminating cleaned joints and cracks with residual water from sawing .
on uphill grades prevent residual water from flowing into previously cleaned and sealed joints and random cracks .
reclean joints and cracks contaminated by sawing .
num sealing joints and cracks num silicone sealant place backer rod in the joints and random cracks as specified .
maintain the backer rods placement during sealant application .
place the rods to maintain the specified depth of sealant for all joints and cracks .
to maintain the proper num num num num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num num num num num num depth of sealant at transverse and longitudinal joint intersections cut one rod and butt against the intersecting rod or notch the rods and overlap maintain the cut rods placement before and during sealing .
configure and place the backer rods to retain the silicone reservoir when using selfleveling silicone .
if the silicone is not retained modify the rod placement or use a nonsag product .
use a masking tape bond breaker between the sealant and the joint filler on type e expansion joints .
when using nonsag silicone sealant apply and tool the sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure the presence at the site of the manufacturers technical representative during the initial sealing .
relative to the surface of the adjacent concrete pavement place the sealant to obtain a finished sealant surface num in num in num mm num mm deep .
remove and replace sealant outside allowed tolerances at no additional cost to the department .
num preformed elastomeric compression sealant submit sealant design computations indicating that the proposed material will be in compression over the temperature range from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc along with the sealant manufacturers recommendations for joint or random crack width and depth .
perform work in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations including weather limitations concrete temperature width and depth of saw cuts joint intersection and installation depth .
at least num calendar days before starting sealing submit the lubricant and a numfoot num m sample of the sealant to the engineer .
use a single fullwidthandfulldepth piece of material for each joint or crack unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
when using more than one piece in a joint fasten abutting ends securely and hold them accurately to shape by stapling or other approved methods .
provide the seal at least num in num mm wide .
machineplace the seal and do not stretch during installation .
num num num num num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num num num num num num hotpoured elastic sealant seal flush with the existing pavement surface .
apply sealant to the joint or crack from the bottom up with an applicator that allows observation of the sealant flow at the applicator nozzle .
remove overflow sealant from the adjacent concrete surface .
do not use squeegees or wands with a cup .
when sealing cracks use backer rod c in num mm larger than the sawed crack .
place backer rod to the bottom of the sawcut .
recess the sealant below the pavement surface num in num mm .
the engineer will accept hotpoured sealant in accordance with subsection num crack seal acceptance except that units will be in lf linear feet .
the linearfoot units will also apply to subsection num lot sizes sampling and testing .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure sealing cracks conc pvmt and sealing joints conc pvmt by the foot meter of each random crack or joint sealed .
the department will pay as follows num num num num sealing existing concrete pavement joints and cracks num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest sealing cracks conc pvmt ft m num ft num m ft m sealing joints conc pvmt ft m num ft num m ft m num num determination of pay factor and pay adjustment the engineer will determine the pay factor and pay adjustment for hotpoured elastic sealant in accordance with subsection num determination of pay factor and pay adjustment .
num num num rumble strips section num rumble strips num description this section describes the requirements for cutting rumble strips in plant mix pavement and concrete pavement .
num materialsvacant num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following num .
for portland cement concrete pavement provide a grinder with carbidetipped grinding drum .
for plant mix pavement provide a mill with steel milling head .
ensure equipment produces a smooth cut in accordance with the corrugation pattern specified .
num .
a power broom or sweepervacuum .
num construction num general repair or recut misaligned rumble strips .
repair or replace damaged pavement at no additional cost to the department .
before opening the adjacent lane or roadway to traffic each day remove waste material resulting from the work .
num shoulder rumble strips align the shoulder rumble strip where specified and as verified by the engineer .
demonstrate to the engineer on an initial test section of num ft num m that the equipment and methods provide the desired rumble strip and surface inside each depression without tearing or snagging the plant mix pavement .
if the results do not meet the contract requirements use new equipment or methods or make necessary adjustments repair or replace the test section as directed at no additional cost to the department .
num num num num num num num rumble strip sections align the group of rumble strip sections without deviation greater than num in num mm from the longitudinal reference line .
do not install before the engineer verifies the alignment .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
rumble strips asphalt or rumble strips concrete by the mile kilometer longitudinally along the edge of travel way for each affected shoulder .
num .
rumble strip section by the each .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest rumble strips asphalt mi km num mi num km num mi num km rumble strips concrete mi km num mi num km num mi num km rumble strip section ea ea ea ea ea ea num num num rumble strips num num division num structures num section num structural steel num description this section describes the requirements for structural steel .
num materials provide and use materials in accordance with the following material subsection automatically endwelded studs num bolts and fasteners other than highstrength num bronze bearing plates num elastomeric bearing pads num epoxy resin grout num galvanized coating num highstrength anchor bolts num highstrength bolts nuts and circular washers num nonshrink grout num paint num preformed fabric pads num sheet metal num steel castings num steel pins and rollers num steel pipe num structural steel num welding materials num provide blue paint for the final field coat .
use structural carbon steel .
provide a feeler gauge with each lot of load indicator washers .
num equipmentvacant num num num num num structural steel num num num num num num structural steel num num num construction num fabrication num general use temperatureindicating crayons to determine temperatures of materials .
num fabricator certification ensure that steel fabricators supplying structural components for bridges are certified under the american institute of steel construction quality certification program at the time of contract letting and that the certification remains in effect through fabrication .
num shop drawings do not fabricate steel before the state bridge engineer approves shop drawings .
ensure that the fabricator gives shop drawings to the state bridge engineer in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
with the advance shop drawings submit for approval two copies of the welding electrode certification conformance procedure qualification record and welding procedure specification in accordance with aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
on the drawings reference weld symbols to welding procedure specifications .
identify each piece by aashto or astm specification give different assembly and erection marks to pieces of different grades of steel .
give differing piece marks to individual girders and other main members .
show details of proper washer installation on shop drawings .
num shop inspection the fabricator is responsible for quality control ensure that the fabricators inspector is an aws certified welding inspector in accordance with aws qcnum .
ensure that the primary job of the fabricators inspector is quality control independent of production .
ensure that the fabricators inspector reports directly to the fabricators top management or chief engineer and works separately from the production unit performing no production or supervisory work for the project .
num before fabrication ensure that the fabricator submits to the state bridge engineer a written quality control plan outlining quality control tasks the fabricator will follow to ensure that work meets specifications .
include a list of inspection and nondestructive testing personnel .
the departments inspector will act independently of the fabricator .
review by the departments inspector does not relieve the fabricator of responsibility for providing materials and finished members as specified .
the department may reject deficient or defective materials or members at any time .
replace rejected items promptly at no additional cost to the department .
notify the departments inspector in writing at least num calendar days before starting structural steel fabrication .
before fabrication give the departments inspector one complete copy of the mill test reports showing chemical and physical properties of the steel .
ensure that the reports indicate by piece marks the individual items fabricated for the project .
remove references to unrelated material .
ensure that the fabricator helps in testing and inspection and gives the departments inspector access to fabrication and storage areas .
ensure that the fabricators inspector verifies that highstrength fasteners and elastomeric bearing pads meet contract requirements by reviewing certifications and visual inspection .
num identification of steels during fabrication properly identify each piece of steel used in fabrication .
use only material identifiable by heat number and mill test report .
stamp flange and web plates in main girders wbeam girders and splice plates with the applicable heat numbers at locations visible on the finished structure .
stamp match marks and erection marks showing orientation direction of members or both .
use lowstress stamps approved by the departments inspector stamp near ends of girders but not on the edges of plates or flanges .
use a system of assemblymarking on individual pieces that maintains the mill test report number .
do not apply marks with paint .
num orientation of plates cut and fabricate steel plates into structural members so that the primary direction of rolling of the plate parallels the principal stress in the member .
num num num num num structural steel num num num num num num num num num num structural steel num num handling and storing materials place stored material above the ground on platforms skids or other supports .
keep material free from dirt grease and other foreign material properly drained and protected from corrosion .
support long members on skids to prevent deflection damage .
for shipping and storage provide softeners for lifting and tiedown chains to prevent damage to corners .
when lifting with hooks ensure sufficient jaw and throat width to prevent damage to flanges or the flangetoweb weld .
num straightening and curving rolled beams and welded girders num general the department will reject members made from steel heated higher than num ºf num ºc or cooled artificially before naturally cooling to num ºf num ºc .
use a cooling method approved by the departments inspector .
for astm a num grade numw astm a numm grade numw steel limit application of heat to num ºf num ºc and perform application in accordance with procedures approved by the state bridge engineer .
num straightening material in the shop straighten structural steel without damaging the metal and only with the department inspectors approval .
the department will consider kinks and bends that can not be straightened without damaging the member cause for rejection .
inspect the metal surface for evidence of damage after straightening .
num curving rolled beams and welded girders if horizontally curved rolled beams or welded plate girders are specified curve during fabrication .
fabricate rolled beams as a straight unit induce required curvature by applying heat to the flange edges on one side .
fabricate welded girders the same way or by flamecutting flanges to the required curvature from rectangular plates before fitting and welding to the web .
the department will allow cold bending if the proposed methods are first approved by the state bridge engineer .
num perform heatcurving of beams or girders in accordance with the following num .
curve before painting and before or after welding of transverse intermediate stiffeners .
unless provisions are made for girder shrinkage locate and attach connection plates and bearing stiffeners after curving .
if required curve or oxygencut longitudinal stiffeners separately and then weld them to the curved girder .
num .
camber girders before heatcurving .
camber rolled beams by methods approved by the departments inspector .
do not mechanically camber rolled beams without the state bridge engineers approval .
for plate girders cut the web to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for shrinkage .
if necessary correct moderate deviations from specified camber as approved by the departments inspector .
num .
when curving girders with the web in a vertical position brace or support the girder to avoid overturn .
when curving with the web in a horizontal position provide sufficient support to obtain uniform curvature .
during heating place intermediate safety catch blocks at the midlength of the girder within num in num mm of the flanges .
num .
curve beams and girders by continuous or vtype heating .
heat those flange edges that will be on the inside of the horizontal curve after cooling .
heat both inside and outside flange surfaces when the flange thickness equals or exceeds num in num mm heat both surfaces concurrently .
num .
for the continuous method heat a strip along the edge of the top and bottom flange simultaneously ensure sufficient strip width and temperature to obtain specified curvature .
num .
for vtype heating heat the top and bottom flanges at approximately the same rate and in regularly spaced truncated triangular areas having their base along the flange edge .
on the inside flange surface end the apex of the truncated triangular area just before the juncture of the web and flange .
when the radius of curvature is num ft num m or more extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface to the juncture of the flange and web .
when the structural steel num num num structural steel num num num num num num radius of curvature is less than num ft num m extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern of the outside flange surface past the web for a distance equal to oneeigth of the flange width or num in num mm whichever is less .
use a truncated triangular pattern with an included angle of approximately num to num degrees and a base no greater than num in num mm .
the departments inspector may approve varying patterns .
num .
measure final horizontal curvature and vertical camber acceptance after welding and heating are complete and flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature .
check horizontal curvature with the girder in the vertical position by measuring offsets from a stringline or wire attached to both flanges or other method approved by the departments inspector .
check camber .
num finish ensure that shearing thermalcutting and chipping of plates leaves edges smooth and free of discontinuities .
break flatten or round by grinding all edges and corners that will be exposed in the finished member .
num holes for fasteners drill punch subdrill and ream or subpunch and ream holes for fasteners .
make subpunched and subdrilled holes num in num mm smaller than the nominal fastener diameter and finished holes num in num mm larger than the nominal fastener diameter .
for structural steel thicker than in num mm and highstrength steel thicker than e in num mm drill holes full size or subdrill and ream full size .
remove burs from inside and around the edges .
the department considers acceptable holes up to num in num mm larger than specified when using a drill or reamer of nominal diameter and slightly conical holes that naturally result from punching .
do not thermalcut round holes or correct mispunched or misdrilled holes by welding .
do not allow thermalcut slotted holes whether combined with drilling or punching or not to exceed their specified width by more than num in num mm .
the department allows occasional gouges not more than num in num mm deep .
grind thermalcut bolt hole surfaces smooth .
num for holes in field connections and field splices of main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents plate girders and rigid frames subpunch or subdrill then ream during assembly or drill full size through a steel template during assembly .
obtain approval of the assembly including camber alignment accuracy of holes and milled joints from the departments inspector .
holes for cross frames may be drilled full size unassembled using a steel template .
ream after pieces are assembled and firmly bolted together with surfaces in close contact .
if necessary take pieces apart before bolting and remove shavings .
when drilling members while assembled hold the parts securely together while drilling and drill to finish size or subdrill and ream to finish size while all thicknesses of metal are assembled .
matchmark pieces reamed or drilled together so that they may be reassembled in the same position .
give the engineer a diagram showing matchmarks .
do not interchange parts reamed or drilled together .
fabricate holes for floor beam and stringer field connections in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications including applicable interim revisions .
when specified or approved by the state bridge engineer use oversize short slotted and longslotted holes in accordance with the following num .
with einch num mm diameter and larger highstrength bolts .
num .
oversize holes in any or all plies of frictiontype connections .
num .
shortslotted holes in any or all plies of friction or bearingtype connections .
align slots normal to the direction of loading in bearing type connections .
num .
longslotted holes in one of the connecting parts of a friction or bearingtype connection at an individual faying surface .
align slots normal to the direction of loading in bearingtype connections .
do not exceed the hole dimensions in table num maximum hole sizes .
structural steel num num num num num num num num num structural steel table num maximum hole sizes num num ensure that the minimum distance from the fastener center to member edges in accordance with table num minimum edge distance for standard holes .
bolt diameter standard diameter oversize diameter short slot width length long slot width length in mm e num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numf num num f num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nume num num num numc num num num table num minimum edge distance for standard holes for oversized and slotted holes ensure that there is a clear distance between the edges of the hole and the member at least equal to the minimum required for a standard hole .
num welding and examination of welded joints num general weld and inspect welded highway structures in accordance with aashto aws dnum bridge welding code .
ensure that welders hold the specified qualifications for applicable processes positions and thicknesses .
for ultrasonicallytested welds use welders experienced in this type of welding and who first pass an ultrasonic welding test .
the departments inspector requires notice from the fabricator num hours before welding inspections are required .
weld structural steel by the manual shielded metalarc submergedarc or fluxcoredarc process .
do not use the gas metalarc process .
give written welding procedure specifications to the departments inspector in accordance with aashtoaws dnum .
structural steel num num num num num num bolt diameter sheared edges rolled edges of plates or shapes or gas cut edges in mm e num numc num f num num num num num num f num num num numc num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num nume num numd num numd num num num num structural steel num num num num num num num num obtain written authorization from the state bridge engineer to weld stiffeners to webs and flanges using automatic submergedarc welding .
make stiffener toweb welds on one side at a time .
do not weld material to girder webs or flanges unless shown on approved shop drawings .
for splices in main members that will be field welded shopassemble in proper alignment and check for correct fitup dimensions .
do not repair incorrect fitup by welding without approval from the departments inspector .
the department will reject members on which welds can not be repaired or replaced in accordance with aashtoaws dnum article num repairs as determined by the departments inspector .
make repair welds at least num in num mm long and at no additional cost to the department .
perform welding on main loadcarrying bridge members including repairs at a minimum preheat and interpass temperature of num ºf num ºc for material thicknesses less than or equal to num in num mm and num ºf num ºc for thicker material .
num ultrasonic weld testing ultrasonically test field and shop butt welds in main members in accordance with aashtoaws dnum .
document the tests in accordance with section num of aashtoaws dnum .
grind butt welds flush before ultrasonic testing .
ensure that testing personnel are qualified in accordance with the american society of nondestructive testing asnt snttcnuma level ii .
the department inspector may perform additional testing .
inspect num percent of the following ultrasonically num .
flange splice welds num .
transverse web splice welds num .
longitudinal web splice welds in tension areas num .
fullpenetration flangetoweb welds in tension areas and num .
longitudinal stiffener splice welds in tension areas .
num in compression areas inspect num percent of the following ultrasonically num .
longitudinal web splice welds num .
full penetration flangetoweb welds and num .
longitudinal stiffener splice welds .
if rejectable defects are found in any partially tested weld test the entire weld .
do not test radiographically .
move and brace material as required for proper inspection and personnel safety .
num other nondestructive weld testing test welds in girders using the magnetic particle or dye penetrant method as follows num .
for fillet welds test at least num inches in every numfoot num mm in every num m length include the ends of the welds .
if rejectable discontinuities are found in any test length test the lesser of the welds full length or num ft num m on either side of the test length .
num .
the department does not require testing welds in secondary members or the substructure .
num .
test the ends of flange buttsplice welds .
num .
test arc strikes not incorporated into the final weld after grinding .
num .
ensure that testing personnel are qualified in accordance with asnt snttcnuma level ii .
perform magnetic particle testing in accordance with section num of aashto aws dnum using the yoke method .
perform dye penetrant testing in accordance with section num of aashtoaws dnum .
document testing in accordance with section num of aashtoaws dnum .
num thermal cutting thermalcut structural steel only if a smooth surface free from cracks and notches is obtained using a mechanical guide .
handcut only where approved by the departments inspector .
num num structural steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num structural steel num num num num cut girder flanges to num in num mm wider than specified .
ensure the fabricator notifies the engineer and contractor if this is done .
avoid cutting inside the specified lines .
ensure that thermalcut surfaces meet requirements of ansi bnum for a surface roughness height of num num in num µm .
ensure that thermalcut surfaces of members not subject to calculated stress have a surface roughness height of no more than num num in num µm .
fillet reentrant cuts to a radius of at least num in num mm .
for surface roughness exceeding specification and notches or gouges up to num in num mm deep remove by machining or grinding .
fair corrections with the surface of the cut on a minimum bevel of num .
repair gouges of flamecut edges deeper than num in num mm by methods approved by the departments inspector .
if necessary weld in accordance with subsection num welding and examination of welded joints and test ultrasonically in accordance with aashtoaws dnum .
grind completed welds smooth and flush with the adjacent surface .
before painting thermalcut surfaces remove the layer left from resolidification by grinding .
num edge planing plane sheared edges of plate that are thicker than e in num mm and that are a or part of a design member to a depth of num in num mm .
num shop assembling steel before assembling bolting or welding clean steel contact surfaces for connections .
do not paint contact surfaces before bolting or welding .
when specified shopassemble entire structures accurately adjusted to line and camber and with holes for field connections drilled or reamed while assembled .
perform flangetoweb welds on welded plate girders before installing transverse stiffeners .
assemble fieldbolted joints for girders with the abutting members adjusted for alignment and camber .
drill or ream holes for field connections while assembled .
ensure that the fabricator makes bolt assemblies available to the departments inspector .
before shipment clean and relubricate or replace bolt assemblies deemed improperly lubricated dirty weathered or rusted .
num num num matchmark connecting parts shopassembled for drilling or reaming holes for field connections .
give the engineer a diagram of such marks .
num facing of bearing surfaces ensure that the surface finish of bearing contact surfaces is in accordance with table num surface roughness requirements .
table num surface roughness requirements num num ensure that bearing surfaces of bearing assemblies fit within num in num µm for num percent of their area with no gap elsewhere greater than num in num mm .
for bearing and base plate surfaces and other metal bearing surfaces that will come in contact with preformed fabric pads elastomeric pads or portland cement grout finish flat to within cinch tolerance in num in num mm tolerance in num mm and cinch num mm tolerance overall .
num abutting joints when specified face and bring abutting joints to an even bearing .
where joints are not faced ensure the opening does not exceed num in num mm .
num structural steel num num num location roughness height num in µm plates in contact with elastomeric or preformed fabric pad num num heavy plates in contact as part of bearing assemblies to be welded num num milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers num num bridge rollers and rockers num num pins and pin holes num num sliding bearings num num num num num num structural steel num num end connection angles locate end connection angles of floor beams and stringers flush with each other and accurately set as to position and length of member .
do not finish end connection angles .
if angles are milled due to faulty shop assembly do not reduce thickness by more than num in num mm or reduce the allowable bearing value below design requirements .
num elastomeric bearing pads supply and install elastomeric bearing pads in accordance with shop drawings .
num finished members ensure that finished members are true to line free from twists bends and open joints and in accordance with the dimensional tolerance requirements of aashtoaws dnum except for the specified camber of welded beams and girders for which the department will allow variation in accordance with table num allowable camber tolerances .
apply these tolerances to the camber in the fabricated pieces before erection .
table num allowable camber tolerances girder type camber tolerance typical girder c in number of feet from the nearest endnum num mm number of meters from nearest end not to exceed num in num mm girder with a designed concrete haunch between the slab and the top flange num in number of feet from the nearest endnum num mm number of meters from nearest end not to exceed num in num mm num num stiffeners for bearing and other stiffeners designated as finish to bear mill or grind to achieve at least num percent contact with the flange and no gap elsewhere greater thannum in num mm .
weld other stiffeners to flanges or fit tight as specified .
the department defines fit tight stiffeners as having at least one bearing point on the flange and no clearance at any point greater than num in num mm .
ensure that stiffeners are perpendicular to flanges .
num bent plates before plates are bent round the corners or edges to a radius of num in num mm throughout the part of the plate to be bent .
for cold bending ensure the bend line is perpendicular to the direction of rolling .
ensure a bend radius that will not crack the plate .
for bends perpendicular to the direction of rolling ensure the radius is at least the minimum radii measured to the concave face of the metal shown in table num minimum radius for perpendicular bends .
table num minimum radius for perpendicular bends num num num structural steel num thickness in mm minimum radius t thickness of metal to be bent up to num num num t over num num to num num num t over num num to num num num t over num num to num num num t over num num to num num num t num num structural steel num num num num num if bend lines are parallel to the direction of final rolling add num t to value shown in table num minimum radius for perpendicular bends .
for a shorter radius bend plates hot do not exceed num ºf num ºc .
hotbend low alloy steel thicker than num in num mm for small radii .
num stressrelieving relieve stress in welded bearing assemblies by heat treating in accordance with section num of aashtoaws dnum .
perform finish machining after heat treating .
adequately support the weld assembly in the furnace .
ensure the provision of an accurate recording pyrometer with thermocouple junctions at the hottest and coolest points on the assembly but not in the direct path of heating flames .
ensure that the recording device provides a continuous permanent record of the temperatures .
give the departments inspector two copies of the records .
num pins and rollers num general use pins and rollers that are straight smooth free of flaws and finished in accordance with subsection num facing of bearing surfaces .
num boring pin holes bore pin holes true to detail dimensions smooth straight and at right angles to the axis of the member and parallel to each other .
always make a finishing cut .
ensure that the length outsidetooutside of holes in tension members and insidetoinside of holes in compression members does not vary from detailed dimensions more thannum in num mm .
bore holes in builtup members after shop bolting and welding .
num pin clearance ensure that the pin hole diameter does not exceed that of the pin by more than num in num µm for pins num in num mm or less in diameter or num in num mm for larger pins .
num num num num pilot and driving nuts furnish two pilot nuts and two driving nuts for each size of pin .
num painting num general paint new structural steel work .
do not paint aluminum weathering steel meeting astm a num grades numw or numw astm a numm grades numw or numw galvanized or bronze surfaces .
apply the shop coat after fabrication and after surfaces have been prepared .
apply field coats after erection is complete .
ensure that paint is delivered in original unopened containers with intact labels identifying the paint and showing the date of manufacture and batch number .
paint only dry clean surfaces .
do not paint frosted or icecoated surfaces when steel paint or air temperature is below num ºf num ºc in rain wind snow fog mist or when the steel surface temperature is less than num ºf num ºc above the dew point .
if a thin film of water applied to the cleaned surface with a damp cloth evaporates within num minutes the dew point requirement is satisfied .
perform blast cleaning and painting in well lighted areas .
mix paint thoroughly with mechanical mixers to keep the pigments in suspension and continue stirring while paint is applied .
furnish and install a water trap or separator on airsupplied equipment used in spray painting .
apply paint with spray guns rollers or brushes .
if sprayed brush out the paint where necessary .
when brushed ensure a uniform even coating .
work paint into joints and open spaces .
on otherwise inaccessible surfaces apply paint with sheepskin daubers .
ensure that the completed coat of paint provides a uniform appearance .
protect painted surfaces while drying .
num shop cleaning after fabrication blastclean the surfaces of new structural steel to be painted except machine finished surfaces in accordance with the following for the selected paint system num num num num num structural steel num num num num num num num num structural steel num num num num num .
system a .
society for protective coatings sspcsp numcommercial blast cleaning .
num .
system b. sspcsp numnearwhite blast cleaning leaving a blast profile of from num mil to num mil num µm to num µm when tested by profilometer .
after fabrication prepare unpainted weathering steel bridge girders in accordance with sspcsp numcommercial blast cleaning .
ensure that the final surfaces of other unpainted weathering structural steel meet or exceed the standards of sspcsp numhand tool cleaning .
num shop painting before applying the shop coat stamp match and erection marks for field identification of members and weight marks in accordance with subsection num identification of steels during fabrication .
after acceptance of steel work by the departments inspector and before shipment blastclean and before surfaces rust apply one coat of approved shop primer .
reclean if surfaces rust or are contaminated before painting .
do not paint surfaces to be embedded in concrete except edges of top flanges apply one coat of shop primer to them .
apply one coat of primer to machined surfaces .
paint structural steel surfaces in accordance with the following for the selected paint system num .
system a .
paint surfaces not in contact but inaccessible after assembly or erection with three coats of shop primer .
do not paint shop contact surfaces .
excluding slipcritical connections give field contact surfaces one coat of primer .
ensure a minimum film thickness of num mil num µm measured dry with a calibrated magnetic film thickness gage in accordance with sspcpa nummeasurement of dry coating thickness with magnetic gages .
after painting store the steel in an air temperature above num ºf num ºc for no less than num hours but num hours is preferred .
leave metal surfaces within num in num mm of field welds unprimed until after field welding is complete .
num num .
system b .
apply one coat of shop primer to surfaces inaccessible after assembly or erection .
do not paint shop contact surfaces .
excluding slipcritical connections give field contact surfaces one coat of shop primer .
one coat of shop primer may be applied to slipcritical connection surfaces if the paint manufacturer ensures in writing that the coated surface will provide class b slip resistance as defined in the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications including applicable interim revisions .
before surfaces rust apply paint with airless spray equipment to a dry film thickness of from num mil to num mil num µm to num µm .
if necessary to achieve minimum dry film thickness recoat in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
brush or daub touchup as necessary to obtain a smooth surface .
during application and curing ensure that the temperature is from num ºf to num ºf num c to num ºc that the steel temperature is at least num ºf num ºc above the dew point and that the relative humidity is between num and num percent .
apply primer at lower humidities in accordance with applicable recommendations from the manufacturer .
do not load members for shipment sooner than num calendar days after painting and until thoroughly dry .
consider paint dry when it can not be scraped off with a thumbnail .
protect structural steel members while paint dries and repair paint damage at no additional cost to the department .
num galvanizing galvanize steel after it is fabricated into the largest practical sections .
fabrication includes bending and welding .
before galvanizing completely seal edges of tightly contacting surfaces by welding and blastclean welds in accordance with sspcsp numwhite metal blast cleaning .
galvanize components of bolted assemblies separately before assembly .
perform any straightening after galvanizing without damaging the coating .
repair damaged areas of galvanizing in accordance with astm a num .
perform shop repairs by metalizing or soldering with zincbased alloys in rod or powder form .
num num num num num structural steel num num num num num num structural steel num num num num shipping materials mark the weight mass on members weighing more than num ton num t. block projecting parts with wood or otherwise protect them from damage .
do not bend scrape or overstress pieces while handling and shipping .
the department will reject bent or otherwise damaged pieces .
ensure that material shipped to the project is accompanied by a manufacturers certification listing each separate piece by name and piece mark along with two copies of the mill test reports and the fabricators quality control records .
ship small parts such as bolts nuts washers pins fillers and small connecting plates or angles in boxes crates kegs or barrels .
include an itemized list and description of the contents on the outside of each package .
keep the metal clean and undamaged during loading transporting and unloading .
ship girders upright unless otherwise approved by the state bridge engineer .
num field work num general use temperatureindicating crayons to determine temperatures of materials .
assemble structural steel as specified following all matchmarks .
handle material without damaging parts .
do not damage or distort members by hammering .
clean bearing and permanent contact surfaces before members are assembled .
provide sufficient bracing to prevent lateral buckling of girders during field erection .
round corners and edges that are marred cut or roughened in handling or erection by grinding or other approved methods .
perform field straightening using only approved methods .
tighten highstrength bolts in accordance with subsection num installation before the superstructure concrete is placed .
num drifting of holes as necessary drift holes to bring parts into proper alignment without enlarging the holes or otherwise distorting the metal .
ream holes that need enlarging to admit fasteners .
num num num num num connections using high strength bolts num general this subsection covers the assembly of slipcritical structural joints using high strength bolts nuts and washers for structural steel joints or equivalent fasteners tightened to a high tension .
use slipcritical bolted connections .
use f in num mm diameter highstrength bolts with a load indicator washer twistoff control element or use lockpin and collar fasteners .
num bolts nuts and washers determine bolt lengths in accordance with table num bolt length .
table num bolt length num grip is thickness of material to be connected exclusive of washers .
notes num .
for each flat washer add num in num mm .
num .
for each bevel washer add num in num mm .
num .
for each load indicator washer add c in num mm .
num .
for twistoff fasteners add only the value shown do not add additional length for the washers .
num .
adjust bolt length determined to the next longest numinch num mm increment .
num num num structural steel num bolt size in mm add to gripnum to determine bolt length in mm e num f num num num num f num numc num num num num num numc num num num num num nume num num structural steel num num num num determine lengths of lockpin fasteners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use load indicator washers that provide a method to evaluate induced bolt tension during and after tightening .
evaluate tension from measurements of the residual gap after protrusions have been flattened .
for fasteners with twistoff control or indicator elements use a type with a splined end extending beyond the threaded portion of the bolt which is then gripped by a special design wrench chuck providing a means for turning the nut relative to the bolt until the splined end is sheared off .
num bolted parts fielddrill holes for bolted parts in accordance with subsection num holes for fasteners .
ensure that the surface slope of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut does not exceed numvnumh with respect to a plane perpendicular to the bolt axis .
ensure that bolted parts fit solidly together when assembled and are not separated by gaskets or interposed compressible material .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant dyed so that a visual check for lubricant can be made during field installation .
ensure that black bolts are oily to the touch when installed .
clean and relubricate dry dirty weathered or rusted bolts before installation .
relubricate twistoff type bolts as necessary in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that when assembled joint surfaces are free of dirt loose scale other foreign material burrs and other defects preventing solid seating of the parts .
ensure that contact surfaces within slipcritical type joints are free of oil paint including overspray lacquer rust inhibitor and other foreign material .
roughen galvanized contact surfaces by hand wire brushing do not use power wire brushing .
install bolt nut and washer combinations from the same rotationalcapacity lot .
num num num num num num num installation num bolt tension tighten fasteners to at least the bolt tensions shown in table num bolt tension .
table num bolt tension num equal to the proof load length measurement method given in aashto m num aashto m numm .
use impact wrenches that can tighten bolts in a maximum of ten seconds .
do not tighten highstrength bolts installed in or through concrete to the required tension in table num bolt tension .
install with lock washers and tighten only snugtight with lock washers flattened .
num washers for slipcritical highstrength bolted connections provide and use washers as follows num .
where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope greater than numvnumh with respect to a plane perpendicular to the bolt axis use a hardened beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
num .
use hardened washers under the element turned in tightening .
num num num structural steel num bolt size in mm minimum bolt tensionnum num lb kn e num num num num num num f num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num structural steel num num .
use hardened washers where aashto m num aashto m numm bolts are installed and tightened in an oversized or short slotted hole in an outer ply .
num .
use a plate washer or continuous bar at least num in num mm thick with standard holes where aashto m num aashto m numm bolts are installed and tightened in a long slotted hole in an outer ply .
this washer need not be hardened .
ensure that the washer or bar completely covers the slot after installation and is of structural grade material .
place hardened washers over the outer surface of the plate washer or bar .
num .
where required use load indicator washers as specified in subsection num load indicator washer installation .
num tension calibrator the engineer will provide a tension measuring device where bolts are being installed and tightened .
use it to confirm the following num .
the ability of the complete fastener assembly including lubrication to be used to satisfy the requirements of table num bolt tension num .
wrench calibration if applicable and num .
the bolting crews understanding and proper use of the method to be used .
num verification test procedure on site demonstrate the ability to achieve required fastener tension by testing in a tension calibrator a representative sample of at least three fasteners of each diameter and length to be used .
test assemblies that include flat washers arranged as those in actual connections to be tensioned .
the department requires that each fastener tested develops a tension at least num percent greater than the tension required by table num bolt tension .
the department does not require testing on projects using less than num highstrength fasteners or on fasteners too short for the calibrator .
num num num num general installation install fasteners in all holes in the connection and bring to a snugtight condition .
the department defines snugtight as the tightness existing when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
snugtighten from the center of the connection to the free edges then retighten in a similar systematic manner as necessary until all fasteners are simultaneously snugtight and all plies of the connection are in full contact .
after snugtightening tighten fasteners in the connection to achieve the minimum tension shown in table num bolt tension .
progress systematically from the center of the joint to its free edges .
num load indicator washer installation load indicator washers may be used to ensure proper bolt tension as specified in table num bolt tension .
place the load indicator washer on the bolt with the protrusions bearing against the underside of the bolt head turn the nut .
if the bolt head is turned due to bolt entering and wrench clearance place a hardened round washer on the bolt under the bolt head and place the load indicator washer on the bolt with the protrusions against the hardened round washer .
if it is necessary to place the load indicator washer at the nut end place it on the bolt with protrusions facing toward the nut .
place a hardened round washer on the bolt against the protrusions and install the nut .
turn the nut .
when beveled washers are required they may be used in conjunction with the load indicator washer .
ensure that the surface contacting the protrusions does not turn during installation .
where a load indicator washer is used with a hardened round washer some slight movement of the round washer is acceptable .
for oversize or slotted holes use hardened washers in accordance with subsection num washers .
do not substitute load indicating washers for required hardened washers use them in conjunction .
do not reuse load indicator washers .
hold the stationary element with a hand wrench to prevent turning when tightening .
tighten the bolt until the average gap is less than num in num µm as determined by a feeler gauge .
if the gap around the circumference of the load indicator washer is not uniform because the wrench pulls the bolt offcenter in num num num num num num structural steel num num num num structural steel num num the hole and results in protrusions not compressing uniformly the department will consider the criteria met when gaps are measured in accordance with table num load indicator washer inspection criteria .
table num load indicator washer inspection criteria num after all bolts in a joint have been tightened inspect the bolts to ensure that they have not slackened during tightening .
if necessary restore the tension on these bolts by tightening so that gaps are less than originally measured .
num installation of twistoff fasteners under the nut use twistoff bolt assemblies that include a hardened washer specifically designed for twistoff fasteners .
on oversize or slotted holes the department does not require a hardened washer under the bolt head if the diameter of the bolt head is at least as large as the hardened washer .
proper bolt installation tension is indicated when the bolt tip shears off .
num installation of lockpin and collar fasteners if slotted or oversize holes are specified use hardened flat washers .
proper installation tension is indicated when the pintail separates .
num number of spaces in washer between protrusion minimum number of spaces gauge is refused num num num num num num num num num num num num reuse of bolts do not reuse galvanized aashto m num aashto m numm bolts .
ungalvanized aashto m num aashto m numm bolts may be reused once provided no significant permanent elongation or stretch has occurred in the threads as determine by assembling the nut on the bolt .
the bolt may be reused if the nut runs freely the full length of the threads .
do not reuse twistoff fasteners with a shearedoff tip or lockpin fasteners without the pintail .
num inspection the engineer may use the following inspection procedures num .
connections with load indicating washers .
the engineer will use a metal feeler gauge to inspect load indicator washers and at least num percent of the bolts but not less than two bolts selected at random in each connection .
the engineer will accept the connection as properly tightened if gaps on all the inspected bolts are in accordance with subsection num load indicator washer installation .
if any gaps checked are in excess of the specified average gap reinspect each bolt in the connection retighten as required and resubmit the connection for inspection .
num .
connections with twistoff bolts .
within num hours of bolt tightening the engineer will use a manual torque wrench that indicates torque on a dial or that can be adjusted to show that the jobinspecting torque as defined below has been reached .
tighten a representative sample of five bolts of the diameter and length with washers used in the work and arranged as in the work to an initial condition of approximately num percent of the required fastener tension and then to the tension specified in table num bolt tension using a tension measuring device .
then apply the inspecting wrench to the tightened bolt in the calibrator .
determine the torque necessary to turn the nut or head num degrees approxi mately num inch at a numinch radius num mm at num m in the tightening direction .
the average of the three middle values will determine the jobinspecting torque .
inspect bolts represented by the sample in the preceding paragraph that have been tightened in the structure by applying in the tightening num structural steel num num num structural steel num direction the inspecting wrench with the jobinspecting torque to num percent of the bolts at least two bolts selected at random in each connection in question .
if no nut or bolt head is turned by application of the jobinspecting torque the engineer will accept the connection as properly tightened .
if any nut or bolt head is turned with the job inspecting torque retighten all of bolts in the connection and resubmit the connection for inspection .
num .
lockpin and collar fasteners .
the engineer will visually inspect lockpin and collar fasteners .
num bolted connections other than highstrength for permanent connections not requiring highstrength bolts use regular hexagon head bolts with hexagon nuts in accordance with subsection num bolts and fasteners .
num field welding num general in the field weld by the shielded metalarc process using electrodes in accordance with aashtoaws classification enum unless otherwise approved in writing by the state bridge engineer .
use welders qualified as specified in accordance with subsection num welding and examination of welded joints general .
at least num calendar days before welding or erection give the engineer a written welding procedure specification in accordance with aashtoaws dnum section num qualification and generally follows the form shown in annex ivsample welding forms for welding procedure specification .
include a sequence of welding and a method for supporting members during field welding of splices in girders or other main members .
obtain the engineers approval before beginning welding or erection .
num workmanship and technique num general make field splice welds with the members properly aligned relative to each other .
obtain the engineers approval of the alignment before beginning welding .
num num num num num do not weld when the air temperature is lower than num ºf num ºc or when surfaces are wet or exposed to rain snow or high wind velocities .
do not make welds other than those specified and approved .
work upward on vertical passes for all welding including repairs .
backgouge by air carbonarc gouging or grinding .
use extension bars or runoff tabs on flange and web splice welds .
ensure that extension bars or runoff tabs for flanges have the same joint preparation and thickness as the flanges and that they fit accurately with no gaps .
num preparation of base metal weld surfaces and edges that are smooth uniform and free from discontinuities .
ensure that surfaces including those nearby are free from loose or thick scale slag rust moisture grease galvanizing and other foreign material .
the department will allow mill scale that can withstand vigorous wire brushing .
num assembly bring parts to be joined by fillet welds as close together as possible .
do not allow the root opening to exceed num in num mm .
if the root opening is greater than num in num mm increase the leg of the fillet weld by the amount of root opening .
do not allow the root openings of groove welds without backing to exceednum in num mm .
for groove welds with backing ensure a root opening of at leastnum in num mm but no more than num in num mm .
do not allow a separation between base metal and backing bars greater thannum in num mm .
do not use fillers .
ensure that the engineer inspects and approves joint preparation before welding .
num preheat and interpass temperature requirements use a preheat and interpass temperature sufficient to prevent cracking but not less than indicated in table num minimum preheat and interpass temperature for field welding .
num num structural steel num num num num num num num num structural steel num num num num table num minimum preheat and interpass temperature for field welding num thickest part at point of welding .
num preheat the base metal so that the surfaces on which the weld metal is being deposited are at or above the specified minimum temperature for the distance shown in all directions from the point of welding including the side opposite to that being welded .
num tack welding the same quality requirements apply to tack weld as to final welding except that discontinuities need not be repaired if they will be filled in by the finished weld .
make tack welds with electrodes that meet the requirements for the final weld .
perform tack welding within the joint so that all tack welds will be incorporated into the final weld .
thoroughly clean tack welds before performing the final weld .
num weld cleaning before welding over previously deposited metal remove slag and brush the weld and adjacent base metal clean .
remove slag from completed welds and clean the weld and adjacent base metal by brushing or other means .
num quality of welds do not paint welded joints until after welding and cleaning and the weld has been approved by the engineer .
the engineer will accept a weld by visual inspection if num .
it has no cracks .
num .
craters are filled to the full crosssection of the weld .
type of welding material thicknessnum distancenum from weld up to num in num mm over num in num mm main girder num f num c num f num c num in num mm other num f num c num f num c num in num mm num num .
adjacent layers of the weld and weld metal and base metal are thoroughly fused .
num .
the undercut is no deeper than num in num mm on girders or num in num mm on other welding .
num .
it has no porosity .
num .
it is free of overlap .
num .
the faces of fillet welds are in accordance with the profiles shown in aashtoaws dnum figure num a and b with none of the unacceptable profiles shown in aashtoaws dnum figure num c. num .
groove welds are made with slight or minimum face reinforcement and in the case of butt and corner joints num .
the face reinforcement does not exceed c in num mm in height and has a gradual transition to the plane of the base metal in accordance with aashtoaws dnum figure num d. num .
they are free of the discontinuities shown for butt joints in aashtoaws dnum figure num e. num .
butt joint surfaces required to be ground flush are finished so that the thickness of the base metal is not reduced by more than num in num mm or num percent of the thickness whichever is smaller without a reinforcement that exceeds num in num mm .
measure fillet welds with a fillet gauge .
num weld testing test butt and fillet welds in accordance with subsection num welding and examination of welded joints .
num weld repairs remove entirely and replace or repair welds not meeting the requirements of subsection num quality of welds at no additional cost to the department .
when repairing a weld correct as follows structural steel num num num num num structural steel num num num num .
repair overlaps or excessive convexity by removing the excess metal .
num .
repair excessive concavity undersize welds and undercutting by adding weld metal .
num .
repair porosity slag inclusions and incomplete fusion by removing unacceptable portions and rewelding .
num .
with approval from the engineer repair cracks in welds or base metal by removing metal for the full length of the crack plus num in num mm at each end and rewelding .
remove weld metal by air carbonarc gouging or grinding .
preheat repair welds in accordance with subsection num preheat and interpass temperature requirements and ensure a minimum length of num in num mm .
num preparation of bearing areas ensure that column bases truss and girder pedestals base plates and masonry plates have a full and uniform bearing on the substructure concrete and are rigidly and permanently located to the correct alignments and elevations .
do not place on improperly finished deformed or irregular bridge seat areas of piers or abutments .
place steel pedestals base plates and masonry plates on preformed fabric pads .
num setting anchor bolts drill or form anchor bolt holes perpendicular to the plane of the bridge seat .
set the anchor bolts in epoxy resin grout unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
before setting drop anchor bolts into dry holes to ensure a proper fit .
immediately before placing clean holes thoroughly .
ensure that anchor bolts are free of contaminating substances .
remove oil or grease by washing with solvent .
heat anchor bolts installed in temperatures below num ºf num ºc in clean boiling water for at least five minutes .
dry with a clean cloth and immediately set in epoxy .
pour the epoxy mix into the drilled hole to a depth that just overflows the hole when the bolt is inserted and pushed to the bottom .
immediately after insertion rotate bolts two complete revolutions .
hold the bolts in their proper position during the curing period .
place and cure epoxy mix in accordance with the num num num num manufacturers recommendations .
when checking the curing period do not consider time while the temperature is below num ºf num ºc .
at no additional cost to the department replace any bolt disturbed during curing .
remove existing epoxy from the hole and replace bolt in accordance with the above procedure .
do not leave grout in slotted holes in expansion rockers rollers plates or on any metal surface that will be painted .
grout anchor bolts in correct position with expansion bearings properly adjusted before placing the roadway slab .
remove and regrout anchor bolts not firmly anchored in hardened grout at no additional cost to the department .
based on the prevailing temperature the engineer will give instruction for varying location of the anchor bolts in relation to slotted holes in sliding expansion shoes or plates .
ensure that the nuts on anchor bolts at the expansion ends of spans allow free movement of the span .
to ensure proper location and elevation use templates to set anchor bolts in concrete before erection of the superstructure .
num field painting num general repair shipping damage to paint at no additional cost to the department .
ensure the repairs have a uniform appearance and a dry film thickness not less than the original shop coat .
num field cleaning after erection remove foreign matter from unpainted areas by blastcleaning or with hand tools .
clean areas of steel coated with shop primer using a pressure water wash. num field paint application after field erection give all steel in the structure two full coats of paint .
protect the structure against disfigurement by overspray spatters splashes and smirches of paint or by paint materials .
paint without damaging vehicles persons or property including plants and animals .
prevent dust from accumulating on freshly painted surfaces .
remove or obliterate overspray .
num num structural steel num num num num num num structural steel num num fieldpaint structural steel surfaces in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num general and the following requirements for the selected paint system num .
system a .
do not use this system to overcoat system b primer .
cover unpainted surfaces field bolts surfaces where paint is worn off removed or defective and shipping and erection marks with one coat of shop primer .
when paint applied for touching up bolts and abraded surfaces has thoroughly dried apply the first and second field coats .
ensure a minimum film thickness for each coat of num mil num µm measured dry with a calibrated magnetic film thickness gage in accordance with sspcpa nummeasurement of dry coating thickness with magnetic gages .
let each coat of paint dry before applying the next coat .
consider paint dry enough for recoating when an additional coat can be applied without causing detrimental film irregularities such as lifting wrinkling or loss of adhesion of the undercoat .
do not apply additional coats less than num hours from the application of the previous coat .
fill small cracks and cavities that have not been sealed watertight by the first field coat with a pasty mixture of first field coat paint before the second field coat is applied .
give surfaces inaccessible after field assembly two coats of second field coat paint before assembly except on surfaces that will be embedded in concrete .
num .
system b .
do not use shopapplied primer in the field .
after cleaning structural steel coat all surfaces with one application of the fieldapplied intermediate coat and field primer .
mix the paint as per manufacturers recommendations .
based on the manufacturers recommendations paint may be applied with an initial mist coat allowed to dry for at least num minutes and then applied again to provide a final dry film thickness of from num mil to num mil num µm to num µm measured dry with a calibrated magnetic film thickness gage in accordance with sspcpa nummeasurement of dry coating thickness with magnetic gages .
ensure that paint is free of gas bubbles and blowouts .
num overcoat time for the fieldapplied intermediate coat and field primer is between four hours and one year .
before applying the top coat ensure that the surface is cured clean sound dry and free of contamination .
mix the acrylic latex top coat per manufacturers recommendations .
brush roll or spray the acrylic latex top coat to a wet film thickness of from num mil to num mil num µm tonum µm or a dry film thickness of from num mil to num mil num µm to num µm to produce a smooth surface free from runs sags streaks flashes laps pinholes fisheyes or craters .
num repair of galvanizing repair damaged areas of galvanizing in the field with zincrich paint and in accordance with astm a num .
num falsework where falsework is supported on structural steel members ensure that there is no rotation of the member when loads are applied .
do not weld cut or drill holes in structural steel to support falsework .
design and construct falsework to support loads that will be applied .
remove falsework materials completely except for piling .
remove falsework piling to at least num in num mm below the surface of the original ground finished groundline channel bottoms streambed or bottom and side slopes of excavated areas .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure structural steel as one complete unit or by the pound kilogram .
payment by the pound kilogram will be based on the invoices for the material incorporated into the work .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num structural steel num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest structural steel ls lb ls kg ls lb ls kg ls num lb ls num kg num precast concrete num section num precast concrete num description this section describes the requirements for the design fabrication and construction of prestressed precast concrete girders precast concrete bridge members and precast concrete box culverts .
the department will use the following definitions throughout this section num .
fabrication .
includes shopcast diaphragms placement of curb tie bars shopcast curbs bearing plates shopplaced reinforcing steel and other inserts and sleeves as specified .
num .
precaster .
the contractors precaster .
num .
prestressed precast concrete girders .
members designed and fabricated by the precaster to provide the span lengths structure widths and girder depths specified .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num elastomeric bearing pads num fly ash num portland cement num prestressing steel num reinforcing steel num structural steel num water num num equipment equip jacks used to stress tendons with a pressure gauge having an accurate dial with a diameter of at least num in num mm .
calibrate as a unit with the cylinder extension in the position it will be in at final jacking force and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num num num num num num construction num plant certification ensure that plants producing permanently installed precast not prestressed concrete items are certified by the national precast concrete association or the american concrete pipe association at the time of bid opening and manufacture .
ensure that plants producing prestressed precast concrete products are certified under the precastprestressed concrete institute plant certification program category bnum at the time of bid opening and manufacture .
along with shop drawings give the bridge program a copy of the precasters certification current at the time of manufacture .
if plants are changed give the engineer a copy of the certification for the new plant at least seven calendar days before the delivery of precast items to the project .
num shop drawings before fabrication ensure that the precaster gives the state bridge engineer shop drawings of each member showing complete details of the methods materials mix design including slump equipment proposed for use in precasting and the method and details of curing in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
include a written quality control plan .
for prestressed members outline the following details num .
method and sequence of stressing num .
final strand stress num .
individual strand stress before harping num .
detensioning sequence num .
concrete strength num .
complete specifications and details of the prestressing steel and anchoring devices and num .
other data pertaining to prestressing including arrangement of prestressing steel in the members .
precast concrete num num num num num num precast concrete num do not begin fabrication without the state bridge engineers approval .
num design num general when the precaster designs structural members submit for approval two sets of design computations and for prestressed girders girder deflections along with the advance shop drawings to the state bridge engineer .
ensure that these design computations and the associated plans are prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer and in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications including applicable interim revisions .
num prestressed precast concrete girders design prestressed precast concrete girders for the aashto loading specified .
ensure the provision and use of concrete with at least the numday compressive strength fc specified .
use a design that ensures a working stress in the prestressing steel no greater than num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength .
consider the working stress as the force and stress remaining in the prestressing steel after all losses include creep and shrinkage of concrete elastic compression of concrete creep of steel take up of anchorages and other remaining losses .
estimate these losses in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications including applicable interim revisions .
provide bonded reinforcement in the top of the girder .
ensure a bonded reinforcement capable of resisting the total tension force in the concrete computed on the assumption of an uncracked section .
ensure that tensile stresses in the concrete do not exceed num psi num mpa before losses due to creep and shrinkage .
num precast concrete box culverts design precast box culvert structures in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications including applicable interim revisions for the design live load and fill height specified the state bridge engineer may approve alternate designs .
include provisions in the design for construction loads routed over the structures .
num num num num num num num if the precast box culvert has castinplace concrete head walls and an alternate design with different thickness walls is approved submit revised head wall details with the precasters shop plans .
make changes in the structural concrete and reinforcing steel as a result of the alternate design at no additional cost to the department .
num quality control the precaster is responsible for quality control .
ensure its performance by an inspector qualified by training and experienceof which the state bridge engineer will be the final judge .
ensure that the primary job of the precasters inspector is quality control independent of production .
ensure that the precasters inspector reports directly to the precasters top management or chief engineer and works separately from the production unit performing no production or supervisory work for the project .
ensure that the precasters quality control plan outlines the steps the precaster will take to ensure that work meets specifications and that it lists the precasters inspection personnel .
num inspection and records keep records providing full information regarding the testing of materials tensioning concrete proportioning placing and curing and disposition of members .
ensure that the precasters inspection activities and records include the following num .
proper calibration of measuring equipment num .
identification examination and acceptance of materials such as strand reinforcing steel and cement and subassemblies such as steel plates and their anchorages num .
tensioning observations num .
inspecting beds and forms before concrete placement num .
checking the dimensions of members number size and positions of strands reinforcing steel other incorporated materials opening blockouts etc precast concrete num num num num num num num precast concrete num num .
regular inspection of batching mixing conveying placing compacting finishing and curing of the concrete num .
preparation of concrete specimens for testing and performance of tests for slump air content cylinder strength etc num .
inspecting operations of detensioning product removal from beds handling and storing and num .
general observation of plant equipment working conditions weather temperature and other items affecting products .
ensure that the precasters quality control personnel are responsible for keeping these records .
ensure that records are legible complete have the project identification precasters name and inspectors name and signature .
num testing test concrete in accordance with table num precast concrete testing requirements .
table num precast concrete testing requirements num num num quality assurance the departments inspector will provide independent inspection and may require a prefabrication conference with the precaster before beginning work .
before beginning work give the departments inspector two complete copies of all mill test reports chemical analyses and certifications required .
ensure that the precaster notifies the departments inspector at least num calendar days before beginning work on precast concrete .
num test specification slump aashto t num air content aashto t num compressive test specimens aashto t num compressive strengths aashto t num num review by the departments inspector does not relieve the precaster of the responsibility for providing materials and finished members as specified .
the department may reject deficient or defective materials or members at any time .
replace rejected items promptly at no additional cost to the department .
num concrete ensure that the precaster uses a design mix that produces concrete with the required numday compressive strength fc and an airentrainment of from num to num percent .
give the concrete mix design to the departments inspector num calendar days before placing concrete .
measure and batch materials at a batch plant and to within num percent of the required individual material batch weight mass .
ensure that the precaster takes temperature entrained air and slump tests before placing concrete in the forms .
keep complete records of quality control tests .
give two copies to the departments inspector .
perform concrete control tests in the presence of the departments inspector .
for testing numday acceptance strengths ensure the precaster makes for each precast member at least three cylinders of concrete num in num mm diameter num in num mm high and cured in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure that the precaster or an independent laboratory tests the cylinders and that transportation and curing prior to and during transportation of the cylinders is performed .
give test results to the departments inspector .
cure cylinders taken for prestressed precast members to determine strength for form removal or for cutting or relaxing prestressing steel by the same method and under the same conditions as the member .
num reinforcing steel ensure reinforcing steel is provided and placed in accordance with section num reinforcing steel ensure the precaster or an independent laboratory tests the samples .
give test results to the departments inspector .
ensure that the concrete cover to the face of main reinforcing steel is at least num in num mm and at least num in num mm to other reinforcing steel .
precast concrete num num num num num num num num num precast concrete num num prestressing steel protect prestressing steel against physical damage dirt oil or rust corrosion visible rust or other signs of corrosion are cause for rejection .
ensure the provision of a concrete cover at least num in num mm thick over the face of the prestressing steel prestressing steel with a diameter less than or equal to num in num mm and a centertocenter strand spacing of at least num in num mm .
ensure that prestressing steel has been packaged in containers or shipping forms that protect against damage and corrosion and identify the manufacturer type of steel and heat number .
num prestressing tension prestressing steel with hydraulic jacks to at least the working stress shown in design computations .
do not cut or release prestressing steel in pretensioned members until the member has attained a compressive strength at least equal to the release value shown in design computations .
unless a load cell or other approved method is used to monitor stress in at least two strands cast prestressed members the same day as prestressing .
keep a record of gauge pressures and elongations and give two copies to the departments inspector .
num structural steel ensure the provision and incorporation into the work of structural steel in accordance with section num structural steel .
do not paint or galvanize embedded plates .
paint other structural steel items such as cross frames in accordance with subsection num painting .
num bearing devices provide and install elastomeric bearing pads in accordance with shop drawings .
num forms use metal forms for prestessed precast members use metal or wood bulkheads .
maintain metal forms in likenew condition with no open holes dents open joints or misaligned butt joints .
fill open holes and joints with weld metal and grind smooth .
fill dents with weld metal and grind smooth or remove and replace with new metal welded in place and ground smooth .
make repairs so num num num num num num num num that the surface profile of the forms does not leave bumps or depressions in the cast concrete surface .
do not make temporary repairs using such materials as duct tape caulking etc .
ensure that forms produce a uniform surface finish for members and that form joints are smooth and tight enough to prevent significant leakage .
use forms rigid enough to prevent distortion from concrete pressure and other loads incidental to construction including vibration .
before placing reinforcement treat forms with an approved form release agent that will not discolor concrete .
before placing concrete clean the forms of debris .
num placing concrete mix and place concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete except vibrate the concrete internally externally or both as required for proper consolidation .
provide holes for diaphragm dowels and venting that pass through the member openings for connection rods and recesses for grout in members as specified .
lifting anchors may be installed in the ends of members provided that the portion of each anchor above the concrete is removed after the member is erected .
show lifting anchors on shop drawings and locate them with consideration for the safe handling and lateral stability of the member .
do not remove prestressed precast concrete members from forms until the design release strength has been reached .
do not dry cast .
num finishing precast concrete surfaces do not add water to the surface of concrete to help in finishing operations .
leave a rough finish to surfaces where additional concrete will be placed a smooth surface where no additional concrete will be placed and a transverse metal tine finish in accordance with subsection num finishing bridge decks on deck surfaces where no additional concrete will be placed .
give formed concrete surfaces an ordinary surface finish immediately after form removal .
remove and smooth fins and irregular projections .
thoroughly clean cavities produced by form ties and other holes honeycombed spots broken corners or edges and other defects .
saturate with water and carefully point and true with a cement and fineaggregate mortar mixed as per the design mix or precast concrete num num num num num num num num num num precast concrete num with a commercial patching mixture approved by the state bridge engineer .
apply mortar within num minutes after mixing .
cure mortar patches in the same manner as the concrete .
for prestressed precast concrete members patch defects with an approved twocomponent epoxy resin concrete compound applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
match the finished color of the patch to the concrete .
do not make concrete repairs other than at holddown locations for prestressed precast concrete members until the departments inspector has been notified of the extent of irregularities and approved the method of repair .
num curing precast concrete cure prestressed precast concrete members by steam or alternate methods approved by the state bridge engineer .
cure other precast concrete members in accordance with subsection num curing concrete or by steam curing .
perform steamcuring as follows num .
cover members immediately after casting or keep the exposed surfaces wet with fog spray or wet blankets .
num .
use enclosures that allow free circulation of steam around the member and are constructed to contain steam with minimum moisture loss .
use tarpaulins or similar flexible covers only if they are in good repair and secured to prevent steam and moisture loss .
num .
ensure that steam at the jets is low pressure and saturated and that steam jets do not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
during application of steam do not allow the temperature gradient within the enclosure to exceed num ºf num ºc per hour .
maintain a constant curing temperature throughout the enclosure no greater than num ºf num ºc for sufficient time to develop the required compressive strength .
cover control cylinders to prevent moisture loss and place in a location representative of the enclosures average temperature .
num .
provide devices to obtain an accurate continuous and permanent record of the curing temperature place one or more devices every num ft num m of continuous bed length .
num num num num num .
detension members in pretension beds immediately after steam curing while the concrete and forms are still warm or maintain the temperature in the enclosure above num ºf num ºc until the stress is transferred to the concrete .
num .
the department will consider curing complete at the end of the steam curing cycle .
num tolerance for precast concrete members num .
prestressed precast concrete girders .
use prestressed precast concrete girders with tolerances shown in table num tolerances for prestressed precast concrete girders .
precast concrete num num precast concrete num table num tolerances for prestressed precast concrete girders dimension tolerance igirders t bulb t and tri deck girders depth flanges web and fillets num in num mm num in num mm depth overall num in num in num mm num mm num in num mm width flanges d in num in num mm num mm c in num in num mm num mm width web fillets d in num in num mm num mm d in num in num mm num mm length of beam num innum ft num in max .
num mmm num mm max .
num innum ft num in max .
num mmm num mm max .
deviation along exposed beam ends measure skews diagonally num inft num in max .
num mmm num mm max .
c inft num in max .
num mmm num mm max .
diaphragm insert spacing num in num mm num in num mm stirrup bars projection above top of beam num in num mm na stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num in num mm na table continues on next page num table num tolerances for prestressed precast concrete girders continued precast concrete num dimension tolerance igirders t bulb t and tri deck girders stirrup bars clearance at end of beam num in num mm na horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to centerline of beam c innum ft num mmm c innum ft num mmm camber variation from design c innum ft num in max .
up to num ft length num mmm num mm up to num m length num in max .
over num ft length num mm max .
up to num m length num innum ft in max .
num mmm num mm max .
camber differential between adjacent beams na num innum ft num mmm in num mm max .
center of gravity of strand group num in num mm num in num mm position of hold down point for depressed strands num in num mm num in num mm position of handling devices num in num mm num in num mm num precast concrete num num .
precast concrete box culverts .
use precast concrete box culvert sections with tolerances as follows num .
internal dimensions within num percent of those specified num .
haunch dimensions within num in num mm of those specified num .
slab and wall thicknesses not less than num percent of those specified and num .
lengths of two opposite surfaces of the box section within in num mm of each other except where bevel ends are specified .
num precast concrete box culverts before shipping precast concrete box culverts ensure the assembly of at least three sections chosen by the departments inspector and that the joints fit as specified for final assembly .
excavate and backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
before installing precast concrete box culvert sections obtain two copies of recommended installation procedures from the precaster and give one to the engineer .
install on the prepared base in accordance with the recommendations .
do not allow gaps between sections when assembled in their final position exceeding num in num mm for more than num in num mm at any one location or totaling more than num in num mm in multiple locations .
do not allow the alignment of walls top slabs and bottom slabs to vary more than num in num mm for more than num in num mm at any one location or more than num in num mm total in multiple locations .
measure misalignment perpendicular to slabs and walls .
num handling and shipping precast members do not damage precast concrete members while handling storing or erecting .
blocking may be required to ensure safe transport .
handle store and erect members in an upright position and such that the points of support and directions of the support reactions with respect to the member are approximately the same as when the member is in its final position .
until concrete has attained num percent of the specified design strength do not move precast members by lifting on anchors embedded in the concrete or by lifting the member itself .
num num num num num mark the weight mass on members heavier than num ton num t. ensure that materials shipped to the project are accompanied by a manufacturers certification that lists each separate piece by name and piece mark and includes mill test reports and the precasters quality control report .
determine and provide the necessary temporary bracing to ensure lateral stability of prestressed precast concrete girders during erection and placement of the diaphragms and deck .
do not remove temporary bracing until the deck is placed and the diaphragms have attained num percent of ultimate design strength .
num rejection of precast members the department may reject precast members if upon removal of the forms there is cracking honeycombing air pockets sand streaks or other evidence of imperfect mixing or casting or because of failure to meet requirements of these specifications at the fabrication plant or job site .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
precast box culverts ___ ___ ft mm by the foot meter .
num .
precast concrete members as one complete unit .
num .
prestressed precast conc bulbt_____ in mm prestressed precast conc igirder _____ in mm and prestressed precast conc trideck _____ in mm by the foot meter from end of girder to end of girder for each prestressed precast member supplied .
precast concrete num num num num num num num precast concrete num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest precast box culverts ___ ___ ft mm ft m num ft num m ft num m precast concrete members ls ls ls prestressed precast conc bulbt ___ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m prestressed precast conc igirder ___ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m prestressed precast conc trideck ___ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m the department will pay as follows num section num bridge railing num description this section describes the requirements for constructing steel bridge railing pedestrian railing and bridge railing modifications .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection bolts and fasteners num bridge railing num epoxy resin grout num galvanized coating num high strength anchor bolts num use an adhesive anchorage system approved by the bridge program .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general fabricate and construct bridge railing in accordance with section num structural steel .
num fabrication ensure that venting and pickup holes in rails and sleeves are shown on the fabricators shop drawings .
place vent holes on the underside of the rail members as installed .
ensure that post base plates are flat after fabrication .
shopcurve rail members for curved bridges with a radius of less than num ft num m. bridge railing num num num num num num num num num bridge railing num grind rough edges on posts and rails smooth before galvanizing .
galvanize railing and hardware in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
straight or unwelded tubes may be galvanized before fabrication provided that cut surfaces are repaired in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
in addition to the requirements of aashto m num ensure that the galvanizing is free of general roughness dross pimples blisters and wet storage stain .
use nonmetallic spacers at least num in num mm thick to separate rails bundled together for storage or shipment .
ensure that metal bundling straps do not touch the rails .
num erection num general after installing rail elements paint the exposed rail bolt threads with two coats of zincrich paint in accordance with astm a num .
num new construction place and properly align railing posts before placing new concrete .
num railing modification for railing modification remove existing rail posts associated hardware and portions of anchor bolts protruding beyond the concrete surface when required .
removed bridge railing becomes the contractors property .
if removing and resetting bridge railing reuse rails posts and splice sleeves .
toggle bolts become property of the contractor do not reuse them .
use new ubolts to reattach rails to the posts .
matchmark items to be reused before removal .
replace items damaged during removal and resetting at no additional cost to the department .
set anchor bolts or threaded rods for railing modification in epoxy resin grout or an alternate adhesive anchorage system in accordance with subsection num setting anchor bolts .
if using an alternate system ensure that the anchor holes in the concrete are the diameter and length recommended by the adhesive manufacturer to achieve a minimum pullout capacity equaling the ultimate tensile strength of the anchor bolt or threaded rod .
preserve at least num in num mm between the bottom of drilled holes and the underside of the concrete slab .
num num num num num num num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
bridge railing and pedestrian railing by the foot meter .
num .
bridge railing modification pedestrian rail modification and reset bridge railing by the foot meter or by the complete unit .
the engineer will not include sleeves for attaching guardrail in the measurement for bridge railing or bridge railing modification the department will pay as follows bridge railing num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bridge railing ft m num ft num m ft num m bridge railing modification ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls num m pedestrian railing ft m num ft num m ft num m pedestrian railing modification ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls num m reset bridge railing ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls num m num bearing piles and sheet piling num section num bearing piles and sheet piling num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and driving steel bearing piles and steel sheet piling .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection steel bearing piles num cutwater angles and pile splices num paint num sheet piling num ensure that sheet piling has a minimum section modulus sm innumft cmnumm as specified .
num equipment num pile driving for bearing piles provide hammers capable of driving piles to specified length and required bearing capacity .
use fixed or swinging leads constructed to allow free movement of the hammer and rigged to hold the pile and hammer in alignment during driving .
to distribute the hammer blow fit a helmet around the pile head as needed to prevent the transfer of torsional forces during driving maintain the proper hammer and pile alignment .
provide hammer cushions of durable manufactured materials in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines .
equip diesel hammers with a device such as rings on the ram that allows the engineer to visually determine hammer stroke at all times during pile driving .
do not use gravity pile hammers .
the engineer may approve the use of air steam or closed end diesel hammers .
num num num num num num num submit hammer specifications to the engineer including the following information num .
make model and range of energy minimum to maximum in foot pounds joules of the pile hammer num .
range of the pile hammer stroke in feet meters num .
type thickness in inches millimeters area in square inches square millimeters elastic modulus in kips per square inch megapascals and coefficient of restitution of cushioning material num .
weight in pounds mass in kilograms of the ram striker plate and helmet and num .
estimated length in feet meters of piling in the leads .
when the department requires dynamic pile testing supply an electrical generator capable of producing num kw of power to operate the testing equipment .
num approval of piledriving equipment the geology program will determine the adequacy of the pile hammer through wave equation analysis .
if the hammer is deemed inadequate provide other equipment .
at least num calendar days before driving piles using the pile driving hammer configuration form enuma give the engineer the data for each hammer to be used .
the department will not allow the use of hammers for which the wave equation indicates pile stresses that exceed num percent of the minimum yield strength for steel piling .
num pile driving for sheet piling use a vibratory hammer to drive sheet piling unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer .
num construction num determination of length use bearing piles long enough to provide the specified bearing capacity penetration and extension into the cap or footing block .
the length of piling bearing piles and sheet piling num num num num num num num bearing piles and sheet piling num specified is an estimate only the engineer will determine the final length following an investigation of the site .
for sheet piling provide the specified area indicated on the departments proposal form enum unless site conditions prevent installation to those limits .
num predrilled holes when specified or approved by the engineer use predrilled holes .
extend to the elevation specified and obtain the remaining penetration with the pile driver .
do not allow the hole diameter to exceed the pile width .
place the pile in the hole and drive it to set the point firmly into bearing material and secure full bearing .
fill the space around the pile to the ground surface with dry sand pea gravel flowable fill or other material approved by the engineer .
do not use water or air jets without written approval from the engineer .
num pile driving num .
bearing piles .
drive piles using the system approved and without variation except with the engineers written approval .
the engineer will consider changes in the driving system only after the necessary information for a revised wave equation analysis is submitted .
support long piles to prevent lateral buckling during driving .
support pile hammers in leads while driving piles .
maintain hammers to obtain the operating length of the stroke and number of blows per minute for which the hammer is designed .
maintain cushions in good condition .
the engineer will observe the hammers initial operations to verify its adequacy .
repair or replace inadequate hammers .
cut the heads of steel piles squarely .
ensure that the helmet closely fits the top of the pile and extends down the sides to maintain alignment of the pile head under hard driving conditions .
drive piles to within num inft num mmm of vertical or the specified batter .
drive foundation piles in footings of piers and abutments so that their tops are within num in num mm of position in any direction .
num .
pile bents .
drive piles for bents so that the center of each piles top is within num in num mm of that specified when measured parallel to the centerline of the bent .
num num num num .
for pile bents with steel bent caps ensure that the centerline of the tops of the piles is not out of position by more than num in num mm measured perpendicular to the specified centerline of the bent or more than num in num mm from a stringline stretched between the centerline of the exterior piles .
num .
for pile bents with concrete bent caps ensure that the centerline of the tops of the piles is not out of position by more than num in num mm measured perpendicular to the specified centerline of the bent .
num .
sheet piling .
install piling to the depth and lateral limits specified do not remove .
when specified cut weep holes at the factory or in the field .
num bearing value and penetration for bearing piles drive pile to the length specified and at least num ft num m into the ground when no tip elevation is specified .
the department defines ground within an area of roadway embankment as the bottom of the roadway embankment or bottom of footing whichever is lower .
when a tip elevation is specified drive piles to at least the specified elevation unless otherwise allowed in writing by the engineer .
num .
end bearing piling .
based on a dynamic formula the wave equation or both the engineer will provide the following num .
the stroke or hammer energy num .
the blow count criteria to prevent overstressing of piling and num .
the amount of pile set in blows per inch mm to achieve refusal at a specified stroke or hammer energy for open end diesel hammers or hydraulic hammers respectively .
num .
soil resistance piling .
based on the wave equation and including a safety factor the engineer will provide the blow count per inch mm or per num in num mm at a specified stroke or hammer energy to achieve design bearing capacity and to prevent overstressing of piling .
bearing piles and sheet piling num num num bearing piles and sheet piling num num .
dynamic load tests .
if specified the department will take dynamic load measurements .
before full production driving drive test piling the department will specify pile locations to be tested .
contact the engineer num calendar days before and again two days before installing test piles .
the department will schedule a testing consultant to instrument and test piles during driving .
the departments consultant will test using the pile dynamic analyzer with the case pile wave analysis program to determine when the desired load capacity is achieved when specified restrike num hours after the test pile has been driven to ensure the desired capacity has been achieved .
allow sufficient time for required instrumentation and testing .
delay or standby time resulting from nonadherence of the contractor to the pile testing schedule will be at no additional cost to the department .
provide an additional num ft num m of piling for testing .
the department may change the specified length of piles driven after the tests .
num cutoff cut steel piles off at the elevation specified and when required cap them with steel plates or other devices .
cut sheet piles off at the depth specified .
num pile splices for bearing piles use steel hpiles of the size and weight mass specified .
the department will allow the length of steel pile to be built up in sections by splicing .
splice before driving during driving or both .
ensure that spliced piles have identical crosssections .
make steel pile splices with pile splicer sections or welded splices as follows num .
pile splicer .
bevel the outside edges of the flanges on the upper length of pile and cut a f in numc in num mm num mm notch in the web for the spacer bar .
slip the splicer onto the upper pile until the bar slides into the notch then weld the splicer to the upper pile .
set the upper num num num num pile with the attached splicer on the driven pile .
weld the splicer and the outside edge of each flange to the driven pile .
num .
welded splices .
connect the two pile sections by bevel groove welding .
align the connected pile sections to ensure that the axis of the pile is straight .
weld splices in accordance with subsection num field welding .
do not use a pile splicer section when the splice point is above ground unless piling is embedded in concrete .
to reduce piling waste use cutoffs longer than num ft num m to extend piling or splice them together as fulllength piles and incorporate them into the structure .
num painting paint bearing piles that will be visible in the completed structure .
clean and paint the exposed portion of the pile and the portion extending num in num mm below ground or low water surface whichever is higher in accordance with subsection num field painting .
for the final coat use the same color used on structural steel .
num pile points use and attach pile points as specified .
work necessary for pile points is considered incidental to the steel piling .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
pile splices required for the extension of piles due to an overrun in specified lengths per each splices made for the contractors convenience will not be paid for .
only one splice per pile will be paid for when an overrun in the specified length occurs .
num .
predrilled holes when specified by the foot meter .
num .
steel piling hp ___ ___ by the foot meter of driven length installed .
num .
steel sheet piling sm _____ by the square foot square meter of installed area .
num num bearing piles and sheet piling num num num num num bearing piles and sheet piling num num when the total driven quantity of piling installed is less than the total contract quantity the department will pay the difference by the invoice price of the material and the transportation cost .
excess piling remains the property of the contractor .
if required by the engineer he or she will measure piling installed in excess of the total contract quantity for payment .
the department will pay as follows num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest pile splices ea ea ea ea ea ea predrilled holes ft m num ft num m ft num m steel piling hp ___ ___ ft m num ft num m ft num m steel sheet piling sm ___ sf mnum num ft num m sf num mnum num section num concrete barrier num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete bridge barrier bridge median barrier median barrier and shoulder barrier .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num fly ash num grout num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num provide and install delineation as specified .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing and finishing equipment num use steel forms .
concrete barrier num num num num num num num concrete barrier num num num num construction num general use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
castinplace or slipform concrete barriers .
do not slipform bridge barrier if there is traffic on the bridge .
secure castinplace barrier forms for roadway barrier without damaging roadway pavement .
num installation vibrate and work the concrete until consolidated and free of voids without segregating the mix .
for the slipform method use concrete capable of maintaining the shape of the barrier without support .
cure in accordance with subsection num curing concrete .
surfaces protected by forms for five calendar days or more do not require curing .
immediately after removing forms give the exposed surfaces of bridge barrier a rubbed finish in accordance with subsection num finishing concrete surfaces .
for shoulder and median barriers leave an ordinary finish .
saw and grout shoulder and median barrier joints as specified including casting anchor bolts in terminal ends and furnishing steel sleeves or other hardware for guardrail connections .
place concrete barrier delineators of the type specified at numfoot num m intervals throughout the length of the barrier .
num dimensional tolerances remove and replace barrier not meeting tolerance requirements at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that concrete barrier meets the following tolerances num .
crosssectional dimensions within num in num mm of design dimensions num .
finished barrier true to specified line and grade num in every num ft num mm in num m and num .
surface variation under a numfoot num m straightedge no greater than num in num mm .
num num num num num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure bridge barrier bridge median barrier median barrier _____ in mm and shoulder barrier by the foot meter and without deducting for open joints required over bridge expansion joints .
the department will pay as follows concrete barrier num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bridge barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m bridge median barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m median barrier ____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m shoulder barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m num drilled shaft foundations num section num drilled shaft foundations num description this section describes the requirements for constructing drilled shaft foundations .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num fly ash num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num provide a powerdriven rotary auger or if required rock drilling equipment .
provide a rig of sufficient size and capacity and equipped to produce holes of the diameter and depth specified .
num construction num drilled holes drill shafts to within num in num mm of their specified locations measured at the top of the center axis .
drill vertical shafts no more than num percent of their length from plumb .
for their full length drill battered shafts no more than num percent from the specified angle of inclination .
num num num num num num drill holes deep enough to meet design requirements .
the engineer may change the specified elevation of the bottom of a drilled hole depending on where satisfactory material is encountered .
do not place reinforcing steel or concrete until the final bottom elevation has been established .
use removable casing when necessary to prevent caving or water seepage .
ensure that such casing is smooth watertight and made of metal strong enough to resist hydrostatic pressure concrete pressure and surrounding earth pressure .
ensure that the casing is clean extends to the top of the drilled hole excavation and has an outside diameter not less than the specified diameter of the drilled hole .
when the top of the drilled shaft is below ground level use a removable oversize casing or other approved forming method from the ground surface to the shaft as required to control caving .
if caving conditions are encountered stop drilling and change methods .
use water for drilling mud or slurry only with approval of the engineer .
as approved by the engineer dispose of excavated material not used as backfill around the completed structure .
num cleaning and inspection do not place concrete before the engineer has inspected drilled holes for tolerances satisfactory bearing material and freedom from debris and loose material .
the department will consider a hole sufficiently dry if water depth can be kept at num in num mm or less while placing concrete .
num reinforcing steel assemble the reinforcing steel cage completely and place as a unit .
anchor the reinforcing cage adequately to prevent movement after installation .
use spacers to ensure proper clearance between the reinforcing steel cage and shaft face .
extend the bars in the lower portion of the shaft to the bottom of the hole if the shaft is lengthened and fulldepth reinforcement is specified .
lapsplice the bars to proper length in accordance with subsection num placing and fastening and table num lap lengths for drilled shaft reinforcing steel .
drilled shaft foundations num num num num num num num num num num num num drilled shaft foundations num table num lap lengths for drilled shaft reinforcing steel if specified as fulldepth make spiral reinforcement fulldepth on extensions .
use spliced bar extensions with sufficient stability to withstand lifting placing and downward forces of wet concrete without slippage .
if necessary to ensure stability tack weld the lap splice extension along with tie wire for a distance no more than num in num mm from the bottom of the initial reinforcement and tack weld the spiral to the longitudinal reinforcement .
num concrete use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design except with concrete slump use it in accordance with table num concrete slump limits .
num num bar size no .
length bar size no .
length num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num table num concrete slump limits place concrete as soon as possible after completing the drilled hole place continuously in the shaft to the top elevation specified .
place in vertical dry holes without dropping more than num ft num m. do not drop concrete if it strikes the reinforcing steel or the sides of the hole .
in holes deeper than num ft num m or battered holes place concrete with an enclosed chute or pump .
where dewatering of the hole can not maintain a static water depth of num in num mm or less discharge concrete below the water .
if the batter exceeds num degrees from the vertical or if concrete is placed underwater immerse the placement discharge pipe at least num in num mm into the fluid concrete .
vibrate the top of the concrete in accordance with subsection num placing concrete for a depth equal to two shaft diameters .
do not vibrate concrete when the static water level is near or within the top portion to be vibrated .
num casing removal remove the casing while concrete is workable but after all concrete has been placed unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
as necessary to facilitate the casings upward movement use an initial short pull or jerk rotation downward pressure or tapping .
thereafter lift vertically at a slow uniform rate while keeping the casing aligned with the hole .
telescoping outer and inner or jointed casings may be pulled in stages .
in all cases of removal maintain at least num ft num m of fluid concrete above the bottom of the casing .
drilled shaft foundations num num num num casing type slump minimum maximum stayinplace num num removable num num num drilled shaft foundations num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure drilled shaft foundations _____ in mm by the foot meter from the completed bottom of the shaft to the top of the shaft .
the department will pay as follows num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest drilled shaft foundation ____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m num section num reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num description this section describes the requirements for constructing reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num fly ash num geotextile num pervious backfill material num plastic pipe for underdrain num portland cement num reinforcing steel num sheet metal num sheet piling num water num provide cardboard void material with an initial installed compressive strength greater than num psi num kpa and a final compressive strength after saturation of less than num psi num kpa .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing and finishing equipment num sheet pile driving equipment num reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num num num num num num reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num num num construction num steel sheet piling when constructing bridge approach fills onehalf at a time with traffic on the other half of the roadway use the specified size of steel sheet piling .
drive steel sheet piling where specified in accordance with section num bearing piles and sheet piling .
drive piling so that it extends from just below the proposed approach slab to the depth specified and from the abutment to the end of the approach backfill material .
do not damage the abutment corbel or footing .
leave the piling in place after construction .
num reinforced bridge approach fills before placing backfill and perforated plastic pipe line the bottom of the excavation with embankment and retaining wall reinforcement geotextile .
do not cover the top of the pipe or impede drainage with the geotextile .
place perforated and nonperforated plastic pipe along the base of the abutment backwall and slope to drain .
where steel sheet piling is required provide a hole in the piling to facilitate pipe placement .
if necessary for drainage extend the pipe through the abutment wingwall .
wrap perforated portions of pipe with drainage and filtration geotextile overlap longitudinal and peripheral seams from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
place perforated pipe with the perforations down and cap at the high end .
create a void of num in to num in num mm to num mm between reinforced approach fill and the abutment backwall and wingwalls use a stayinplace honeycomb cardboard a temporary slip form or other approved method .
do not use polystyrene slabs and a dissolving agent .
ensure that the strength reduction of stayinplace cardboard is controllable and that the reduction is complete before construction of the approach slab .
keep cardboard materials as dry as practical during installation and placement of backfill .
place backfill and geotextile in accordance with subsection num construction .
place an initial lift of backfill material on the geotextile lining in the bottom of the excavation .
where steel sheet piling is required extend the geotextile up the piling face to the bottom of the next layer of geotextile .
place and compact backfill material and wrap geotextile adjacent to the void material .
place the next layer of geotextile and compact the subsequent specified thickness of backfill on top of the fabric reembedment folds may be required .
repeat this procedure as necessary for the height of the abutment backfill .
num num num num num seams perpendicular to abutment back or wingwalls and seams parallel to abutment back or wingwalls and more than num ft num m away may be constructed by overlapping the geotextile at least num in num mm .
if minimum overlap can not be reached sew seams in accordance with subsection num construction .
leave seams exposed until the work has been inspected and repaired if necessary .
after completing the final lift of backfill remove the temporary slip form or saturate the stayinplace cardboard material to create the numinch to numinch num mm to num mm void .
if a slip form is used remove without displacing backfill or impairing the integrity of the geotextile .
if cardboard is used saturate inplace and continuously for at least eight hours without eroding the site .
num reinforced concrete approach slabs use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
finish the foundation surface at least num in num mm outside of slab edges to provide a firm support for forms .
moisten foundation material before placing the concrete .
form place and cure concrete in accordance with section num construction .
ensure that slab surfaces meet the tolerances and finish requirements of subsection num finishing bridge decks .
provide and place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
use galvanized sheet for bond breaker above corbels or sleeper slabs .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
bridge approach backfill by the cubic yard cubic meter based on the neat lines specified .
num .
reinforced conc approach slabs by the square yard square meter of the outtoout slab dimension .
reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num num num num num num num num num reinforced bridge approach fills and reinforced concrete approach slabs num the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for the following num .
geotextile in accordance with section num geotextiles based on the dimensions specified and including geotextile required for re embedment num .
steel sheet piling in accordance with section num bearing piles and sheet piling and num .
perforated and nonperforated plastic pipe in accordance with section num underdrains .
num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bridge approach backfill cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum reinforced conc approach slabs sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum num section num reinforced concrete slope paving num description this section describes the requirements for constructing reinforced concrete slope paving .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num aggregate for flowable backfill num curing materials num epoxy resin bonding compound num fly ash num joint fillers and sealers num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing and finishing equipment num machinemix flowable backfill materials in a rotary drum or other approved mixer capable of thoroughly dispersing all ingredients throughout the material .
reinforced concrete slope paving num num num num num num reinforced concrete slope paving num num num num construction num slope preparation num .
new construction .
moisten material under the slope paving where necessary and compact thoroughly to the required embankment density as specified in subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
shape the slope to the bottom plane of the paving .
num .
slope paving repairmodification .
when specified remove existing slope paving to the lines indicated or as approved by the engineer .
expose the existing welded wire fabric for at least num in num mm within the removed area and clean of old concrete .
if necessary to ensure neat lines after reconstruction sawcut construction joints num in num mm deep .
removed concrete becomes the property of the contractor .
fill voids beneath removed and adjacent slope paving with flowable backfill in accordance with subsection num construction use a material consistency and placement method that will not result in voids or segregation .
place flowable backfill in maximum lifts of num in num mm with each lift obtaining its initial set before placement of subsequent lifts .
fill voids to match the bottom plane of existing paving but without leaving a surface that would cause a new slope paving section thinner than specified .
cure at least num hours before placing new slope paving .
num placing finishing and curing concrete use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form place and cure in accordance with applicable portions of section num construction .
floatfinish in accordance with subsection num finishing concrete surfaces .
when placing slope paving as a repair or modification first clean the surfaces of the existing concrete abutting the new concrete and coat with epoxy bonding compound .
place welded wire fabric and lap with the exposed existing wire fabric .
place new concrete while the epoxy bonding material is still tacky .
if num the epoxy is no longer tacky remove any surface contaminates and reapply .
if existing joint filler was removed place new num in num mm joint filler with elastic joint sealer in new slope paving .
match the top surfaces of new and existing concrete .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure reinforced conc slope paving and slope paving repairmodification by the square yard square meter of surface area including the outside face of cutoff walls .
measurements will be made parallel to the surface .
no deduction will be made for the areas taken up by the intersection of columns or piling with the slope paving .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for flowable backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
reinforced concrete slope paving num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest reinforced conc slope paving sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum slope paving repair modification sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum num vacant num section num vacant section num vacant num section num riprap and gabion erosion protection num description this section describes the requirements for constructing bank or ditch lining or slope protection .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection aggregate for riprap num filter aggregate for riprap num geotextile num wire enclosed riprap and gabions num num equipmentvacant num construction num preparation of slopes shape slopes to allow for the full thickness of riprap or gabions and any bedding or filter aggregate .
slope material no steeper than its natural angle of repose .
when possible excavate the slope from undisturbed material when not shape and compact the underlying material to at least num percent of maximum density at optimum moisture content in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control .
num filter aggregate when specified place a layer of filter aggregate on the slope immediately before placing riprap .
shape the layer to provide the minimum thickness specified and to match the bottom surface of the riprap .
riprap and gabion erosion protection num num num num num num riprap and gabion erosion protection num num erosion control geotextile when specified place a layer of erosion control geotextile on the slope in accordance with section num construction immediately before placing riprap or gabions .
num handplaced stones where handplaced stones are specified place larger stones first and with close joints .
when a footing trench is specified place the larger rocks in the trench .
place rocks with their longitudinal axis perpendicular to the embankment face and arranged so that each rock above the foundation course has a numpoint bearing on the underlying rocks .
ensure that foundation rocks do not bear on smaller rocks used for chinking voids .
do not place rocks by dumping .
fill voids between large stones with smaller stones .
num machineplaced stones place machineplaced stones so as to minimize voids .
place larger stones in the toe course and on the outside surface of the slope protection .
after completing the slope protection work fill the footing trench with excavated material the department does not require compaction .
num wireenclosed riprap form wire enclosure segments to specified dimensions .
place lace and fill segments to provide uniform dense erosion protection .
heavyduty galvanized gabions may be substituted for standard wire enclosed riprap with the engineers approval and at no additional cost to the department .
num gabions lace adjacent gabions newtonew and newtoexisting along the perimeter of contact surfaces .
wire the bases of empty gabions placed on top of filled gabions tightly to the filled gabions .
stagger joints between ends of adjacent gabion baskets in a row at least num in num mm from those in the row below .
stretch the gabions in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to provide proper alignment .
while stretching inspect corners for open vs if found close vs by replacing the material .
ensure that the stretching provides a resistant force to prevent bulging while installing the aggregate fill and connecting wires .
num num num num num num num place the last layer of stone in a gabion level with the top of the gabion to provide an even surface for the next course of gabions .
before placing the next course backfill the completed course with siteexcavated material in accordance with subsection num backfilling and without displacing or damaging gabions .
num wire acceptance for wire products used not meeting the specification requirements for the type of wire specified the engineer will do one of the following num .
reject and require removal of the outofspecification material at no additional cost to the department num .
accept and leave the material in place with the contractors cost of the wire product deducted or num .
accept the material at a reduced unit price in accordance with the materials programs schedule of price adjustment for outof specification wire products in effect at the time of the contract award .
obtain a copy from the materials program .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
filter aggregate gabions handplaced riprap and machineplaced riprap by the cubic yard cubic meter in place .
num .
wireencl riprap by the square yard square meter parallel to the top surface .
if gabions are substituted for wireencl riprap the engineer will measure the gabions by the square yard square meter as wireencl riprap .
riprap and gabion erosion protection num num num num num num riprap and gabion erosion protection num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for erosion control geotextile in accordance with section num geotextiles .
num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest filter aggregate cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum gabions cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum gabions sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum handplaced riprap cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum machineplaced riprap cy mnum num ft num m cy mnum wireencl riprap sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum the department will pay as follows num section num expansion joints num description this section describes the requirements for the installation of expansion joints .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection compressed joint material num preformed elastomeric compression joint seal num provide adhesive for installing compressed joint material and sealant for the splices as recommended by the joint material supplier .
provide lubricant adhesive for installing elastomeric compression joint seals as recommended by the joint seal supplier .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general at least num calendar days before installation give the engineer the manufacturers written recommendations for joint installation .
do not install joint material before obtaining the engineers approval of the prepared surface depth width and alignment .
ensure the presence of a technical representative of the expansion joint materials supplier during initial installation of at least one complete joint .
form the joints in the concrete to provide true vertical sides with no projections .
remove irregularities in the joint faces that would prevent full contact of the joint material .
do not allow joint width to vary from specified dimensions by more than num½ percent measured perpendicular to the joint .
protect joints from damage until completion of all work on the structure .
expansion joints num num num num num num num expansion joints num after the concrete has cured and immediately before installing the joint clean the concrete surfaces of the joint thoroughly removing all foreign matter including grease oil and curing compound .
ensure that the completed installation provides a watertight seal .
num compressed joint material provide compressed joint material for the specified depth and gap size .
when required coat joint contact surfaces with adhesive in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
install material at an air temperature from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc .
uniformly recess the top of the material ¼ in num mm below the top of the concrete .
ensure that splices are vertical and beveled num degrees horizontally .
place sealant in the splice before butting the pieces .
num elastomeric compression joint seal install elastomeric compression joint seal in a compressed state without stretching .
seal each joint with one continuous length of seal .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure compressed joint material and elastomeric comp joint seal by the foot meter along the centerline of the joint including curb and gutter sections .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest compressed joint material ft m num ft num m ft num m elastomeric comp joint seal ft m num ft num m ft num m num section num structural concrete num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing portland cement concrete for bridges culverts and other castinplace reinforced concrete structures .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num evaporation retardant num fly ash num grout num hardware cloth for drains num joint fillers and sealers num portland cement num water num provide concrete consisting of portland cement water fine aggregate coarse aggregate and approved additives proportioned and mixed as specified or approved .
for the wearing surfaces of bridge decks provide type num whitepigmented impervious curing compound .
elsewhere provide and use type num clear or translucent .
fabricate stayinplace forms that will be exposed in the finished structure including corrugated sheets spanning supports closures and accessories from hotdipped galvanized steel in accordance with astm specification a num grade num with a minimum coating class of gnum .
structural concrete num num num num num num num structural concrete num num equipment num batch plant use a batch plant equipped with scales bins and weighing hopper as follows num .
with beam springlessdial or electronic scales equipped and graduated to enable the accurate determination of the weight mass of each material .
ensure that poises can be secured in any position .
num .
with a cover and vents on the weigh hopper to control dust during operation .
ensure that the discharge chute is not suspended from the weigh hopper or arranged so that cement or fly ash lodges or leaks from the hopper .
num .
with a means to measure water either by a meter certified in accordance with section num watering using a calibrated measuring tank or by weight mass on approved scales .
num .
with a calibrated dispenser to the waterline and equipped with a manuallyoperated shutoff valve for introducing airentraining agents into the mix .
batch plants may be equipped to proportion aggregates and bulk cement by automatic weighing devices of an approved type .
num mixers provide stationary or truck mixers that are the revolvingdrum or revolving blade type and operate them uniformly at the manufacturers recommended mixing speed .
before use obtain a copy of the manufacturers operating guide showing dimensions and arrangements of blades in reference to the original height and depth .
do not use equipment or components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys that will come in contact with concrete during mixing transporting or pumping .
equip mixers with adequate water storage and a meter for accurately measuring and controlling water used in each batch .
equip stationary mixers with an automatic timing device that can be locked .
interlock the timing device and discharge mechanism to prevent discharging any part of the batch until the specified mixing time has elapsed .
num num num num num num if used ensure the provision of revolvingdrum truck mixers that are watertight and capable of distributing materials uniformly .
equip with electrically or mechanicallyactuated continuousregistering accurate revolution counters mounted so that the dial can be easily read .
num placing and finishing equipment do not use aluminum equipment for placing concrete .
provide internal high frequency vibrators that produce at least num pulses per minute .
provide tremies consisting of a watertight tube with a hopper at the top and a minimum diameter of num in num mm .
equip the tube with a device to prevent water from entering while the tube charges with concrete .
support the tremie to allow free movement of the discharge end and to allow rapid lowering when necessary to slow or stop the flow of concrete .
provide concrete pumping equipment of adequate capacity for the work and pumps that produce a continuous stream of concrete without causing air pockets .
provide a finishingmachine that complies with the following num .
is selfpropelled capable of forward and reverse travel under positive control and equipped for raising screeds to clear the screeded surface when traveling in reverse .
num .
is equipped with at least two finishing devices for consolidating the concrete one of which is a pantype vibrator and the other a device with two or more rotating cylindrical drums at least num ft num m long .
ensure that the vibration frequency of the devices is variable with positive control from num to num vpm and that both devices have positive control of the vertical position .
num .
is capable of finishing the surface to within num in num mm of the placement edges .
num .
travels on supporting screed rails that do not deflect under the weight of the machine and can be removed without damaging new concrete .
provide two portable lightweight work bridges for touchup work and surface texturing behind the finishing machine .
structural concrete num num num num num num num num structural concrete num for a tine finish provide a metal tining device with numinch to numinch num mm to num mm steel tines approximately num in num mm thick and num in num mm wide on inch num mm centers .
num grinding equipment for corrective grinding provide a diamondsaw cutting machine capable of cutting through mortar and aggregate without breaking or dislodging aggregate particles .
num construction num general notify the engineer at least num hours before placing concrete .
the engineer will hold a prepour conference before the placement of concrete bridge decks and as otherwise deemed necessary .
num weather limitations heat the water aggregates or both when air temperatures are at or below num ºf num ºc .
provide heated enclosures during curing when the air temperature is at or below num ºf num ºc .
maintain the concrete surface at a minimum temperature of num ºf num ºc for at least num hours after placing and at num ºf num ºc or higher for the remainder of the numcalendar day curing period .
ensure that concrete delivered in air temperatures below num ºf num ºc arrives at the project at a temperature from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc .
heat aggregates water or both to a temperature from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc .
heat aggregates by steam or dry heat and ensure that they are free of frozen lumps ice and snow .
do not use equipment or methods that alter or prevent air entrainment or produce hot spots in the aggregate .
do not place concrete against frozen ground or in contact with materials having a temperature less than num ºf num ºc .
if necessary heat items such as forms reinforcing steel adjacent concrete and foundation materials to above num ºf num ºc before placing concrete .
during placement keep delivery chutes or buckets at or above num ºf num ºc .
remove and replace concrete damaged by frost or overheating at no additional cost to the department .
num num num num num num num num the department will use the critical rate of evaporation as a limiting factor for the placement of concrete on bridge decks during hot weather .
do not start work if the evaporation rate is greater than num lbft²h num kgm²h .
stop placing concrete if the evaporation rate rises above num lb ft²h num kgm²h or take action to reduce evaporation such as by providing shade using ice or other cooling methods in the concrete mix and providing wind barriers .
the engineer will determine the deck surface evaporation rate from figure num evaporation nomograph by measuring relative humidity near the deck wind velocity air temperature and concrete deck temperature concrete mix temperature .
the engineer will determine the relative humidity from figure num relative humidity using the wetbulb and drybulb temperatures .
discuss cold or hot weather operations at the prepour conference .
structural concrete num num num num structural concrete num figure num relative humidity num figure num evaporation nomograph structural concrete num rate of evaporation lbftnumhr kgmnumhr tousethischart num .
enterwithairtemperature moveuptorelativehumidity .
num .
moverighttoconcrete temperature .
num .
movedowntowindvelocity .
num .
moveleftreadapprox.rate ofevaporation .
num structural concrete num num shipping and storage protect cement from moisture damage .
store cement of different brands type or from different mills separately .
deliver portland cement and fly ash unless provided as a blended cement separately and store them separately at the plant site location .
num mix design at least num calendar days before concrete production send a mix design request to the materials program that includes the following num .
samples of the actual materials to be used in the minimum quantities indicated num .
num lb num kg of fly ash num .
num lb num kg of portland cement num .
num lb num kg of fine aggregate num .
num lb num kg of coarse aggregate and num .
num pt num l of each admixture .
num .
the procedure and sequence for adding each ingredient to the batch .
the materials program will complete two mix designs per class of structural concrete at no cost to the contractor however the contractor will be charged num for each additional mix design requested .
for the specified class of concrete use class a or b when not specified supply structural concrete in accordance with table num concrete class table .
num num num num num table num concrete class table structural concrete num num fly ash to cement replacement ratio .
num ensure that concrete with slump greater than num in num mm contains a waterreducing admixture .
num percent by weight mass of the total aggregate .
for the class specified the materials program will determine the material proportions to be used for producing a workable mix within the specified consistency and proportions of ingredients shown in table num concrete class table .
fly ash may be substituted for portland cement to a maximum of num percent by weight mass at a num replacement ratio when approved by the materials program based on a satisfactory trial mix .
use a fly ashtocement replacement ratio of num for fly ash with a calcium oxide content of less than num percent .
do not allow the total combined weight mass of portland cement and fly ash to vary more than num percent from the approved trial mix .
num num parameter class a b s ultimate design strength fc num d psi mpa num num num num num num min .
cement content lbydnum kgmnum num num num num num num max .
water cement ratio num num num max .
water cement fly ash ratio num num num num num num num num num num percent entrained air contentrange num num num num num num consistencymax .
slump in mmnum num num num num num num percent fine aggregatenum num num num num num num num structural concrete num do not change the material source properties or gradation specification without the engineers approval .
do not work with changed or new materials until the engineer has determined and designated an appropriate mix design based on the new or altered materials including cement fly ash and admixtures .
num forms num general use forms that are sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion from concrete pressure and other loads incidental to construction including vibration .
construct and maintain forms mortartight and to prevent joints from opening .
ensure that forms produce smooth even concrete surfaces in proper alignment .
keep forms free of dents and their surfaces free from foreign matter .
clean previously used forms of all foreign material .
maintain the shape strength rigidity watertightness and surface smoothness of reused forms .
remove forms from inside box girders and clear of loose debris .
use plywood or a similar product for forming exposed concrete surfaces .
chamfer corner angles measuring less than num degrees that will be exposed in the finished structure with a numinch num mm triangular strip .
countersink bolt and rivet heads on the inside of forms .
use clamps pins or other connecting devices designed to hold the forms rigidly together and allow removal without damaging the concrete .
to prevent the adherence of concrete treat forms with a formrelease agent before placing reinforcement or saturate untreated wood forms with water immediately before concrete placement .
do not use agents that will adhere to or discolor concrete .
num stayinplace forms num general the department will allow the use of stayinplace slab forms for bridge deck construction however the department will not pay for any increase in the quantity of concrete due to such use .
store stayinplace forms above the ground surface and to facilitate drainage at an angle of at least num degrees from horizontal .
protect forms from moisture .
num num num num num num num num num num num design and shop drawings design stayinplace forms and angle supports to support the dead load of the form reinforcing steel and concrete and an additional num lbft² num kpa for construction live load .
ensure a unit working stress in the steel sheet of less than num times the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished or num psi num mpa whichever is less .
compute physical design properties in accordance with the latest published edition of american iron and steel institute specification for the design of coldformed steel structural members .
ensure a maximum dead load deflection of forms supporting slabs no greater than num of the span or num in num mm whichever is less .
ensure a distance from the face of stayinplace forms to the face of reinforcing steel of at least num in num mm .
submit shop drawings to the state bridge engineer in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
ensure that the stayinplace form fabricator verifies the appropriate girder dimensions with the girder fabricator before providing shop drawings so that the drawings are representative of actual girder dimensions .
num stayinplace form installation attach stayinplace forms to concrete girders by welding or bolting to cast in anchors .
ensure that the form fabricator supplies the anchors to the girder fabricator .
use attachment devices from the form fabricator to attach stayinplace forms to steelgirder bridge superstructures do not weld or bolt .
when required perform cutting with a saw gas torch or shears .
repair galvanized coating damaged during fabrication shipping storage or installation of stayinplace forms in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
place concrete in accordance with subsection num placing concrete .
do not dump concrete near laps in forming at midspan of corrugated sheets or in any manner causing excessive concentrated construction loads .
when required by the engineer remove sections of stayinplace forms to examine concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if defects are found repair them or replace the concrete as approved by the engineer .
the department does not require the replacement of removed forms however repair adjacent forms to present a neat appearance and ensure their satisfactory retention .
structural concrete num num num num num num num num num num structural concrete num num falsework build falsework on a firm foundation and strong enough to carry the superimposed load without excessive deflection settlement or stress .
design falsework to allow for normal settlement so that the final position of the parts of the structure will meet specified dimensions and elevations .
leave falsework in place during placement of the entire superstructure except curbs .
remove supports so as to allow the concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses of its own weight mass .
remove falsework piling to at least num in num mm below the original ground or finished surface whichever is lower .
remove and replace any part of the structure damaged or not true to line and grade because of sag settlement or failure of the falsework at no additional cost to the department .
num deck drains weep holes and eye bolts if specified install deck drains along the front face of the curb .
if specified provide and install structural steel drains in accordance with section num structural steel .
provide and install weep holes in abutment walls wingwalls and retaining walls as specified .
when specified for attaching fence to box culverts and bridges anchor eye bolts in the concrete .
num batching measure and batch materials at a batch plant .
control the weight mass of individual aggregates and admixtures to within num percent of requirements .
num .
cement and fly ash .
use sacked or bulk cement .
do not use fractions of a sack unless the fractional weight mass is known .
do not use cement damaged by moisture .
weigh bulk cement and fly ash on approved scales in accordance with subsection num weighing procedures and equipment .
num .
aggregates .
handle and deliver aggregates to the batch plant without segregation .
do not use segregated aggregates or those mixed with earth or foreign material .
num num num num num num stockpile or bin aggregates that have been washed produced or handled hydraulically to drain at least num hours before batching .
the department will accept rail shipment lasting more than num hours as adequate binning if the cars allow free drainage .
the department may require longer storage if aggregates have a high or nonuniform moisture content .
num .
airentraining and other admixtures .
store airentraining admixtures in sealed containers and protect them from freezing .
before use mix the admixture thoroughly with a mechanical stirring device .
except as indicated below introduce airentraining admixtures with a calibrated dispenser into the stream of mixing water .
fully discharge the required quantity before all the mixing water has entered the drum .
add airentraining and other approved admixtures to the concrete mix separately and do not intermingle them before entering the concrete batch .
before adding admixtures other than those for air entraining obtain the engineers approval for the proposed methods and equipment .
num mixing and delivery num general use a concrete plant with sufficient capacity and hauling vehicles to ensure continuous concrete delivery at the rate required for uninterrupted placement and without allowing intervals between batches longer than num minutes .
mix and deliver concrete to the site by one of the following num .
mix completely in a central plant and transport to the point of delivery in truck agitators .
num .
mix partially in a central plant and complete mixing in a truck mixer .
num .
mix completely in a truck mixer .
structural concrete num num num num structural concrete num clean mixers to prevent buildup of materials .
repair or replace the pickup and throwover blades in the drums when worn num in num mm or more .
repair or replace mixers and agitators with accumulated hard concrete or worn blades .
when blade wear or mixing uniformity is questionable the engineer will take consistency tests .
if the measured consistency falls outside limits specified do not use the concrete and repair or replace the mixing unit .
the engineer will conduct uniformity tests for mixing time or mix consistency in accordance with aashto m num .
use a mixer drum speed in accordance with the manufacturers plant operating directions .
do not mix a volume of concrete greater than the mixers rated capacity or greater than the amount needed for immediate use .
do not use concrete that has developed an initial set or retemper concrete by adding water or additives .
empty the mixer including rinse water at the plant in view of the engineer before charging a batch of concrete .
before charging the mixer wet the inside of the drum thoroughly and eject free water .
charge the batch into the mixer so that some water enters before the cement and aggregates .
if approved a portion of the mixing water may be withheld from the batch materials in order to adjust the consistency of concrete at the placement site .
charge into the drum the water that is used in batching within the first onequarter of the specified mixing time .
batch and charge cement into the mixer with no loss of cement .
ensure that concrete is homogeneous and mixed thoroughly with no evidence of lumps or undispersed cement .
mix admixtures uniformly throughout the batch .
when the concrete temperature is from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc place within num minutes of introducing the cement to the aggregates or water .
for each one degree increase in concrete temperature above num ºf num ºc reduce the numminute placing time by num minutes num minutes for one degree celsius .
other conditions that speed the stiffening of the concrete may warrant shortening the placing time to num minutes or less .
ensure that the mixed concrete temperature immediately before placing is from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc .
if ice is used as part of the mixing water do not discharge concrete from the mixer until the ice melts .
num num num num num num num num num mixing time num .
central mixers .
the department defines mixing time as beginning when all dry materials are in the drum and ending with the start of the discharge .
for central mixers with a capacity of num yd³ num m³ or less mix for at least num seconds .
for larger mixers mix for the time recommended by the mixer manufacturer .
num .
truck mixers .
mix each batch of concrete from num to num revolutions of the drum or blades at the manufacturers recommended mixing speed .
at the plant mix in the presence of the engineer and record the number of revolutions at mixing speed on the concrete batch ticket .
actuate the revolution counter after all materials including mixing water are in the mixer drum .
after mixing rotate the drum at the agitating speed recommended by the manufacturer .
do not exceed a total of num revolutions .
adjust mixing time as necessary to obtain a uniform mix .
num transporting transport mixed concrete in truck agitators or mixers operating at the agitating speed designated by the manufacturer .
provide mixed concrete at the delivery point suitable for placement and meeting specified requirements .
deliver each load of concrete with an accompanying departmentfurnished concrete batch ticket form enum or with a computergenerated ticket providing the same information .
num onsite mix adjustment do not add mixing water to the concrete while hauling if necessary to increase the slump add remaining mixing water at the placement site .
accurately meter added water .
do not exceed the allowable ratios of watertocement or water tocementplusflyash specified in table num concrete class table .
if water is added onsite use up to num additional mixing revolutions if necessary .
the engineer may approve the use of onsite admixtures for slump and air enhancement if used mix additionally in accordance with the admixture manufacturers recommendations .
structural concrete num num num num num num num structural concrete num do not make more than two onsite mix adjustments defined as the addition of water or an onsite admixture .
do not redose partial loads .
adjust the mix onsite while the concrete is plastic and within num minutes of starting the initial mixing .
do not add water or other materials to concrete that has started to set .
num testing the engineer may test for consistency of individual loads at approximately the beginning midpoint and end of the load .
if slump tests on any one load vary by more than num½ in num mm do not use the mixer until the condition is corrected .
the engineer will take concrete samples for slump and air content tests at the outlet of the mixer truck .
for pumped concrete slump and compressive strength samples will be taken either after pumping and before screeding or before pumping .
air content samples for pumped concrete will be taken after pumping and before screeding .
samples represent the entire batch .
num placing concrete num general place concrete after forms and reinforcing steel have been checked with the engineer present after forms have been cleaned and immediately after wetting surfaces on which concrete will be placed .
place unsegregated concrete without displacing reinforcement .
do not deposit a large quantity at any point and run work or drop concrete into or along forms for a distance of more than num ft num m unless confined by closed chutes or pipes .
fill forms by depositing concrete as near final position as possible .
work coarse aggregate back from the forms and around reinforcement without displacing the bars .
after the concrete obtains initial set do not jar forms or place stress on reinforcing steel .
incline chutes to allow the free flow of concrete .
do not add water to concrete to promote flow in chutes .
when the air temperature exceeds num ºf num ºc cool the forms reinforcing steel steel beam flanges and other surfaces contacting the concrete mix with a water spray .
num num num num num num num num place concrete continuously in each section of the work to complete integral placements .
place and consolidate concrete in horizontal layers no deeper than num in num mm for beams and slabs or num in num mm for footings walls or columns .
place layers before the previous layer obtains an initial set .
do not taper the ends of layers place with nearly square ends and level tops .
consolidate each layer to prevent separation planes between layers .
consolidate the external surface of concrete during placement with spading tools and vibrators .
place concrete so as to force coarse aggregate from the surface and bring mortar against the forms producing a dry smooth finish without air pockets or honeycombs .
for pumped concrete arrange equipment to protect fresh concrete from vibrations .
after pumping discharge remaining concrete in the pipeline without contamination or segregation .
when using a pump for placements such as decks or structural girders have backup placement equipment onsite .
keep chutes troughs and pipes clean by flushing with water after each run .
discharge flushing water away from the placed concrete .
num consolidation consolidate concrete with mechanical vibrators operating in the concrete supplement by hand spading as necessary .
provide at least two vibrators at the site when placing more than num yd³ num m³ of concrete .
work the concrete around the reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into form corners and angles .
do not use vibrators to flow or run concrete into position .
vibrate long enough to compact but do not cause segregation .
insert the vibrator vertically with a distance between insertions of approximately num times the radius of influence defined as the area visibly affected by the vibrator .
overlap adjacent radii of influence by approximately num in num mm .
with the vibrator penetrate rapidly to the bottom of the layer and hold in place from num to num seconds .
stop vibrating in one location when large aggregate is embedded and escaping air bubbles stop appearing .
num joints locate construction joints as specified or approved by the engineer .
for an emergency joint form a keyway or insert dowel bars to provide adequate bond across the joint .
structural concrete num num num num num num num num num structural concrete num roughfloat horizontal joints to consolidate the concrete surface do not key .
when placing new concrete on the joint draw the forms tight against existing concrete .
clean the joint surface of foreign matter with wire brushes brooms or sandblasting and wet immediately before placing concrete .
key vertical joints form with oiled beveled timber .
do not make joints with concrete sloping to a thin feathered edge .
use bulkheads for nonhorizontal joints and for horizontal joints that would otherwise lead to a feathered edge in the next layer .
form such joints with a temporary bulkhead so that the next layer will end in a body of concrete at least num in num mm thick .
sandblast construction joints at the tops and bottoms of tgirder stems box girder webs and box culvert side walls to remove foreign matter including laitance and curing compound and to expose clean aggregate .
sandblast or otherwise clean openings for joint materials before placement to ensure proper bonding with concrete .
let joints dry before placing joint material .
num grout work clean areas to be grouted of material that would prevent bonding of mortar and concrete keep the areas wet for at least num hours immediately before grouting .
fill completely and pack grout into recesses and holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations specified .
ensure that locations where grout could escape are mortartight before placing .
for at least three calendar days after placement cure grout surfaces by the water method and keep free of loads .
remove and replace improperly cured or otherwise defective grout at no additional cost to the department .
num footings when approved by the engineer forms may be omitted on sides of concrete footings not exposed in the finished structure if doing so place concrete directly against the sides of the footing excavation .
below specified footings use concrete subfootings of the same class and placed monolithically with the footings .
for subfootings thicker than num in num mm step out beyond the edges of the specified footings by half the depth of the subfooting .
num num num num num num num num num cofferdam seals if excavations can not be dewatered before placing concrete construct an underwater concrete cofferdam seal at least num in num mm thick from concrete containing num percent extra cement .
do not build the top of the seal higher than the specified bottom of the footing .
place the concrete in a compact mass in its final position using a tremie .
maintain still water at the point of deposit and use watertight cofferdam forms .
do not place concrete other than that for cofferdam seals underwater .
fill the tremie by a method that prevents washing of the concrete .
submerge the discharge end completely in concrete to prevent water entry .
with a batch in the hopper start the flow of concrete by slightly raising the discharge end but still keeping it submerged in deposited concrete .
continue the flow until completion of a monolithic homogeneous seal .
cure the concrete at least five calendar days before dewatering .
increase the time if the seal is to withstand hydrostatic pressure and the seal has been placed in water less than num ºf num ºc .
exclude from the counted curing time periods when water temperature is continuously below num ºf num ºc .
take concrete test cylinders and cure in similar conditions to determine strength .
after sufficient time to ensure adequate seal strength dewater the cofferdam and clean the concrete top of scum laitance and sediment .
num finishing concrete surfaces num finish types num .
ordinary finish .
give formed concrete surfaces an ordinary surface finish immediately after form removal .
finish horizontal surfaces while concrete is plastic .
do not add water to concrete surfaces for finishing operations .
if approved by the engineer and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommend ations a commercial evaporation retardant may be used .
remove fins and irregular projections from exposed surfaces .
clean cavities and other defects thoroughly saturate with water and carefully point and true with a mortar of cement and fine aggregate mixed in the proportions of the concrete being finished .
use mortar for pointing structural concrete num num num num structural concrete num within num minutes of mixing .
use commercial patching mixtures only when approved by the engineer .
cure patches in accordance with subsection num curing concrete .
tool construction and expansion joints in completed work and free from mortar and concrete .
num .
rubbed finish .
keep concrete to receive a rubbed finish saturated with water .
ensure the mortar used in pointing is set before wetting .
rub surfaces with a mediumcoarse carborundum stone faced with a small quantity of mortar composed of cement and fine sand mixed in proportions of the concrete being finished .
rub until form marks projections and irregularities have been removed all voids are filled and a uniform surface is obtained .
leave the paste produced by rubbing .
after placing concrete above the treated surface obtain the final finish by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water until the entire surface is smooth and uniform in color .
after final rubbing and when the surface is dry rub with burlap to remove loose powder .
num .
float finish .
obtain a float finish for horizontal surfaces by placing an excess of material in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a template forcing coarse aggregate below the mortar surface without creating a concave surface .
after strikingoff work and float the surface with a floating tool .
do not use aluminum floats .
before the finish sets remove the surface cement film with a fine brush leaving a finegrained smooth sanded texture .
num finishing bridge decks num general finish bridge decks with a deck finishing machine on rails .
use hand tools only where necessary .
set up finishing machines num hours before use to allow inspection by the engineer in daylight before each placement .
before placing concrete and under the engineers inspection verify the adjustment and operation of deck finishing machines by moving the machine over the full length of the deck section and traversing the float completely across end bulkheads .
check the specified cover over reinforcing steel and make necessary adjustments .
num num num the engineer will randomly check the depth of fresh concrete immediately behind the screed and over reinforcing steel across the full width and length of the bridge deck .
if depth checks indicate variations greater than num in num mm take corrective action immediately which may involve additional tie downs for reinforcing steel or adjusting screed elevations .
provide a working bridge behind the screed that can be used for depth checks .
immediately after screed floating and while concrete is plastic test the slab surface for irregularities using a numfoot num m straightedge .
hold the straightedge in successive positions parallel to the road centerline and in contact with the slab surface for the entire area of the slab .
move the straightedge in stages of no more than half its length .
correct variations immediately fill depressions with freshlymixed concrete or strike off projections .
consolidate and refinish corrected areas .
repeat straightedge testing and refloating until the slab surface has no deviations greater than num in num mm .
after finishing the slab surface and allowing water sheen to evaporate finish the concrete surface by dragging a seamless strip of damp burlap over the full width of the surface .
use a drag consisting of burlap layers with sufficient length in contact with the concrete to slightly groove the surface .
move the drag forward with a minimum bow of the lead edge .
keep the drag damp clean and free of hardened concrete particles .
num tine finish immediately after the burlap drag finish give the surface a transverse metal tine finish .
control the method and application time of the finish to avoid tearing the surface and unseating aggregate particles .
produce grooves in the concrete from c in num mm to num in num mm deep at right angles to the roadway centerline on all bridges regardless of skew .
operate the metal tine device mechanically or manually and do not overlap passes .
other texturing equipment such as a finned float may be used if they produce equivalent grooves .
leave the last num in num mm of deck next to the curbs untextured for drainage .
use an edging tool at unarmored expansion joints .
as approved by the engineer remove or correct concrete without a satisfactory finish at no additional cost to the department .
structural concrete num num num num num num num num structural concrete num num surface tolerance when concrete has set sufficiently to allow walking and no later than the day after placement the engineer will check the surface with a straightedge and mark variations in excess of num inch in num ft num mm in num m. grind high spots with a diamondsaw cutting machine .
repair low spots as approved by the engineer .
grind or patch to smooth the surface .
at no additional cost to the department remove portions or all of the deck if corrective work is not satisfactory .
protect concrete against damage until it obtains final set .
num curing concrete if forms are removed in less than five calendar days cure concrete immediately with water or impervious compound methods after removal of forms curing is not necessary if concrete is protected by metal or treated wooden forms for five calendar days or more .
keep untreated wood forms moist during curing period .
when the weather would otherwise cause concrete mixing water to evaporate rapidly apply a fine mist to concrete surfaces until curing is complete .
alternatively use a commercial evaporation retardant approved by the engineer and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
when using the water method keep concrete continuously damp for at least five calendar days by applying water with an atomizing nozzle that produces a fog mist do not direct water under pressure on the concrete or allow water to accumulate causing concrete to flow or wash. keep surfaces damp throughout curing and use burlap or other covering approved by the engineer to retain moisture .
when using impervious curing compound give surfaces the required surface finish before applying compound .
apply curing compounds in accordance with table num impervious curing compound applications .
during finishing protect concrete by the water curing method .
mix compound thoroughly an hour or less before use and apply uniformly .
apply twice each time at a rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² of surface area .
for concrete bridge decks and other exposed concrete apply the first time immediately after the disappearance of free water from the surface .
for formed concrete apply immediately after removing forms .
if the concrete surface is dry spray with a fine water mist and apply curing compound immediately after the disappearance of free water from the surface .
apply compound the second time after the first application num num num num num num num has set and at right angles .
during curing spray any uncovered surfaces with a fine water mist .
protect the coating against marring for at least ten calendar days after application .
recoat marred surfaces at the specified rate .
stop using compound if it leaves a streaked or blotchy appearance cure with water until the cause of the problem is corrected .
table num impervious curing compound applications structural concrete num application material concrete pavement premium white approach slabs premium white bridge decks premium white silica fume concrete premium white curb and gutter double gutter premium white or premium clear sidewalks and bike paths premium white or premium clear median paving premium white or premium clear concrete pavement repair premium white or premium clear concrete barrier premium white or premium clear castinplace drainage elements premium white or premium clear decorative concrete premium clear slope paving basic ditch paving basic erosion control basic culvert boxes basic exposed horizontal surfaces of formed structures basic surfaces exposed after form removal basic num structural concrete num polyethylene sheeting meeting the requirements of aashto m num may be used along with the preceding methods .
overlap sheets at least num in num mm and extend at least num in num mm beyond the outer edges of the concrete .
seal weight cover or tie sheet edges to prevent premature removal .
cure all concrete at least five calendar days .
do not use the water method in temperatures below num ºf num ºc .
do not allow vehicles on any span until concrete has obtained at least num percent of its ultimate design compressive strength fc .
do not allow loads greater than num lb num kg on any span until the concrete obtains fc .
num removal of forms and supports do not remove structural forms until concrete is strong enough to withstand damage once forms are removed .
remove forms and supports such that concrete gradually and uniformly takes stresses due to its own weight .
remove forms by methods that do not mar gouge or chip concrete surfaces overstress concrete members or distort formwork .
leave surfaces clean and umblemished .
forms and their supports may be removed and subsequent loads may be placed when both conditions of table num form and support removal and loading of concrete are met as approved by the engineer .
num num num num num num table num form and support removal and loading of concrete structural concrete num structural element form and support removal subsequent loadingnum strength of concrete based on of design strength time num num strength of concrete based on of design strength time in days num num footingssleeper slabs num num h num num drilled shafts num num h num num columnspier walls num num d num num abutmentsills diaphragms num num h num num bent capspier caps num num d num num concrete superstructures tbeam flat slab num num d num num bridge decks num num d num num floor and wingwall footings of box culverts num num h num num walls of box culverts num num d num num top slab of box culverts num num d num num wingwalls retaining walls num num h num num other vertical surfaces not carrying load num num h num from time of the last placement in the forms and without counting days when air temperature is below numf num c. num when using high earlystrength type iii cement the specified time limits may be decreased as determined by the engineer and agreed upon before placing the concrete .
num ensure num percent of design strength is attained before setting formwork and reinforcing steel or further concrete placements .
num structural concrete num without damaging the concrete remove metal ties or anchorages within the forms to a depth of at least num in num mm below the surface .
if the engineer has allowed wire ties cut the wires back at least num in num mm below the face of the concrete after removing forms .
immediately after removing forms fill the cavities with cement mortar and ensure the final surface is sound smooth even and uniform in color .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure class a concrete class b concrete and class s concrete as one complete unit or by the cubic yard cubic meter .
the engineer will compute volumes from the neat lines specified .
the department will pay as follows num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest class a concrete ls cy ls mnum ls num ft ls num m ls num cy ls num mnum class b concrete ls cy ls mnum ls num ft ls num m ls num cy ls num mnum class s concrete ls cy ls mnum ls num ft ls num m ls num cy ls num mnum num num section num reinforcing steel num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and placing reinforcing steel .
num materials num reinforcing steel provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection reinforcing steel num num reinforcing steel supports and ties when using metal supports provide with legs curved to form a hook with the ends at least c in num mm above the form work .
protect metal supports for uncoated reinforcing steel that are in contact with the exterior surface of the concrete by galvanizing or coating with plastic or epoxy .
ensure that coatings do not chip crack deform or peel .
extend protection at least num in num mm above the form work .
apply plastic protection by dipping ensure a minimum thickness of num in num mm at points of contact with form work .
coat metal supports for epoxycoated reinforcing steel completely with epoxy or plastic .
use galvanized metal supports for galvanized reinforcing steel .
for coated bars provide support legs in accordance with the dimensional and coating requirements for uncoated bars .
use plastic or epoxycoated tie wires for epoxycoated reinforcing steel galvanized tie wires for galvanized reinforced steel and stainlesssteel tie wires for use with mechanical tying equipment .
num mechanical reinforcing steel splices provide mechanical reinforcing steel splices consisting of a lap or butt splice system capable of developing at least num percent of the aashto specified reinforcing steel num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num yield strength for the reinforcing steel .
when epoxy coating is specified shop or fieldcoat the splice and adjacent material as necessary with epoxy in accordance with subsection num reinforcing steel or seal the splice with an approved heatshrink plastic sleeve in accordance with the sleeve manufacturers recommendations .
num equipment automated equipment for tying reinforcing steel may be used provided it produces ties as strong and tight as those tied by hand and does not damage coatings .
num construction num general the engineer will test reinforcing steel before use .
provide two test samples num ft num m long for each manufacturer heat number and size of reinforcing bar and spiral wire delivered include a certification indicating the heat number and sizes of material .
the engineer may also require two flame or sawcut samples num ft num m long of any grade num num bar delivered .
replace samples with splice bars from the same heat number and long enough to lap the bar from which the sample was cut in accordance with table num minimum lap lengths for reinforcing steel splices .
num coated reinforcing steel for coated reinforcing steel use green epoxycoated or galvanized reinforcing steel .
use only one type of coating on a project .
handle ship store and place coated reinforcing steel without damage to the coating .
use handling and bundling systems that are padded .
to prevent barto bar abrasion use a strongback multiple supports or platform bridge to minimize sagging .
do not drop or drag bars or bundles .
store bars above the ground on wooden or padded supports .
ensure that epoxy coatings damaged during fabrication are repaired before shipping .
before installation regardless of source or cause clean and repair damaged epoxy coatings with patching material in accordance with subsection num reinforcing steel .
repair galvanized surfaces in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
num num num num num num num replace the bar if more than num percent of its surface area is damaged .
num reinforcing steel order lists unless the contract includes a bar list with bending diagrams submit on num in num in num mm num mm paper order lists for reinforcing steel .
include all data necessary for complete fabrication and supply .
for each structural unit abutment bent or slab detail the reinforcing steel and include a complete list of bars .
do not combine lists .
indicate the name of the structure route station project number and drawing number when applicable .
before fabricating ensure that the supplier submits two sets of complete advance order lists for each structure to the state bridge engineer for approval and notifies the engineer of this submittal .
the state bridge engineer will return one set to the supplier with necessary corrections noted .
ensure that the supplier furnishes seven corrected sets of the order lists to the state bridge engineer each marked final .
if these sets are correct one set will be returned to the supplier to begin fabrication .
do not fabricate before obtaining the state bridge engineers approval .
on the final order lists and in the transmittal letter clearly identify changes made between the advance and the final lists other than those requested by the engineer .
do not then change size dimensions or material from those shown on the final order lists without the engineers written approval .
the departments approval of an order list is an acceptance of the character and sufficiency of the list and does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for errors or omissions .
make changes to comply with the contract at no additional cost to the department .
num protection of materials protect reinforcing steel from damage ensure steel is free from dirt detrimental scale paint oil or other foreign substances .
tight surface rust may remain however remove loose rust scale .
replace steel so rusted that it would impair bonding .
remove cement mortar adhering to exposed steel due to previous placement .
reinforcing steel num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num num bending cold bend reinforcing bars .
do not fieldbend bars partially embedded in concrete .
cut and bend steel in accordance with the aci manual of practice for detailing reinforced concrete structures .
do not use methods producing kinks or improper bends .
fabricate reinforcing steel bends and hooks in accordance with the aci manual of practice for detailing reinforced concrete structures .
except for numdegree and numdegree hooks the department specifies dimensions in bending diagrams measured outtoout .
provide and use spirals with num extra turns at each end for anchorage .
provide channel spacers with each spiral to hold the spiral bar firmly in place while placing concrete .
use in accordance with table num channel spacer requirements for spiral reinforcing steel .
table num channel spacer requirements for spiral reinforcing steel num num num num core diameter no .
of spacers num in num mm num num in num mm to num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num spiral bars num num placing and fastening num general place reinforcing steel accurately hold firmly with supports in the position specified .
tie reinforcing bars securely at all intersections using no .
num gage num mm or heavier wire .
where bars are spaced closer than num in num mm in each direction tie alternate intersections .
multiple wires with combined cross sectional areas equal to or greater than that of a no .
num gage num mm may also be used .
do not fasten reinforcing steel by tack welding .
num the department specifies spacing dimensions for reinforcing steel by referring to the centers of bars .
when not specified ensure a concrete cover of num in num mm to the face of reinforcing steel .
provide reinforcing steel in the full lengths specified do not splice except to replace test samples .
overlap welded wire fabric ends and sides at at least one mesh opening and fasten with wire or other approved fasteners at intervals of num in num mm .
tie bundled bars together at a maximum of num ft num m centers .
hold reinforcing bars in position with precast mortar blocks ferrous metal chairs spacers metal hangers plastic supports and supporting wires capable of supporting applied loads .
do not use wooden or aluminum supports .
do not place bars on fresh concrete adjust bars during concrete placement or insert bars after placing concrete .
num reinforcing steel splices num lap splices overlap splices in accordance with table num minimum lap lengths for reinforcing steel splices .
reinforcing steel num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel num table num minimum lap lengths for reinforcing steel splices bar size no .
lap length uncoated bars coated bars num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm num num num ft num in num mm num ft num in num mm distribute splices well or locate at points of minimum tensile stress .
wire splice bars together rigidly .
where bars are offset from each other wiring may be omitted if the bar ends are held in proper position as specified .
when approved by the engineer make splices in spiral reinforcement with an overlap of num turns .
do not use overlap splices on bars larger than no .
num num .
num welded splices when specified or approved by the engineer splice reinforcing bars by welding in accordance with aashtoaws dnum structural welding code reinforcing and using aashtoaws e num welding electrodes .
use electrodes from hermetically sealed containers within four hours of opening the container unless stored in ovens at a temperature of at least num ºf num ºc .
before welding obtain department approval of the proposed procedure and welder qualifications .
weld splices in accordance with the following num .
splices num .
for no .
num num bars and smaller use a splice consisting of a single lap bar with doubleflare vgroove welds num in num mm long .
num num num num num .
for no .
num num bars and smaller when only one side is accessible for welding use a splice consisting of two lap bars with single flare vgroove welds num in num mm long .
num .
for no .
num num bars and larger use a splice consisting of two lap bars with doubleflare vgroove welds num in num mm long .
for no .
num num bars and larger when only one side is accessible for welding use a splice consisting of two lap bars with single flare vgroove welds num in num mm long .
num .
use a lap bar the same size as the spliced bar .
num .
when splicing to an existing bar embedded in concrete expose the embedded bar for at least the required weld length plus num in num mm .
num .
welding num .
do not weld when air temperature is below num ºf num ºc .
num .
free surfaces to be welded and those adjacent from loose or thick scale slag rust grease or other foreign material that would prevent proper welding .
mill scale that withstands vigorous wirebrushing may remain .
remove epoxy coating from surfaces to be welded and those adjacent for at least num in num mm .
num .
do not allow gaps greater than c in num mm between the bar being spliced and the lap bar .
if necessary grind deformations to achieve this gap .
num .
do not undercut deeper thannum in num mm where welds intersect the raised pattern of deformations elsewhere undercut no deeper than num in num mm .
num .
preheat bars to be welded to at least num ºf num ºc at the crosssection of the weld area and num in num mm on each side as indicated by temperatureindicating crayons provided at no additional cost to the department .
cool bars naturally to air temperature after welding .
reinforcing steel num num reinforcing steel num num .
make tack welds at least num in num mm long using preheat and quality requirements applicable to permanent welds .
do not make tack welds that will not become part of the permanent weld .
num .
when welding in the vertical position make passes upward .
num .
avoid arc strikes outside permanent weld areas .
if they occur grind them smooth .
num .
fill the crosssection of flare vgroove welds at least flush with the bar surface .
num .
use welders that have been qualified beforehand in accordance with the departments welder qualification process for each position in which welds will be made .
num .
after welding epoxycoated bars clean welds and adjacent uncoated areas of slag and other foreign material that would interfere with adhesion of epoxy coating and recoat with material in accordance with subsection num reinforcing steel .
num mechanical splices when specified or approved by the engineer install mechanical reinforcing steel splices in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
expose a sufficient length of reinforcing steel to allow mechanical splicing clean and straighten as required .
remove and replace improper splices at no additional cost to the department .
num deck slab reinforcing steel system construct a support system to stabilize the bridge deck slab reinforcing steel mats in all directions to prevent movement by workers placing concrete and to support the weight mass of the concrete .
do not use mortar blocks bricks wood or aluminum supports .
at the least support the top and bottom layers of steel in the different types of reinforcing systems as follows num .
trussbar type deck slab reinforcement .
the trussbar type uses a bent or crank reinforcing bar in the deck slab reinforcement .
support num num num the bottom layer of reinforcing steel with continuous longitudinal slabbolster supports spaced transversely between girders .
place the first supports no more than num in num mm from the centerline of a girder .
place one support at each bend of the crank bar .
do not place transverse supports farther than num ft num m apart .
use additional supports if the distance between bends or to a bend from the first support location of the crank bar exceeds num ft num m. support the top layer of reinforcing steel with either continuous longitudinal highslab bolsters or individual high supports .
place the first supports no more than num in num mm from the centerline of girders with other supports placed at bends with the same limits not exceeding num ft num m as described for the bottom layer .
when using individual high supports place under a longitudinal deck reinforcing bar in a continuous row spaced no more than num ft num m apart longitudinally .
if crank bar placement leaves the top mat of reinforcing too high to provide the specified clearance lay it over slightly .
num .
cantilever support for trussbar type deck slab reinforcement .
support the bottom layer of reinforcing steel for the deck cantilever with continuous longitudinal slabbolster type supports .
if the cantilever exceeds num in num mm from the centerline of the exterior girder place one support near the end of the cantilever and one midway between the centerline of the exterior girder and the cantilever deck end .
support the top layer of reinforcing steel with continuous longitudinal highslab bolsters or individual high supports .
place the supports in the same manner as and within the limits imposed for the bottom layer of the cantilever .
when using individual high supports place under a longitudinal deck reinforcing bar in a continuous row spaced no more than num ft num m apart longitudinally .
num .
independent type deck slab reinforcement .
support the bottom layer of reinforcing steel with continuous longitudinal slabbolster type supports spaced transversely between girders .
place the first supports no more than num in num mm from the centerline of a girder and additional supports between the first supports spaced no more than num ft num m apart .
reinforcing steel num num reinforcing steel num support the top layer of reinforcing steel of separate mats with continuous longitudinal highslab bolsters individual high supports or continuous transverse slab supports spaced longitudinally .
place the first supports no more than num in num mm from the centerline of girders and other supports with the same limits no more than num ft num m apart described for the bottom layer .
when using individual high supports place under a longitudinal deck reinforcing bar in a continuous row spaced no more than num ft num m apart longitudinally .
when using continuous transverse slab bolsters with runners place the bolsters between the bottom and top layers of reinforcing steel spaced no more than num ft num m apart longitudinally .
secure the top and bottom layers of reinforcement together with no .
num gage num mm or heaver tie wire or with multiple ties of equivalent crosssectional area at intervals of num ft num m in each direction .
num .
cantilever support for independent type deck slab reinforcement .
support the bottom layer of reinforcing steel for this system in the same manner and with the same limits used for the trussbar type .
support the top layer in the same manner and with the same limits used for the trussbar type or by using transverse slab bolsters with runners .
extend the bolsters and runners to the end of the cantilever .
these slab reinforcement methods are minimum requirements .
do not use them to support concrete buggies material carts or other equipment .
if additional equipment is anticipated or used reduce the spacing as necessary to provide the needed support .
secure the entire network of reinforcing steel by fastening to each girder line .
tie the top layers of reinforcing bars down to deck formhangers shear connectors or exposed stirrup tops with no .
num gage num mm or heavier wire or multiple ties of equivalent crosssectional area .
space the ties at intervals no farther apart than num ft num m oncenter longitudinally for the length of girder .
after placing and adjusting screed supports and rails make a dry run with the screed machine along the deck to ensure the specified top clearance to the reinforcing steel .
ensure that the top and bottom clearance is not more than num in num mm less than the clearance specified .
ensure that the spacing between the top and bottom layers of reinforcing steel is within num in num mm of that specified .
if these tolerances are not met adjust screed line elevations or reset the top reinforcing steel at no additional cost to the department .
num num num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
mechanical splices as one complete unit or by each splice installed .
modifications required for the placement of the selected mechanical splices will not be measured for additional payment .
num .
reinforcing steel and reinforcing steel coated as one complete unit or by the pound kilogram for the quantity specified .
the department will pay as follows reinforcing steel num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest mechanical splices ls ea ea ls ea ea ls ea ea reinforcing steel ls lb ls kg ls lb ls kg ls num lb ls num kg reinforcing steel coated ls lb ls kg ls lb ls kg ls num lb ls num kg num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num section num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num description this section describes the requirements for repair and resurfacing of concrete bridge decks with silica fume modified concrete .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num evaporation retardant num portland cement num silica fume admixture num synthetic fibers num water num for filling cracks in the completed modified concrete overlay provide a crack filler approved by the materials program .
for bonding agents used in lieu of the slurry bonding method provide a product approved by the materials program .
num equipment num surface preparation equipment provide sawing mechanical scarifying sandblasting equipment and all other tools necessary to complete the work .
provide powerdriven hand tools to remove unsound concrete .
with the engineers approval jackhammers heavier than the nominal numpound num kg class or numpound num kg hammers with a spade at least num in num mm wide may be used .
provide selfpropelled mechanical scarifying equipment capable of accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from the existing deck or from an independent grade control .
ensure that the equipment has the following num num num num num num .
a positive means of controlling crossslope elevations num .
sufficient power traction and stability to maintain an accurate and uniform depth of cut and num .
an apparatus to keep dust generated by scarifying from escaping into the air .
num proportioning batching and mixing equipment ensure that equipment meets the following requirements equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num num placing and finishing equipment provide hand tools for placing stiff plastic concrete and working material down for the screed to strike off .
provide manual screeds or metal plates with electric vibrators attached to consolidate and finish smaller areas .
when resurfacing is specified provide a finishing machine .
provide a finishing machine in accordance with subsection num placing and finishing equipment for finishing large areas .
provide two portable lightweight work bridges for touchup and surface texturing behind the finishing machine .
transport material from the truck mixer to the deck surface with a discharge chute on the truck mixer directly onto the bridge deck or with motorized buggies .
the engineer may prohibit the use of buggies if they cause segregation or inconsistent slump or they delay placement .
provide runways for transport devices operating over exposed reinforcing steel .
equip trucks with diapers or cover the deck surface to prevent contamination of the bridge deck surface .
num construction num general the department classifies bridge deck repair as follows silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num num num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num .
class i repair .
removing the concrete deck surface with a scarifying machine and disposing of removed concrete .
depth is classified as follows num .
class ia num in num mm .
num .
class ib greater than num in num mm to num in num mm .
num .
class ii repair .
removing loose and unsound concrete deck portions by chipping and disposing of removed concrete .
depth is classified as follows num .
class iia up to onehalf total slab thickness .
num class iib from onehalf to total slab thickness .
num mix design use silica fumemodified concrete of a workable mixture having properties or limits in accordance with table num silica fume modified concrete mixture parameters .
num num table num silica fume modified concrete mixture parameters num ensure that the watercementplussilicasolids ratio does not exceed num .
num this weight mass is based on aggregate being in a saturated surface dry condition .
num seasonal and weather limitations place silica fume modified concrete from may num to september num unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer and only when atmospheric conditions are acceptable and rain is not expected .
place between num p.m. and num a.m. unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer .
provide adequate lights for nighttime work .
place when air temperature is above num ºf num ºc and predicted to be above num ºf num ºc for at least six hours after placement .
do not place when air temperature exceeds num ºf num ºc or when the temperature of the insitu deck concrete after wetting falls outside a range from num ºf num ºc to num ºf num ºc .
silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num parameter property or limit ultimate design strength fc num day min .
num psi num mpa cement content min .
num part by weight num lbydnum num kgmnum water contentnum num galydnum num lmnum silica fume solids content min .
num lbydnum num kgmnum fine aggregate approx.num num parts by weight num lbydnum num kgmnum coarse aggregate approx.num num parts by weight num lbydnum num kgmnum fibers min .
num lbydnum num kgmnum entrained air content num to num percent consistency slump num in to num in num mm to num mm mix temperature range num f to num f num c to num c num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num the engineer will determine acceptable atmospheric conditions for placement by measuring deck surface evaporation rate .
this rate will be obtained from figure num evaporation nomograph by measuring relative humidity near the deck wind velocity air temperature and concrete deck temperature .
determine the relative humidity from figure num relative humidity using the wetbulb and drybulb temperatures .
during concrete placement the engineer will use mix temperature in place of deck temperature to calculate the evaporation rate .
do not place silica fume concrete when the evaporation rate exceeds num lbft²h num kgm²h .
postpone or stop placement when any of the following conditions exist num .
rain is expected during the work period or rain starts to fall .
num .
air temperature hinders finishing or texturing the overlay .
num .
any condition hinders finishing texturing or curing the overlay .
protect freshlyplaced concrete from sudden rain .
remove and replace rain damaged concrete at no additional cost to the department .
num surface preparation where specified or designated by the engineer remove unsound concrete from the bridge deck .
remove existing maintenance patches to original repair depth or deeper as required to remove unsound concrete .
do not operate jackhammers or mechanical chipping tools at an angle in excess of num degrees measured from the slab surface .
use hand tools to remove final particles of unsound concrete or achieve the required depth .
work so that saw slurry drains from and stays away from areas cleared of unsound concrete .
when resurfacing is specified ensure that new concrete above the prepared surface or existing reinforcing steel is at least num in num mm thick .
check the clearance before placing concrete .
attach a filler block to the bottom of a finishing device and pass the finishing machine over the area to be finished on screed rails .
remove concrete and depress and tie down reinforcing steel that obstructs the filler block .
if necessary remove concrete beneath reinforcement to enable adequate depression .
when placing new concrete keep at least in num mm of clear distance around these bars .
num num num num avoid cutting stretching or damaging existing reinforcing steel .
remove and replace damaged reinforcing steel with the same size bar using splices in accordance with subsection num reinforcing steel splices at no additioal cost to the department .
in the weld or damaged areas sandblast and repair coated reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num coated reinforcing steel at no additional cost to the department .
specific repair requirements are as follows num .
class ia and class ib repairs .
scarify uniformly all areas designated for class ia or ib repair or prepare to the depth specified .
do not remove more than num in num mm in one pass .
make a test pass from num ft num m to num ft num m in length with the scarifying machine .
after the pass the engineer will inspect the deck .
if microcracks from scarifying are present stop scarification and correct the problem before continuing .
the top mat of reinforcing steel may be exposed or near the surface of the deck do not damage this steel .
ensure that the resulting deck surface is free of excessive scarification marks and other damage .
correct surface irregularities greater than num in num mm above or below specified grade .
perform any additional scarifying required to correct irregularities at no additional cost to the department .
num .
class iia repair .
sawcut areas designated for class iia repair approximately in num mm deep or to the top of reinforcing bars if the bar depth is less .
cut along repair boundaries except those next to a curb face .
make this cut initially or after removing sufficient concrete to reasonably establish the limits of the removal area .
remove loose and unsound material .
where at least half the circumference of a reinforcing bar is exposed or where concrete and steel are no longer bonded remove the concrete to clear at least in num mm around the bar .
do not use chipping hammers heavier than the nominal numpound num kg class to remove concrete below reinforcing bars .
silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num the engineer may enlarge a designated removal area if concrete is deteriorated beyond previously designated limits .
sawcut around the enlarged area with a dry blade before beginning removal .
num .
class iib repair .
the department requires fulldepth removal and will consider the repair a class iib in areas of class iia repair where the depth of remaining sound concrete is less than num percent of the original deck depth .
remove concrete in these areas by chipping and using hand tools .
perform final removal at the edges of class iib repair areas with numpound num kg chipping hammers or hand tools .
provide forms for placing new concrete in the fulldepth opening .
suspend forms from existing reinforcing bars by wire ties or for large openings support forms by blocking from beam flanges .
in all cases support forms using elements of the existing superstructure .
clean all repair areas by sandblasting .
clean exposed reinforcement of rust and clinging concrete and existing concrete against which new concrete will be placed .
before placing new concrete clean the surface by air blasting then flush with water .
for the slurry bonding method keep the surface wet for at least two hours before placement .
blow out water puddles with compressed air before covering with a slurry of silica fume modified concrete .
clean areas with remaining oil indicated by the presence of water beading or other contamination again .
remove the contamination by additional cleaning concrete removal or both at no additional cost to the department .
on any bridge deck portion allow only construction equipment loads between the time of old concrete removal and the new concretes completed curing .
during the curing period for new concrete do not prepare work in adjoining areas or adjacent lanes .
num proportioning and mixing modified concrete num general before aggregates are incorporated into the concrete mix ensure a uniform moisture content in each stockpile that exceeds the minimum absorbed moisture percentage specified in the laboratory test mix .
do not add moisture to stockpiles within num hours of anticipated use cover with white polyethylene sheeting until mixing begins .
before conducting the trial batch stockpile enough aggregate to complete all overlays .
num num num num num laboratory test mix at least num calendar days before their use give the following to the engineer for the laboratory test mix by the materials program num .
a completed concrete mix design form enum indicating all materials to be used including the manufacturer and source of all materials .
num .
a letter indicating proportions of all materials including water .
indicate for aggregate proportions whether they are saturated surface dry condition or dry condition .
indicate total or net water based on aggregate condition .
num .
an equipment letter indicating mixing equipment to be used .
num .
a batch sequence letter describing the sequence of material batching and mixing times .
num .
samples of all mix constituents with at least the following num .
num lb num kg of cement num .
num lb num kg each of coarse and fine aggregate num .
num lb num kg of silica fume num .
num lb num kg of fibers and num .
num pt num l of each admixture .
num trial batch before beginning placement make a trial batch of silica fumemodified concrete as follows num .
use the same batching and truck mixing equipment mixing sequence batch size and time from batching to placement as proposed for production .
num .
ensure the presence of technical representatives from the silicafume manufacturer and the waterreducer manufacturer .
silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num .
ensure that the trial batch is free of lumps and meets all requirements specified in table num silica fume modified concrete mixture parameters .
num .
if the trial batch does not meet requirements demonstrate appropriate corrective measures before batching concrete for placement .
the engineer may require another trial batch .
num .
monitor the initial set of the mix during the trial batch .
num .
do not include trial batch materials in the final resurfacing work .
num .
submit modifications of the mix proportions batching sequence or mixing times to the engineer .
num mixing ensure that the batch plant accurately proportions all materials for the specified mixture and that batch size is the same as the trial batch .
mix materials thoroughly and in accordance with the specified requirements for the batching equipment used .
do not allow the batch size to exceed num percent of the rated capacity of the mixer .
ensure that the mixture discharged from the truck mixer is uniform in composition and consistency .
at mixing speed use at least num revolutions to achieve uniformity .
proceed with mixing at a rate that enables a steady pace for finishing .
dose with waterreducer in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
use a dosage of normalrange waterreducer as required to control consistency during batching and mixing but do not exceed the manufacturers recommendations .
be prepared to redose the mixture at the placement location with highrange waterreducer and airentraining admixture .
do not operate trucks at mixing speed on the bridge deck .
for additional mixing or remixing position trucks off the deck .
if a workable mix can not be obtained with the trial batch properties stop production mixing until the problem is corrected .
num placing after the finishing machine has been set and the screed and deck checked and approved give the engineer at least num hours notice before the pour unless otherwise approved .
num num num num during initial concrete placement ensure the availability for consultation of technical representatives of the silica fume manufacturer .
twentyfour hours before placement install bulkheads to the required grade and profile in transverse joints seal with caulk or other suitable means to prevent concrete from getting into joints .
do not cast across existing transverse joints and saw later .
when required place and fasten screed rails to ensure that concrete can be finished to the required profile .
ensure that anchorage for supporting screed rails provides horizontal and vertical stability .
do not treat screed rails with parting compound .
before placing concrete and in the presence of the engineer verify the vibration frequency of finishing devices meet the requirements of subsection num placing and finishing equipment .
brush a slurry of the silica fumemodified concrete onto the wetted prepared surface .
coat vertical and horizontal surfaces with a thorough even coating and limit progress so that brushed material is still wet when covered by new concrete .
use only the paste portion of the material .
remove and discard aggregate larger than the no .
num num mm sieve that separates from the paste during brushing .
alternatively apply an approved bonding agent in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
limit traffic to num mph num kmh on adjacent lanes during placement and for num hours afterward then limit traffic to num mph num kmh for the next num hours .
place concrete in a continuous operation and in accordance with table num num minimum mixing and placement rate .
table num minimum mixing and placement rate num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num num num num total repair area per bridge ydnum mnum rate ydnumh mnumh num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num when mixing and placing at the specified minimum rate under normal conditions perform final screeding no more than num minutes after depositing concrete on the deck .
remove concrete not screeded within num minutes or that has reached a slump below num in num mm before being screeded .
when placement delays exceed one hour install a construction dam or bulkhead .
during shorter delays keep the end of the placement from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
num finishing manipulate and strike off silica fumemodified concrete to approximately num in num mm above final grade consolidate and finish at final grade with vibrating screeds or finishing devices .
the department may require handfinishing with a wood float along pour edges or on smaller class iia and iib repair areas .
do not add water directly to the concrete surface while finishing .
a fog mist may be used to slow evaporation .
vibrate the end of the deck bulkheads class iia and iib repair areas and curb lines by hand to ensure maximum consolidation .
for class iia and iib repairs where no resurfacing is specified leave a finished surface flush with existing adjacent concrete .
after obtaining a uniform surface give concrete a burlap drag finish and immediately apply an evaporation retardant to the surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
reapply retardant in areas requiring hand finishing .
do not use evaporation retardants as a finishing aid .
provide a tined transverse groove texture as specified in subsection num tine finish and at right angles to the centerline of the roadway on all bridges regardless of skew .
use the tining device at a vertical angle of num degrees or less to achieve proper groove depth .
avoid overlapping and tearing the surface .
do not texture the last num in num mm of deck next to the curb .
immediately after tining cure the surface with two applications of impervious curing compound compatible with wet curing in accordance with subsection num curing concrete .
apply at a rate of num ft²gal num lm² .
after the last application of curing compound has set and as soon as possible without causing deformation cover the surface with a single layer of clean wet burlap .
keep the burlap wet and within one hour cover tightly with a layer of nummil num mm polyethyl ene film leaving no air spaces .
a composite burlap polyethylene material may be used .
keep the burlap moist and leave the wet cure material in place for four calendar days .
num num num num num num screed rails may be removed after the concrete obtains initial set do not damage new surface edges during removal .
separate construction dams from newly placed material by passing a pointing trowel along their inside face for the entire depth and length of dams once the concrete stiffens sufficiently to not flow back .
num curing do not allow traffic on the concrete surface for seven curing days after placement and until concrete obtains a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
after completing placement consider a curing day to be each consecutive num hour period when air temperature remains above num ºf num ºc .
num unacceptable work before opening to traffic the engineer will examine the new overlay using visual and sounding techniques .
remove and repair areas with a significant number and size of cracks or that are not intimately bonded to the underlying deck as specified for class iia repair .
remove and repair as follows num .
before removal saw cut at least num in num mm outside each edge of the repair area .
num .
make repair areas rectangular or square in shape and at least num in num mm on each side .
num .
do not place longitudinal repair joints within num in num mm of a wheel path a wheel path is num ft num m from a lane line in the traveled way .
num .
for repair areas within num ft num m of each other make one large repair as approved by the engineer .
num .
place silica fumemodified concrete in repair areas in accordance with subsection num placing .
num .
fill joint edges of repair areas as specified below for small cracks .
num .
the engineer will examine repair areas again .
silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num num num num num num silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num for cracks greater than num mil num mm wide that are not significant enough to require removal of the overlay fill them completely with crack filler in accordance with the manufacturers recommend ations .
gravityfeed cracks designated to be filled to refusal repeating as necessary .
then apply crack filler using the method coverage rate and cure specified by the manufacturer .
if necessary use two coats .
if manufacturers specifications indicate that deck surface skid resistance may be impaired broadcast silica sand at a rate of num lb yd² num kg m² .
repair cracks at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
bridge deck repair class ia bridge deck repair class ib bridge deck repair class iia and bridge deck repair class iib by the square yard square meter .
the engineer will measure bridge deck repair class ia and bridge deck repair class ib for all areas scarified including the area of class ii repairs .
areas measured as bridge deck repair class ib will not be included in the measured quantity of bridge deck repair class ia .
areas measured as bridge deck repair class iib will not be included in the measured quantity of bridge deck repair class iia .
when additional removal for relatively high areas is specified by the engineer for bridge deck repair class ia or when the required removal depth for bridge deck repair class ib exceeds num in num mm the engineer will measure for payment a second time .
num .
silica fume modified concrete by the cubic yard cubic meter based on batch volumes ordered and placed in the work .
silica fumemodified concrete produced for trial batches will not be measured for payment .
num num num the department will pay as follows silica fume modified concrete bridge deck repair num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bridge deck repair class ia sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum bridge deck repair class ib sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum bridge deck repair class iia sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum bridge deck repair class iib sy mnum num ft num m sy mnum silica fume modified concrete cy mnum num ydnum num mnum num cy num mnum num num paint repair num num section num paint repair num description this section describes the requirements for paint repair on structural steel .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection paint num num equipmentvacant num construction clean and paint deteriorated paint systems on existing structural steel to limits specified .
when required paint steel piling after exposing to num in num mm below ground .
clean and paint from this point to the bottom of the pile cap .
prepare structural steel surfaces for painting in the following sequence num .
wirebrush abrade or scrape with hand or power tools all areas of heavy rusting deep rust pitting loose paint or builtup foreign matter .
num .
remove oil grease and contaminants from the surface with clean rags wetted with cleaning solvent .
num .
using rags wetted with clean uncontaminated water remove dirt oxidation and other contaminants from steel areas .
use a minimal amount of water for cleaning .
obtain the engineers approval for cleaning by other methods .
num .
let surfaces airdry before painting .
compressed air free of water and oil may be used to accelerate drying .
ensure that the final prepared surface is free of oil grease dirt soluble contaminants moisture rust scale loose mill scale loose rust and loose paint or coatings .
tight mill scale and tightly adhered rust paint and coatings may remain .
num num num num num paint structural steel in accordance with subsection num field paint application for the type of paint system selected using the color specified .
the department does not require a prime coat when specifying epoxymastic paint .
use aluminumcolored epoxymastic paint .
protect other portions of the structure traffic and surrounding property from paint overspray .
correct overspray damage at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
paint repairbridge railing as one complete unit or by the foot meter of railing painted .
num .
paint repairstructural steel and paint repaircsteel piling as one complete unit or by the square foot square meter of surface area painted .
the department will pay as follows num num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest paint repair bridge railing ls ft m ls num ft num m ls ft num m paint repair steel piling ls sf mnum ls num ft num m ls sf num mnum paint repair structural steel ls sf mnum ls num ft num m ls sf num mnum paint repair num num division num miscellaneous construction num section num vacant section num vacant vacant num num section num culverts and storm drains num description this section describes the requirements for constructing or relaying culverts and storm drains .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num aggregate for flowable backfill num aluminumcoated pipe num bituminouscoated corrugated steel pipe num bolts nuts and washers num class b bedding num corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe num corrugated metal units num corrugated steel pipe and pipearches num curing materials num fly ash num galvanized coating num pipe joint mortar num polymeric precoated galvanized steel pipe num portland cement num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforcing steel num rubber ring gaskets num steel mitered end sections num water num culverts and storm drains num num num num culverts and storm drains num num num num num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num to mix flowable backfill provide a rotary drum or other approved mixer capable of thoroughly dispersing all ingredients .
num construction num general the following abbreviations when used in the contract represent the full text shown .
num .
rigid pipe rcp reinforced concrete pipe hercp horizontal elliptical reinforced concrete pipe num .
flexible pipe csp corrugated steel pipe cap corrugated aluminum alloy pipe cmp corrugated metal pipe num .
end sections fe flared end sme steel mitered end when the contract specifies cmp the department allows the use of csp or cap meeting specifications .
the department will designate pipearches of the above types of pipe by using the word arch .
num ensure that plants producing rcp and hercp are certified in accordance with subsection num plant certification .
submit a copy of the precast concrete manufacturers certification current at the time of manufacture to the engineer seven calendar days prior to delivery of rcp and hercp to the project .
use an end finish consisting of fe bevel end step bevel end squarecut end or sme sections .
provide sme sections with the specified slope and grate type and parallel drainage pd or cross drainage cd grate .
maintain cover over pipes during construction to prevent damage .
at pipe ends construct embankment slopes to match flared end section slopes .
num pipe selection when extensions of existing pipes are required provide and install the same type and size of pipe .
for flexible pipe use extensions made of the same base metal .
base the strength class of rigid pipe on the fill height tables specified and method of bedding and installation selected .
furnish and install flexible pipe of a thickness based on the design information specified .
select the type of metal seams and corrugation sizes .
a thicker gage metal pipe than required may be used at no additional cost to the department .
the department will allow substitution of equivalent sizes and classes of rcp arch and hercp for each other when either is specified .
for extensions use the same size and class as existing pipe .
select and provide pipe from among those allowed under the corrosion resistance number in table num corrosion resistance acceptability .
use the crnum classification when no number is specified .
culverts and storm drains num num num num num num num num num num table num corrosion resistance acceptability num culverts and storm drains num num ensure that connecting bands and end sections have the same corrosion protection as the pipe .
if bands or end sections for certain pipes are not available use bituminous coated bands or end sections .
num excavation excavate trenches or channels in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
where required camber the channel longitudinally .
vary the amount of camber for the fill height and supporting soil do not reverse the pipe gradient .
type of pipe corrosion resistance number crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum galvanized steel yes no no no no no no no no aluminum coated steel type num yes no no no no no no no no bituminous coated galvanized steel yes yes no no no no no no no aluminum alloy yes yes yes yes no no no no no polymeric precoated galvanized steel yes yes yes yes yes no no no no rcp type ii cement yes yes yes yes yes no no no no rcp type v cement yes yes yes yes yes yes yes no no rcp type v cementfly ash yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes no epoxy coated rcp type ii or type v cement yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes num num pipe bed preparation ensure that soil is undisturbed or compacted for the full length and width of the completed channel bottom .
shape the excavation to fit the pipe bottom and allow any required placement of bedding material .
shape recesses in the trench bottom to accommodate the bell and spigot .
num .
class b installation .
bed on class b bedding material .
num .
class c installation .
bed on uniformlycompacted earth materials or undisturbed trench bottom .
clear the area of stones large enough to cause damage .
install flexible pipe rcp arch and hercp using the class c installation method .
the department requires no specific preparation for pipes placed under approaches and median crossovers .
num installing pipe begin pipe installation at the downstream end .
ensure that the full length of each pipe segment bottom is in contact with the shaped bedding .
place bell or groove ends of rigid pipe and outside circumferential laps of flexible pipe facing upstream .
place flexible pipe with longitudinal laps or seams at the sides .
place reinforcedconcrete elliptical pipe with the minor axis vertical and the major axis horizontal .
num joining pipe and end sections num general use rubber gaskets when watertight joints are specified .
when pipe joint mortar is specified place within num minutes of the mortars preparation .
use galvanized tie bolts washers and nuts .
num .
rigid pipe .
use bellandspigot or tongueandgroove design .
on slopes of num percent or steeper use bolted joint ties or bellandspigot pipe .
join the sections with ends tight and inner surfaces flush and even .
num .
flexible pipe .
join firmly by coupling bands .
culverts and storm drains num num num num num num num rcp fe sections match the fe section joint configuration to the pipe joint .
use tie bolts on sections num in num mm or more in diameter .
use the bolts to hold ends together not to pull sections tight .
if the pipe is accessible to people and animals ensure that tie bolt threads do not project inward .
num sme sections provide and install required hardware and appurtenances including the tapered sleeve required for rcp connections .
ensure a smooth tight juncture consistent with flow characteristics of the pipe .
attach end sections using connectors in accordance with table num sme section connectors .
table num sme section connectors culverts and storm drains num num num num num num num pipe collars when required provide and place reinforcing steel as specified in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
remove fill to expose the existing pipe end and if required remove the existing end section .
form collars to the dimensions specified .
form place and cure concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
the engineer may waive forming of concrete for pipe collars if the final collar dimensions meet specified minimum dimensions .
pipe size connector type round num in num mm num straps round num in num mm and all other pipe num rods and lugs num num repair of damaged coating repair damage to metallic coatings in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
repair damage to polymeric coating by applying a polymeric coating similar to and compatible with the original .
do not backfill around the pipe before inspection and approval by the engineer .
num backfilling do not backfill before the engineer inspects the pipe .
relay or replace misaligned settled or damaged pipe .
place and compact backfill material in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
when specified use flowable backfill in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
num relaying pipe relay removed pipe including end sections using the existing hardware and appurtenances to join the pipe and connect the end sections in accordance with subsection num joining pipe and end sections .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure pipe with beveled stepbeveled or squarecut ends along the invert from end to end and when fe or sme sections are used will not include the length of the end section for new pipe but will include it for relaying pipe .
the length for payment will not exceed the length staked .
the engineer will measure new or relaid pipes installed in a storm sewer system along the centerline of the pipe from invert to invert of manholes or invert of inlet to invert of manhole .
the engineer will measure branch connections along their inverts from the intersection of their flow line with the flow line of the trunk line to the center of the manhole or inlet .
culverts and storm drains num num num num num num num num num the engineer will measure num .
pipe _____ in mm pipe arch _____ _____ in mm rcp _____ in mm rcp arch _____ _____ in mm rcp elliptical _____ _____ in mm cmp _____ in mm cmp arch _____ _____ in mm and relaying pipe _____ in mm by the foot meter .
num .
pipe fe sect _____ in mm pipearch fe sect _____ _____ in mm rcp fe sect _____ in mm rcp arch fe sect _____ _____ in mm rcp elliptical fe sect _____ _____in mm cmp fe sect _____ in mm cmp arch fe sect _____ _____ in mm sme sect _____ in mm sme sect _____ in mm wgrate sme arch sect _____ _____ in mm and sme arch sect _____ _____ in mm wgrate by the installed number of units of each size .
num .
pipe collars by the cubic yard cubic meter of concrete not to exceed the quantity derived from the minimum collar dimensions specified .
the department will pay for approved alternate types of pipe as follows culverts and storm drains num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m pipe arch _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m pipe fe sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea pipe arch fe sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea num num culverts and storm drains pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest cmp _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m cmp arch _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m cmp fe sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea cmp arch fe sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea pipe collars cy mnum num ft num m num cy num mnum rcp _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rcp arch _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rcp elliptical _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rcp fe sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea rcp arch fe sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea rcp elliptical fe sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea relaying pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m sme sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea sme sect _____ in mm w grate ea ea ea ea ea ea sme arch sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea sme arch sect _____ _____ in mm wgrate ea ea ea ea ea ea num the department will pay for specific types of pipe as follows num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
flowable backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
num .
removal of pipe in accordance with section num removal however when relaying is specified the removal is incidental to relaying .
culverts and storm drains num num num num vacant section num vacant num section num underdrains num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing installing and backfilling underdrains .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe num corrugated aluminumalloy pipe num corrugated steel pipe num curing materials num drainage and filtration geotextile num fly ash num gravel for drains num hardware cloth for drains num metal delineator posts num plastic pipe fittings num portland cement num water num wood post num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num underdrains num num num num num num construction num underdrain selection use only the designated type and size of underdrain .
if the strength class is not designated use any strength class .
use only one type of underdrain throughout the project .
num pipe installation when installing underdrains along the edge of interstate highways install under the outside shoulder unless the median shoulder is lower .
excavate trenches in accordance with subsection num trench excavation .
do not leave trenches open during nonworking hours unless approved by the engineer .
install drainage and filtration geotextile as specified and in accordance with section num geotextiles .
install gravel backfill perforated and nonperforated underdrain pipe and outlets as specified .
orient perforations towards the trench bottom .
in locations with a high rate of flow causing possible leakage into the embankment or subgrade to be drained orient perforations towards the top of the trench .
use grading b gravel for drains .
cap the high point of the end of an underdrain .
num plastic pipe primecoat and cement the mating surfaces of pipe and pipe fittings .
use solvent cement and primer from the same manufacturer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use primer that contrasts with the color of the pipe fittings .
num underdrain outlets use nonperforated outlet pipes .
daylight underdrain outlets outside of the clear zone using a concrete head wallstilling basin rodent screen and outlet location post as specified .
install outlet pipes on a num percent or steeper slope .
where the engineer determines that conditions do not allow the specified slope install with at least a num percent slope .
num underdrains num num num num num num num num underdrains num num num num num use class b concrete for head walls and stilling basins in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
form place and cure concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
the engineer may approve the use of alternate concrete head walls and stilling basins that meet the general requirements specified .
num trench backfill after the engineer inspects and approves the pipe installation backfill and compact the trench as specified and in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
underdrain pipe perf _____ in mm and underdrain pipe nonperf _____ in mm by the foot meter along the pipe before backfilling .
the length for payment will not exceed the length staked .
num .
gravel for drains by the short ton metric ton or cubic yard cubic meter .
the engineer will use neat lines for measurement by the cubic yard cubic meter with no reduction in volume for the underdrain pipe .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest gravel for drains ton cy t mnum num ton num ft num t num m num ton cy num t mnum underdrain pipe perf _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m underdrain pipe non perf _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure geotextile drainage and filtration by computing the surface area covered based on the neat lines .
the department will pay in accordance with section num geotextiles .
num underdrains num num guardrail and median barrier num num num section num guardrail and median barrier num description this section describes the requirements for num .
constructing corrugated and box beam guardrail corrugated and box beam median barrier and end terminals .
num .
resetting removed or salvaged corrugated box beam and median barrier guardrail components and associated hardware when required .
num .
constructing temporary guardrail and bridge end connections .
num .
installing and removing temporary guardrail and the appropriate end treatment at the reverse ends of bridges on multilane divided highways .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num box beam barrier num bolts nuts and washers num corrugated beam guardrail selfoxidizing num corrugated metal beam rail num fly ash num galvanized coating num guardrail or median barrier posts num guardrail hardware num highstrength bolts and fasteners num portland cement num reflective sheeting num sheet metal num num structural steel num timber posts and blockouts num water num wire cable num wybet end terminals num where guardrail bolts are specified provide bolts of the button head design with an oval shoulder and that meet the requirements of subsection num bolts and fasteners .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num construction num general use fabricated components with corners edges and burrs ground smooth before galvanization .
repair damaged galvanized components in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
use new shopfabricated guardrail components galvanized after welding .
when fabricating or modifying after galvanization clean cut edges and welded joints with a wire brush .
paint the cleaned area in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
after cleaning give bolt holes one coat of paint .
avoid gouges scratches or dents to steel parts .
do not allow foreign material including paint grease oil or crayon to contact the surface .
do not use damaged steel parts .
position steel parts allowing for free drainage and air circulation during shipping and storage .
the department will allow natural oxide formation on steel surfaces .
remove existing guardrail in accordance with subsection num removal of guardrail barrier bridge railing and pedestrian railing .
guardrail and median barrier num num num num num num num num guardrail and median barrier num num num num num num num before installing guardrail complete grading and shoulder construction through the top course to match the specified slopes .
num shop drawings and fabrication submit shop drawings for new box beam guardrail and median barrier to the highway development program for review in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
include layout diagrams shop details and dimensions piece marks thicknesses of material and other data necessary to fabricate and install rail elements .
to aid in identification and erection ensure that box beam railing has clearly visible piece marks corresponding to the approved final shop drawings .
when shopbending of box beam rail elements is required indicate the locations limits and curving method on the shop drawings .
use box beam rail elements with a nominal length of at least num ft num m. unless physical constraints require odd lengths provide elements in nominal lengths enabling from num to num post spaces .
use a standard post spacing of num ft num m and a minimum of num ft num m. provide rail elements so that a joint occurs at the point of tangency pt of the flare .
place expansion splices in box beam installations over num ft num m in length and at intervals not exceeding num ft num m. space them approximately equally in the guardrail run .
galvanize wybet end anchorages in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
ensure that the outer rail of a wybet end anchorage slides freely over the inner rail after galvanization .
num installation num general after erection thoroughly clean damaged galvanized surfaces with a wire brush to remove damaged spelter coating and repair in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
num num num posts use the same type and shape of posts and blockouts throughout the project .
establish line and grade between the end anchorage systems and correct misalignment or sags in elevation .
set posts plumb .
install as follows num .
post placement by excavation and backfill .
excavate postholes to a diameter of at least num in num mm .
set posts on undisturbed or thoroughly compacted material .
backfill in numinch num mm lifts and thoroughly compact without moving posts from the correct alignment .
num .
post placement by driving .
guide driven posts laterally and protect the tops to avoid battering .
posts may be driven using pilot holes formed with an auger or rock punch .
make pilot holes no less than the diameter of the post and extend the depth to within num in num mm of the final grade .
drive posts the last num in num mm to final elevation .
if adverse or rocky soil conditions hinder driving the depth of the pilot holes may be increased .
after placing posts place material around each post to match the depth and type of existing surfacing material .
set the initial height of posts for corrugated beam guardrail to provide the specified rail mounting height with blockouts mounted in the lowest set of mounting holes .
num rail elements erect rail elements to provide a smooth continuous installation .
ensure that bolts in the finished rail are snugtight and extend beyond the nuts .
place reflective sheeting on both sides of the reflector tabs .
use white sheeting for shoulder installations and yellow for median installations .
the following apply when installing corrugated beam guardrail num .
use guardrail in lengths to the next numfoot num m increment .
num .
do not use washers between the head of the post bolt and rail element .
num .
place splice laps with the exposed edge away from adjacent traffic .
num .
do not use steel blockouts .
num .
orient reflector tabs with the bolt slot facing away from adjacent traffic .
guardrail and median barrier num num num num num num num num guardrail and median barrier num num num num num num num num num end anchorages use precast concrete end anchorage blocks or cast in place .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
form place and cure concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
when using precast blocks install lifting devices to avoid damaging the anchor bolts during lifting or setting .
do not use anchor bolts for lifting .
do not place reflector tabs on end anchorages .
num wybet end terminal the department will allow intermediate spacers for wybet end terminals to be painted with two coats of a zincrich paint in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing in lieu of galvanization .
slide the inner rail inside the outer rail using only manual labor .
before completion of the installation demonstrate to the engineer that the outer tube slides freely over the inner tubes entire length without binding .
cover the impact plate with black and yellow reflective sheeting .
do not place reflector tabs on wybet end terminals .
num bridge rail and concrete barrier connections construct corrugated beam and box beam transition sections and connections to bridge railing and concrete barrier as specified .
bridge rail connections include plates sleeves special end shoes and associated hardware necessary to complete installation .
if required weld the connection sleeve or plate to the steel bridge railing in accordance with subsection num field welding .
num resetupgrade guardrail reset or upgrade existing guardrail installations in accordance with the following num .
reset guardrail .
adjust or install posts and rail to the specified alignment and grade .
if necessary raise or lower posts in accordance with subsection num posts .
provide and install additional bolts nuts washers post mounting brackets and angles as necessary .
provide and install new reflective tabs for the length of the reset rail except on end terminals and end anchorages .
num num .
upgrade guardrail .
provide and install additional rail posts hardware and other guardrail components and modify removed salvaged components to provide the specified length .
when the upgrade causes post spacing to vary more than num in num mm from specified spacing adjust posts including those outside the upgrade section .
after post removal backfill and compact holes in numinch num mm lifts up to ground or shoulder surface .
backfill holes in plant mix with new plant mix up to the existing surface .
cut rail drill holes and touch up exposed steel surfaces with two coats of zinc rich paint in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing to accommodate required modifications in guardrail configuration .
num temporary guardrail when required install temporary guardrail as specified .
obtain the engineers approval before installing undamaged used guardrail elements posts and hardware .
replace unsatisfactory materials at no additional cost to the department .
remove guardrail when it is no longer required .
when specified modify existing bridge railing for connecting temporary guardrail .
before welding remove galvanizing in areas to be welded .
field weld a steel plate to the existing bridge rail end as specified and in accordance with subsection num field welding .
if the end terminal will be reused or remain in place galvanize the steel plate and affected areas in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
bolt the wbeam terminal connector to the steel plate as specified .
make bolts snugtight in accordance with subsection num general installation .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure as follows num .
box beam guardrail box beam med barrier corr beam guardrail corr beam guardrail selfoxidizing and corr beam med barrier by the foot meter .
num guardrail and median barrier num num num num num num num num guardrail and median barrier num num .
reset corr beam guardrail reset corr beam med barrier reset box beam guardrail and reset box beam med barrier by the foot meter and will include the lengths of end anchorages and bridge rail connections in the measured length for resetting barrier or guardrail .
num .
upgrade corr beam guardrail upgrade corr beam med barrier upgrade box beam guardrail and upgrade box beam med barrier by the foot meter .
num .
corr beam guardrail end anch type _____ corr beam guardrail end anch type _____ selfoxidizing corr beam med barrier term box beam guardrail end anch type _____ and box beam med barrier end anch type _____ by the each .
num .
box beam end term wybet box beam end term wybet mod box beam med barrier end term wybet and reset box beam end term wybet by the each .
num .
temporary guardrail by the each which includes the work at both sides of the bridge end .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest box beam end term wybet ea ea ea ea ea ea box beam end term wybet mod ea ea ea ea ea ea box beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m box beam guardrail end anch type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea box beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m box beam med barrier end anch type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea num num guardrail and median barrier pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest box beam med barrier end term wybet ea ea ea ea ea ea corr beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m corr beam guardrail selfoxidizing ft m num ft num m ft num m corr beam guardrail end anch type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea corr beam guardrail end anch type _____ selfoxidizing ea ea ea ea ea ea corr beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m corr beam med barrier term ea ea ea ea ea ea reset box beam end term wybet ea ea ea ea ea ea reset box beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m reset box beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m reset corr beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m reset corr beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m temporary guardrail ea ea ea ea ea ea upgrade box beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for removal of guardrail in accordance with section num removal however when reset is specified removal is incidental to resetting .
num guardrail and median barrier num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest upgrade box beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m upgrade corr beam guardrail ft m num ft num m ft num m upgrade corr beam med barrier ft m num ft num m ft num m num section num fences num description this section describes the requirements for the construction of fence and gates and the removal and resetting of gates .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num barbed wire num bolts nuts and washers num fasteners plastic fence posts num fence posts num fly ash num industrial fence num paint num plastic fence posts num portland cement num structural steel num twisted barbless wire num water num woven wire num provide num ft num m of galvanized gate chain with numinch num mm diameter welded links .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num fences num num num num num num fences num num num num num num num construction num general control livestock and unauthorized vehicle traffic in accordance with section num legal relations and responsibility to the public .
clear and grub in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing as necessary to construct fence to the required grade and alignment .
remove fence in accordance with subsection num removal of fence snow fence and signs .
place fence num in num mm inside the rightofway lines except where topography prevents construction .
when required at breaks in fencing or intersections with existing fences make appropriate adjustments in post spacing to meet the requirements for the type of fence specified .
when imbedding posts braces or anchors in concrete install temporary guys or braces as required to hold the posts in proper position until the concrete sets .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
do not install materials on posts set in concrete or place stress on guys or bracing until at least seven calendar days after placing concrete .
num wire fence num posts for fences with wooden or plastic posts add metal posts between regular posts at intervals no greater than num ft num m. install one metal post in any length of fence with over num ft num m between openings .
set posts firmly and plumb .
remove and replace damaged posts .
num wooden posts drive or tamp posts .
if posts are driven orient the small end of the post in the ground .
orient tamped posts with large butt end in the ground .
num num plastic fence posts before starting give the engineer two copies of the manufacturers recommendations for installation .
set recycled plastic fence posts by digging auguring or driving .
instead of staples and nails use laydown post clips and predrilled numinch num mm pilot holes to attach wire fence .
num end panels and brace panels place end posts corner posts and brace posts with the large end butt in the ground .
notch posts to provide a flat bearing surface for cross braces .
use cross braces as specified for the type of panel used and nail to each post with at least three numd spikes .
bevel diagonal cross braces to obtain adequate bearing against the brace posts .
use type i ii or iii end panels .
when conditions prevent installing the deadman required for type i use a type ii or iii .
end panels placed in a corner installation may share a common end post .
install end panels at each termination of a fence run change in direction gate location and other locations specified by the engineer .
when fencing around curves place a brace panel at the beginning end and center of the curve .
depending on the curves radius and length place additional brace panels at locations along the curve as specified by the engineer .
num wire installation attach wire to posts as follows num .
tangent sections .
place on the landowners side of the post .
num .
curves .
place on the outside of the curve .
if a strand of wire touches the ground tie it to the next higher wire or change wire spacing with the engineers approval .
firmly attach wire or fencing to posts and braces as specified .
stretch wire taut and install at the required elevations .
num fences num num num num num num num num num fences num num num num num num num num stays use wire stays for barbed wire fence .
place them at midspan between posts and extend num in num mm below the bottom wire .
for woven wire fence place wire stays at midspan between posts and extend from the top barbed wire to num in num mm below the top of the woven wire as specified .
when specified use wood stays meeting requirements for gate sticks .
space equally and place with the bottom touching the ground .
staple each wire to the stay .
num gates num general provide gate chains for gates wider than num ft num m on rightofway fence along access control roadways .
the department will provide padlocks required for locked gates .
num wire gates provide wire gates at approaches cattle guards and at least one wing fence on each side of the roadway at structure locations and other locations specified or determined by the engineer .
when the wing fence is num ft num m long or longer the engineer may require an additional brace or end panel to support the gate .
use the same barbed wire number and spacing as specified for the fence .
use a numbarbed wire gate with a combination woven and barbed wire fence .
for gate hinges and gate supports use a double loop of numgage galvanized smooth twisted wire .
install a gate tightener on all gates .
the engineer may approve the use of tighteners other than those specified .
construct tighteners for metal posts the same way and of the same material as for wooden posts .
provide wire gates in accordance with table num length of wire gates .
num table num length of wire gates num rail gates provide rail gates in numinch num mm increments .
for double installations provide two gates of equal length .
provide vertical stays in accordance with table num rail gate vertical stay requirements .
table num rail gate vertical stay requirements paint rail gates using either system in accordance with subsection num painting .
apply all coats in the shop or dip paint as per the manufacturers recommendations for color and process .
num fences num num location length ft m gate sticks equally spaced approaches num num num gates used by large farm and ranch machinery num or num num or num as specified num separation structures and wing fences num num num pedestrian access num num num gate length ft m vertical stays equally spaced num num and num num num and num num pair num and num num and num num pair num num num pair num num fences num num num num num num num deadman installation install a deadman at each specified location to adequately support the fence and in accordance with the deadman details associated with a type i end panel .
use one of the following num .
a timber post with a diameter of at least num in num mm and a length of at least num in num mm .
num .
a stone with a weight mass of at least num lb num kg .
num .
concrete with a weight mass of at least num lb num kg .
num floodgates fasten floodgates so that flood debris will rip out the floodgate rather than the main fence .
num wing fence install wing fences in accordance with the applicable portions of subsection num wire fence and at structures with equivalent diameter of at least num in num mm including stockpasses box culverts bridges and other locations as specified or directed by the engineer .
tie wing fences to the structure with at least four strands of barbed wire extending from the end panel corners to four eye bolts set in the wingwalls slope paving or pipe ends .
if the engineer determines the fence can be anchored to the structure to maintain integrity the engineer may elect to eliminate an end panel or substitute a brace panel for an end panel .
the engineer may eliminate the requirement to tie the end or brace panel to the structure if it can be butted tight against the structure to prevent animal passage and the end or brace panel is stable .
when attaching or abutting the wing fence to the structure is not possible extend wing fences up over and back down the other side of the structure to prevent passage of game and livestock .
construct a detachable fence section across the opening of the structure between wing fences for controlled access highways at other specified locations or as determined by the engineer unless the structure requires continuous access as a stockpass .
num num temporary fence if placing fence will interfere with construction place temporary fence .
use the temporary fence type and configuration specified and leave it in place at the completion of the contract .
temporary fence placed for contractor convenience will be at no additional cost to the department .
install temporary fence in accordance with the applicable portions of subsection num wire fence .
standard brace panels may be used in lieu of end panels .
the department does not require gate tighteners for temporary fence wire gates .
num resetting fence salvage material including hardware posts brace panels and gates if insufficient to complete the fence provide additional new materials at no additional cost to the department .
when specified reset gates by removing salvaging and reusing existing gates and hardware .
provide new materials as required at no additional cost to the department .
num industrial fence install industrial fence where and to the height specified .
install two end panels connected at right angles for each corner installation two brace panels connected in line for each brace installation and one end panel for each end installation .
num wire acceptance for wire products used not meeting the specification requirements for the type of wire specified the engineer will do one of the following num .
reject and require removal of the outofspecification material at no additional cost to the department num .
accept and leave the material in place with the contractors cost of the wire product deducted or num .
accept the material at a reduced unit price in accordance with the materials programs schedule of price adjustment for outof specification wire products in effect at the time of the contract award .
obtain a copy from the materials program .
num fences num num num num num num num num fences num num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
brace panels brace panels _____ end panels and end panels _____ by the each .
the measured number will not be reduced when adjoining brace and end panels share a common post .
both end panels will be measured at corners .
num .
fence type _____ fence industrial _____ in mm fence industrial _____ in mm bw top fence _____ fencewing _____ and reset fence by the foot meter from the outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence and reset fence using surface measurement with no deduction in length for end panels brace panels wire fence gates or reset gates .
num .
gates industrial _____ gates galv stl _____ ft m gates rail _____ ft m and gates _____ by the each for the size and type specified and will deduct the lengths from the linear fence measurement .
a double installation of rail gates will be measured as two gates .
a double swing gate installation of industrial gates will be measured as two gates each half the length of the specified opening width .
num .
reset gates by the each when specified .
the department will pay as follows num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for fence removal in accordance with section num removal however when reset is specified removal will be incidental to resetting .
num price adjustment if the engineer accepts fence constructed with outofspecification wire the unit price will be adjusted in accordance with the materials programs schedule of price adjustment for outofspecification wire products in effect at the time of the contract award .
obtain a copy from the materials program .
num fences num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest brace panels ea ea ea ea ea ea brace panels _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea end panels ea ea ea ea ea ea end panels _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea fence _____ ft m num ft num m ft num m fence industrial _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m fence industrial _____ in mm bw top ft m num ft num m ft num m fence type _____ ft m num ft num m ft num m fencewing _____ ft m num ft num m ft num m gates _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea gates galv stl _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea gates industrial _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea gates rail _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea reset fence ft m num ft num m ft num m reset gates ea ea ea ea ea ea num num minor concrete paving num num num num section num minor concrete paving num description this section describes the requirements for constructing sidewalks bike paths median paving ditch paving and other minor paving .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bed course material num curing material num fly ash num joint materials num joint sealer num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num use a slipform machine that places spreads consolidates screeds and finishes the concrete in one pass providing a dense and homogeneous section with minimal hand finishing .
num num construction num general construct the foundation to a depth and width allowing for the installation and bracing of forms or operation of a slipform paver .
compact the foundation to the requirements of subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control and shape to the section specified .
remove soft and yielding material and replace with approved material .
place concrete at least num in num mm thick .
when welded wire fabric is specified positively support reinforcing to minimize vertical or lateral movement of the fabric and place in accordance with subsection num placing and fastening .
num placing concrete use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
the department does not require aggregate gradation tests or cement sample submission .
form place and consolidate concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction and as follows for the method of placement used num .
formed method .
extend forms for the full depth of the concrete so that they are straight free from warp and strong enough to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing .
brace and stake forms to maintain horizontal and vertical alignment until removed .
treat forms with a release agent compatible with the concrete and the form .
num .
slipform method .
a slipform machine may be used if the finished concrete meets the specified lines and grades and has the specified surface texture .
use the machine to shape vibrate and extrude the concrete for the full width and depth of the placement section and with a continuous forward movement .
use concrete of a consistency capable of maintaining the sections shape without support .
finish outside edges of slab and joints with a numinch num mm radius edging tool .
finish sidewalks and bike paths with a light broom texture .
num minor concrete paving num num num num num num num num minor concrete paving num num num joints space joints to coincide with joints in adjoining concrete .
construct joints in new concrete paving as follows num .
contraction joints .
divide paving into sections by contraction joints formed with a jointing tool .
extend contraction joints into the concrete to at least onethird of the concretes depth .
ensure a joint width of c in num mm .
space contraction joints at numfoot num m intervals or at a distance equal to the paving width whichever is less .
if the paving width exceeds num ft num m place a longitudinal contraction joint at the widths midpoint .
do not space transverse joints farther apart than this same distance of half the paving width .
num .
expansion joints .
install expansion joints of the dimensions specified filled with a preformed expansion joint material at the following locations num .
radius points num .
junctions with existing concrete num .
around rigid structures num .
in line with expansion joints in adjacent concrete pavement num .
at intervals not to exceed num ft num m in continuous runs of concrete paving and num .
between back of curb and sidewalk if the adjacent roadway pavement is concrete and there is lateral constraint other than soil on the opposite side of the sidewalk .
use preformed joint material num in num mm thick that extends the depth of the section .
seal with silicone joint sealant .
num curing cure concrete in accordance with applicable portions of section num curing concrete .
do not allow pedestrian and vehicular traffic on concrete during curing .
num num sidewalk and curb ramps construct sidewalks to provide accessibility consistent with ada standards current at the time of award unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
provide sidewalk curb ramps at street intersections and other specified locations .
do not install drainage structure grates or access covers in sidewalk curb ramps .
construct type i or type i modified sidewalk curb ramps .
if conditions do not allow adequate clear rightofway type ii or iii may be constructed depending on specified sidewalk width and the engineers approval .
install ramps as close to the intersection as possible within pedestrian crossing markings when present and perpendicular to the curb section .
color concrete with red pigment where specified .
do not use surface treatment to obtain red color of the concrete .
num surface tolerance for sidewalks and bike paths leave the finished surface without variation greater than num in num mm every num ft num m in any direction correct excess variation by removal and replacement or grinding .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
concrete sidewalk conc bike path conc median paving conc and ditch paving conc by the square foot square meter or square yard square meter of paved surface .
measurement will be parallel to the paved surface .
num .
curb ramps as sidewalk conc including curb returns and interior curbs .
num .
driveways and approaches as sidewalk conc if the same thickness as the adjacent sidewalk .
minor concrete paving num num num num num num num num minor concrete paving num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
bed course material in accordance with section num aggregate materials .
measurement specified by the cubic yard cubic meter will be based on neat lines .
num .
the area of curb ramps located on the street side of the backofcurb line as curb and gutter in accordance with section num curb and gutter .
num .
driveways and approaches including the sidewalk within the boundary of the driveway as double gutter in accordance with section num curb and gutter when a thicker section than the adjacent sidewalk is specified .
num .
unclassified excavation in accordance with section num excavation and embankment .
num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bike path conc sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum concrete sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum ditch paving conc sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum median paving conc sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum sidewalk conc sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum the department will pay as follows num section num curb and gutter num description this section describes the requirements for constructing curb and gutter .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num fly ash num joint materials num joint sealer num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num use a slipform machine capable of placing spreading consolidating screeding and finishing concrete in one complete pass providing a dense and homogeneous section with minimal hand finishing .
ensure that the forming tube portion of the extrusion machine can be readily adjusted vertically during forward motion to produce a variable curb height matching the predetermined curb grade .
num curb and gutter num num num num num num curb and gutter num num num num num num num construction num general construct the foundation to a depth and width allowing the installation and bracing of forms or operation of a slipform paver .
compact the foundation in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control and shape to the section specified .
remove soft and yielding material and replace with approved material .
when constructing gutter next to existing pavement locate the top front edge of the gutter flush with the top of the surfacing .
if the top lift is wearing course locate the top front edge flush with the contact point between the plant mix pavement and the wearing course or in num mm below the wearing course surface whichever is lower .
num placing concrete num general coordinate concrete mixing delivery and spreading to ensure uniform progress .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form and place concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction modified as follows .
place concrete with forms or a slipform machine .
when the radius of the curb and gutter section is less than or equal to num ft num m square the section off as specified .
when placing concrete curb over a slotted drain cover the slot to keep out foreign material .
do not allow the slot to extend above the flow line of the gutter section .
num formed method place forms the full depth of the concrete straight and free from warp and to enable the inspection of grade and alignment .
brace and secure forms to maintain alignment and grade during concrete placement .
place and consolidate concrete without segregation .
screed with a straightedge float .
num num slipform method use the machine to shape vibrate and extrude the concrete for the full width and depth of the section placed and with a continuous forward movement .
use concrete of a consistency capable of maintaining the curbs shape without support .
indicate the grade for the top of the curb by an offset guide line set from survey marks .
attach a gradeline gauge or pointer to the machine to enable a continual comparison between the curb placed and the grade indicated by the offset guide line .
alternatively maintain curb grade by operating the machine on rails or forms set at uniform depth below the predetermined finished top of the curb grade .
when placing curb gutter and concrete pavement monolithically match the depth of the curb and gutter section to the pavement depth and delete the longitudinal curbandgutter joint if the overall concrete slab width does not exceed num ft num m. num joints num general construct joints at right angles to curb lines .
except sawed cuts tool joint edges before final finishing .
num expansion joints install preformed expansionjoint material at the following locations num .
radius points num .
junctions with existing concrete num .
around rigid structures num .
in line with expansion joints in existing adjacent concrete pavement and at both sides of driveways and num .
at intervals of num feet num m or less in continuous runs of curb curb and gutter and double gutter .
num curb and gutter num num num num num num num curb and gutter num num num num num num num num .
between back of curb and sidewalk if the adjacent roadway pavement is concrete and there is lateral constraint other than soil on the opposite side of the sidewalk .
use preformed joint material that is num in num mm thick shaped to fit the template and extends the full depth of the section .
make joints true and straight and ensure a snug fit of joint material .
after curing check material in each joint for tightness of fit .
mortar loose material in place and cure .
seal with silicone joint sealant .
num contraction joints make contraction joints c in num mm wide and from onequarter to threequarters the depth of the section .
space joints to coincide with joints in adjoining concrete and at intervals from num ft num m to num ft num m. num construction joints make construction joints between curb and gutter and concrete pavement that are num .
type y when no lateral constraint exists behind the curb .
num .
type b when full lateral constraint exists behind the curb .
the department considers the pouring of concrete against a foundation or other fixed object full lateral constraint .
soil is not considered full lateral constraint .
place reinforcing steel required for type y joints perpendicular to the curb face as specified .
num finishing when using forms trowel exposed surfaces smooth and give a fine brush finish with brush strokes parallel to the curb line .
after removing forms fill surface blemishes that will be exposed with grout and finish .
when using the slipform method remove blemishes and give surfaces that will be exposed in the completed item a fine brush finish with brush strokes parallel to the line of the curb .
num num curing immediately after finishing cure the curb and gutter for five calendar days using impervious curing compound or the water method in accordance with subsection num curing concrete .
num surface tolerance ensure that the finished top and face of the curb are true and straight and that the top surfaces are of uniform width and free from irregularities .
do not leave the finished surface with variation greater than num in num mm every num ft num m in any direction .
correct excess variation by removing and replacing the curb section .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
double gutter by the square foot square meter or square yard square meter parallel to the finished surface between neat edge lines making no deduction for appurtenances with less than one square yard one square meter surface area .
num .
special curb type _____ and curb and gutter type _____ by the foot meter along the face of the curb making no reduction in length for drainage structures installed in the curb such as catch basins drop inlets etc .
the department will pay as follows num curb and gutter num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest curb and gutter type _____ ft m num ft num m ft num m double gutter sf sy mnum num ft num ft num m sf num sy num mnum special curb type _____ ft m num ft num m ft num m num num curb and gutter num num pay adjustment when the engineer requires an increased thickness for items paid for by area the quantity for payment will be computed by multiplying the actual area by the relationship of the increased thickness to the specified thickness .
num section num metal drain inlets num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and constructing metal drain inlets .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection bolts nuts and washers num corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe num corrugated metal units num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num galvanized coating num rubber gaskets num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num construction install metal drain inlets in the completed embankment slope at specified locations or as staked by the engineer .
do not order pipe before the engineer checks pipe lengths and elbow angles in the field .
use pipe of any material specified above .
use metal inlet units .
num metal drain inlets num num num num num excavate a trench in the embankment slope of sufficient width for pipe and fixture installation .
install the metal drain inlet elbows drain pipe and metal drain outlet and connect with coupling bands to provide a complete drainage unit .
make joints watertight by installing flat rubber gaskets at each joint .
after installing metal drain inlet backfill the trench to the original slope line in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
compact backfill material to at least the density of the adjacent embankment .
when stilling basins are specified or required by the engineer use erosion control concrete in accordance with subsection num construction .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
metal drain pipe by the foot meter from end to end in place .
the pay length will not exceed the length staked .
num .
metal drain inlet units by the each .
the department will pay as follows num metal drain inlets num num num num num num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for erosion control concrete in accordance with section num erosion control concrete .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest metal drain inlet ea ea ea ea ea ea metal drain pipe ft m num ft num m ft num m num section num highway monuments num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and installing highway monuments .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num curing materials num fly ash num joint materials num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num provide highway monument posts of precast reinforced concrete .
provide tablets meeting u.s. army corps of engineers type num disc with the classic numinch num mm long split style tapered stem .
ensure the tablet is orbitalformed from solid unleaded siliconbronze bar and has a completely smooth top and polished appearance with no raised markings or visible surface defects .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design but with the substitution of type v portland cement .
ensure right angles are fabricated with a inch num mm chamfer .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general do not remove monuments until approved by the engineer .
removed monuments become the contractors property .
num highway monuments num num num num num num num num highway monuments num accurately locate highway monuments within the engineers staked reference points and hold them in true position during placement .
set monuments plumb with the designated post length above ground and with backfill firmly tamp into place .
place polyethylene survey marker signs along side of the monuments as specified .
the department will complete monument marking .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure highway monuments by the each .
the department will pay as follows num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest highway monuments ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num siphons num description this section describes the requirements for constructing inverted pipe siphons .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bolts nuts and washers num corrugated metal units num corrugated steel pipe and pipearches num corrugated steel siphon pipe num curing materials num fly ash num galvanized coating num joint materials num portland cement num reinforced concrete siphon pipe num reinforcing steel num rubber gaskets num structural steel num water num welded steel siphon pipe num for drain valves provide solid wedge gate valves with flanged iron bodies bronzemounted nonrising stems with operating nuts and a rating of at least num psi num kpa .
provide a handle for valve operation .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following num siphons num num num num num num siphons num num num num num num num equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num construction num shop drawings submit shop drawings for siphon pipe including recommended installation procedures to the state bridge engineer in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
for reinforcedconcrete pipe siphons ensure that the siphon pipe fabricator calculates the allowable leakage value for acceptance testing in accordance with exfiltration requirements of astm c num astm c numm and converts this value from gallons liters of water to a drop in water elevation below the outlet flowline .
include this value with the installation procedures .
num excavation excavate trenches in accordance with subsection num culvert excavation .
num installation of pipe prepare bedding in accordance with subsection num pipe bed preparation for class c installation .
place bell ends of welded steel siphon pipe and plastic siphon pipe and outside circumferential laps of corrugated steel siphon pipe facing upstream .
place corrugated steel siphon pipe with longitudinal laps at the sides .
install magnesium anodes at specified locations along welded steel pipe siphons to provide cathodic protection .
test for electrical continuity before backfilling .
repair damage to the protective coating of the pipe by priming the areas with approved coal tar paint then applying hot coal tar enamel in accordance with awwa cnum .
do not fieldcoat damaged parts in air temperatures below num ºf num ºc unless using an approved method of protection and heating .
do not use damaged plastic siphon pipe the engineer will reject it .
num num couplings use oring type couplings for welded steel pipe siphons .
protect field joints by applying primer and wrapping them with two thicknesses of numinch num mm wide protective tape .
join corrugated steel siphon pipe by placing concrete collars .
for reinforced concrete pipe siphons use bellandspigot couplings with a rubber gasket .
form couplings entirely of concrete with a positive groove in the spigot to contain the gasket .
when specified place concrete collars at each joint .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form and place concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
num testing before backfilling over siphon pipe test the entire installation as follows num .
corrugated plastic and welded steel pipe num .
fill siphon structure with water to the outlet flow line level .
num .
repair evident leaks refill to the flow line and let stand for at least num hours .
num .
if there is no apparent water loss during the numhour test period backfill the trench .
if there is water loss repair leaks and repeat the test .
num .
where it is impractical to divert traffic around the full length of the siphon structure construct test using the same test head and backfull a portion of the structure .
num .
concrete pipe num .
fill the siphon structure with water to the outlet flow line level and let stand for num hours .
num siphons num num num num num num num siphons num num num num num num .
refill to the outlet flow line and let stand for another num hours .
if the water level is within the allowable leakage value shown on the shop drawings backfill the trench .
num .
if the water level is above the allowable water elevation value shown on the shop drawings backfill the trench .
num .
if the water level is below the allowable water elevation value as determined by the fabricator repair the siphon and repeat the test .
num .
where it is impractical to divert traffic around the full length of the siphon structure construct test using the same test head and backfill a portion of the structure .
obtain the maximum acceptable drop in water level for the tested portion from the pipe fabricator determined in accordance with astm c num astm c numm and have it approved by the state bridge engineer .
num inlet and outlet structures and drain boxes when specified use class b concrete for inlet and outlet structures and drain boxes in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form place and cure concrete in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
place siphon pipe sections flush with the inside of the structure wall and projecting far enough outside to properly connect with the next pipe section .
provide and place reinforcing steel in accordance with subsection num construction .
construct drain boxes with a steel lid and ladder rungs as specified to access the drain valve .
provide trash guards drain box lids ladder rungs and other similar steel items in accordance with subsection num construction and galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
num backfill place and compact backfill in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
corr stl siphon pipe _____ in mm plastic siphon pipe _____ in mm rcp siphon _____ in mm and welded stl siphon pipe _____ in mm by the foot meter along the invert from end to end of pipe .
num .
corr stl siphon fe sect _____ in mm and rcp siphon fe sect _____ in mm by the each for each size specified .
the department will pay as follows num siphons num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest corr stl siphon pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m corr stl siphon fe sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea plastic siphon pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rcp siphon _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rcp siphon fe sect _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea welded stl siphon pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m num num siphons num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
class b concrete required for constructing inlet and outlet structures and drain boxes in accordance with section num structural concrete .
num .
reinforcing steel required for constructing inlet and outlet structures and drain boxes in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
num .
drain box lids ladder rungs and similar steel items in accordance with the contract .
num .
trash guards in accordance with section num trash guards .
num section num latex emulsion paint for concrete num description this section describes the requirements for latex emulsion paint .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection latex emulsion paint num num equipmentvacant num construction num surface preparation give concrete surfaces a rubbed finish in accordance with subsection num finishing concrete surfaces .
clean surfaces before painting .
where applicable protect concrete surfaces that have been or will be painted with latex from structural steel paint overspray .
num application allow the paste from surface preparation to set at least num hours .
saturate the surface with water and paint while damp but not showing free water .
do not mix sand with paint .
apply at least two coats at a rate of approximately num ft² gal num m²l for the first coat and from num ft²gal num m²l to num ft²gal num m²l for the second .
apply additional coats as necessary for uniform coverage and appearance .
paint when the air temperature is at least num ºf num ºc and only with rollers or brushes .
num latex emulsion paint for concrete num num num num num num num latex emulsion paint for concrete num num num num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure ltx emulsion paint conc as a complete unit in place .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest ltx emulsion paint conc ls ls ls num section num erosion control concrete num description this section describes the requirements for concrete invert paving and erosion control concrete .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num asphalt mastic for field coating num curing materials num fly ash num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num construction num general perform minor grading required to place erosion control concrete in accordance with subsection num excavation and embankment construction general .
num erosion control concrete num num num num num num erosion control concrete num num num num num num num use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
the department does not require a cement sample or aggregate gradation tests .
mix form and place concrete in accordance with applicable portions of section num construction .
finish surfaces to a coarse texture .
num invert paving on a thoroughly cleaned surface place and screed concrete to form a paved section of designated width .
ensure that the final surface of invert paving is parallel with the flow line and level or slightlydished transversely with the pipe centerline .
coat aluminum pipe surfaces to be invertpaved with an asphalt mastic .
num chutes and stilling basins unless the ground can be graded to a neat section with uniform grades use forms to construct chutes stilling basins or similar items .
excavate the trench or basin to necessary limits and grade to the specified shape .
if required to reduce flow velocity score the surface or otherwise leave a rough surface texture .
handtool contraction joints at intervals of num ft num m. ensure a joint depth equal to at least onethird of the thickness of concrete and a width of c in num mm .
num ditch checks when placing concrete in a trench excavate to specified lines and grades with sides as vertical as practical .
form exposed edges above the finished grade to leave neat lines .
num curing after finishing concrete cure in accordance with subsection num curing concrete .
when using a curing compound apply at a rate of num galnum ft² num l num m² .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure erosion control concrete by the cubic yard cubic meter based on batch volumes ordered and placed .
num the department will pay as follows num erosion control concrete num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest erosion control concrete cy mnum num cy num mnum num cy num mnum num num cattle guards num num num section num cattle guards num description this section describes the requirements for constructing and resetting cattle guards and replacing cattle guard grill units .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bolts nuts and washers num curing materials num fence posts num fly ash num galvanized coating num joint materials num metal delineator posts num paint num portland cement num prefabricated cattle guard units num reinforcing steel num structural steel num water num welded grill cattle guard units num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num num construction num general ensure that plants providing precast concrete foundations are certified in accordance with subsection num plant certification .
use galvanized bolts fasteners and associated hardware .
connect existing fences to new and reset cattle guards .
the department specifies minimum outside dimensions of cattle guard grill units .
at no additional cost to the department and with proper adjustments to the foundation dimensions units with dimensions up to num in num mm larger than the specified minimum may be provided .
num excavation excavate in accordance with section num structure excavation and backfill .
provide enough space for the proper installation of forms or precast sections .
when specified excavate the area under the unit to provide drainage through the end of the foundation opposite the gate .
when installing on new embankment bring the fill to grade in accordance with subsection num embankment and cut areas with moisture and density control then excavate for the foundation unit .
num foundations use precast or castinplace foundations made with class b concrete or better in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form mix and place concrete in accordance with applicable sections of subsection num construction .
give exposed concrete an ordinary finish .
construct foundations to match the roadway crossslope .
if necessary and with the engineers approval adjust the elevation of the end support seats and backwall .
for a crowned roadway with an odd number of grill units specified place the center grill level and slope outside units to match the roadway .
adjust foundation units accordingly .
provide and place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
extend steel into the lateral supports when castinplace .
num cattle guards num num num num num num num num num num cattle guards num num num num num num num num place adjacent backfill in numinch nummm layers and compact in accordance with subsection num backfill .
num grill units and wings fabricate grill units and wings in accordance with subsection num fabrication with the exception that they may be fabricated at the site .
the department does not require shop inspection or drawings .
clean and paint grill units wings and miscellaneous hardware in accordance with the applicable portions of subsection num painting or subsection num field painting .
required coats may be applied in the shop or field .
use brown for the final coat .
install grill units and wings as specified .
leave no more than d in num mm of vertical distortion between the grill unit and a plane parallel to the foundation surface .
fabricate and install cattle guard swingwings as specified .
num resetting and replacing cattle guards when specified for resetting dismantle and reset existing cattle guards .
provide new hardware for connectors as required .
replace or repair portions damaged during removal .
when specified replace grill units by removing and replacing with a new unit of the same size and type .
modify foundations as required .
num delineation use type iv delineators to mark cattle guard corners .
for twoway traffic install delineators on all four corners .
an approach is considered a twoway traffic condition .
for oneway traffic install two delineators on the side of on coming traffic .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure cattle guard heavy duty _____ ft m cattle guard medium duty _____ ft m reset cattle guard reset cattle guard heavy duty _____ ft m replace cattle guard grill heavy duty _____ num ft m reset cattle guard medium duty _____ ft m replace cattle guard grill medium duty _____ ft m and cattle guard swingwing by the each as a complete unit .
the department will pay as follows num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for cattle guard removal in accordance with section num removal however when reset is specified removal will be incidental to resetting .
num cattle guards num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest cattle guard heavy duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea cattle guard medium duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea cattle guard swingwing ea ea ea ea ea ea replace cattle guard grill heavy duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea replace cattle guard grill medium duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea reset cattle guard ea ea ea ea ea ea reset cattle guard heavy duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea reset cattle guard medium duty _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea num num snow fence num num num num num section num snow fence num description this section describes the requirements for constructing and resetting snow fence .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection bolts and fasteners num line posts num reinforcing steel num timber and lumber num provide lodgepole pine ponderosa pine engelmann spruce douglas fir hem fir or western larch roughdimension lumber .
for numinch num mm lumber provide western wood products association wwpa no .
num or better treated or untreated .
for numinch num mm lumber provide wwpa no .
num or better and when used for line posts and sillandframe assemblies provide treated lumber .
use treated timber that is dried to a moisture content of num percent after treatment .
provide anchor angles of structural carbon steel in accordance with astm a num astm a numm requirements .
provide bolts with washers and nyloninsert locknuts .
use plated nails in accordance with astm b num scnum or astm a num astm a numm class i coating .
use grade num num reinforcing steel in the anchorage system .
provide galvanized bolts and fasteners .
num equipmentvacant num construction num new snow fence the department specifies the minimum number of washers .
as required provide additional washers and adjust bolt lengths to provide a minimum of num thread num num and a maximum of num in num mm of thread exposed beyond the outside end of the nut when components are assembled clamptight .
do not crush wood fibers by overtightening .
place reinforcing steel anchors as specified and drive to prevent panels from sliding or overturning .
remove and replace anchors that are not tight against the anchor angle .
where rock hinders the driving of anchor bars anchor in the rock .
drill a numinch num mm diameter hole at least num in num mm deep into solid rock and remove dust and loose material .
install bars in holes using epoxy resin grout as approved by the engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
fasten the rock anchor bars to the frame as specified they may be perpendicular to the sill .
ensure that rockanchored bars extend above ground to the same height as driven anchor bars .
if driving anchors is not possible install four rock anchors per panel with two rock anchors for each outer sill .
replace and compact soil removed for rock drilling .
place line posts in holes excavated to specified dimensions .
backfill holes to finished ground in approximately numinch num mm compacted layers .
the engineer may approve the driving of posts .
place panels to equally distribute weight mass to the uprights and with a continuous bearing surface under each sill .
grade to obtain proper bearing .
overlap panels to eliminate spaces .
num removing and resetting snow fence as specified remove snow fence including hardware posts and panels and reset .
before resetting inspect each panel for damage and repair as directed by the engineer .
repair damage incurred during resetting at no additional cost to the department .
panels removed but not reset become the property of the contractor .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
reset snow fence and snow fence wood _____ ft m by the each for each fence panel constructed or reset .
num snow fence num num num num num num num num num .
snow fence repair for panels damaged prior to removal in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
the department will pay as follows num snow fence num num num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for removal of snow fence panels in accordance with section num removal however when reset is specified removal will be incidental to resetting .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest reset snow fence ea ea ea ea ea ea snow fence repair num num snow fence wood _____ ft m ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num cutoff walls and head walls num description this section describes the requirements for constructing concrete cutoff walls and head walls .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bolts and fasteners num curing materials num fly ash num galvanized coating num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num construction use class b concrete or better in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form mix place and cure concrete in accordance with subsection num construction .
num cutoff walls and head walls num num num num num num cutoff walls and head walls num num num num num num construct head walls and cutoff walls perpendicular to the pipe .
for corrugated metal pipe install anchor bolts as specified and prior to concrete placement .
head walls may be poured monolithically or with the footing or cutoff portion and wall or slope paving poured independently .
if poured independently provide a key way as specified and in accordance with subsection num joints .
provide and place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
fieldcut vertical and horizontal steel to maintain a clearance of at least num in num mm vertically and horizontally around the pipe .
grade fill slopes to match head wall cutoff wall or both .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure cutoff wall conc and head wall conc by the cubic yard cubic meter using the neat lines specified for the computed volume of concrete .
volumes occupied by reinforcing steel and anchor bolts will not be deducted from the concrete volume .
the volume occupied by the pipes outside diameter will be deducted .
when a head wall consists of a cutoff wall portion and slope paving the entire installation will be measured as a head wall conc .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest cutoff wall conc cy mnum num ft num m num cy num mnum head wall conc cy mnum num ft num m num cy num mnum num section num precast reinforced concrete stock passes num description this section describes the requirements for constructing precast reinforced concrete stock passes .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num bolts and fasteners num portland cement num curing materials num fly ash num galvanized coating num reinforced concrete stock passes num reinforcing steel num water num num equipmentvacant num construction provide precast reinforced concrete stock pass sections from plants certified in accordance with subsection num plant certification .
the department will not accept drycast precast members .
provide sections that vary from specifications no more than num .
num percent for internal dimensions num .
num in num mm for haunch dimensions num .
num percent less for slab and wall thicknesses and num. in num mm for lengths of two opposite surfaces of the box section except where bevel ends are specified .
num precast reinforced concrete stock passes num num num num num precast reinforced concrete stock passes num num num num num num num before shipping shopassemble at least three sections to verify that joint fit meets the requirements specified for final assembly .
excavate for stock passes in accordance with subsection num culvert excavation .
shape and uniformly compact the trench bottom to support the length and width of the stock pass and flared end sections at the established line and grade .
install stock pass and end sections with joints tightly closed .
when specified use galvanized tie bolts and fasteners to join flared end sections to end culvert sections .
when assembled in their final positions do not allow a gap between sections or a misalignment of walls top slabs and bottom slabs greater than num in num mm for more than num in num mm at one location or num in num mm total for multiple locations .
measure misalignment perpendicular to slabs and walls .
backfill the stock pass in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure num .
rc stock pass _____ _____ in mm by the foot meter along the invert centerline not including flared end sections .
the measured length will not exceed the length staked .
num .
rc stock pass fe sect _____ _____ in mm by the each installed per end regardless of the number of sections required to complete a flared end assembly .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest rc stock pass _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m rc stock pass fe sect _____ _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num trash guards num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and installing trash guards .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection bolts and fasteners num structural steel num paint num num equipmentvacant num construction fabricate in accordance with section num structural steel with the exception that they may be fabricated at the site .
the department does not require shop inspection or drawings .
clean and paint trash guards and brackets in accordance with the relevant portions of subsection num painting or subsection num field painting .
required coats may be applied in the shop or field .
use brown for the final coat .
fasten trash guards to the pipe as specified .
when required the department will provide padlocks for the locking bar .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure trash guard _____ by the each for each type installed .
the department will pay as follows num trash guards num num num num num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest trash guard _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea num num adjustment of valve boxes and fire hydrants num num num num section num adjustment of valve boxes and fire hydrants num description this section describes the requirements for adjusting valve boxes fire hydrants and associated waterlines .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num aggregate for flowable backfill num bed course material num curing materials num ductile iron water pipe num fly ash num portland cement num water num provide polyvinyl chloride pressure pipe and associated fittings that meet the requirements of awwa cnum awwa cnum or awwa num as appropriate .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num num construction num general adjust valve boxes and fire hydrants in accordance with the installation and material standards of the current wyoming public works standard specifications and the owner .
lay waterlines associated with adjustments on undisturbed material in trenches wide enough for proper installation and testing .
excavate in accordance with subsection num excavation .
when excavating below grade place shape and compact bed course material as specified .
before starting work give the engineer and owner numhour notice .
do not start without the owners approval .
give notification for connections service interruptions line cleaning pressure testing and system disinfection .
minimize service interruptions and notify users two hours or more before interrupting service .
unless otherwise required by the owner notify fire departments num hours before interrupting service to hydrants .
handle pipe valves and fixtures without causing damage keep clean and store to prevent damage and excessive handling .
remove damaged or unsuitable material from the project .
inspect each pipe joint or fixture and clean the inside before lowering into the trench .
prevent contaminants from entering during installation .
drain or pump water encountered during laying so that it does not enter the pipe .
center each joint fit tightly and fasten in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num adjustments of waterlines valves valve boxes and fire hydrants when specified adjust existing waterlines valves and hydrants for grades locations and street elevations .
remove and adjust items carefully to enable reuse .
when salvaged items can not be reused install new items that meet specified requirements and the waterline owners specifications and standards .
place a concrete collar around valve boxes in accordance with the applicable sections of the current edition of wyoming public works standard specifications .
num adjustment of valve boxes and fire hydrants num num num num num num num num num adjustment of valve boxes and fire hydrants num num num num num num testing and disinfecting lines test and disinfect lines before backfilling in accordance with applicable municipal requirements or as specified .
num thrust blocks brace fixtures that could blow off the line under pressure with a castinplace wedge block of class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
mix and place in accordance with applicable portions of subsection num construction .
cast the block between the fixture and undisturbed vertical trench wall in accordance with municipal requirements or as specified .
num backfilling do not place backfill containing rock or hard lumps larger than num in num mm alongside or within num in num mm of the pipes top .
place and compact backfill in accordance with subsection num backfilling or if the waterline is not located in the roadway to at least the density of the adjacent material .
when specified use flowable backfill in accordance with subsection num flowable backfill .
during backfilling brace hydrants valve boxes or other vertical fixtures and adjust the fixtures top to correspond with the fixtures established elevation .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure valve boxes _____ in mm fire hydrant adjustments fire hydrants adjustments valve boxes and thrust blocks by the each .
the department will measure and pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest adjustments fire hydrants ea ea ea ea ea ea adjustments valve boxes ea ea ea ea ea ea fire hydrant ea ea ea ea ea ea thrust blocks ea ea ea ea ea ea valve boxes _____ in mm ea ea ea ea ea ea num section num vacant num vacant num num structural plate pipe num num num num num num section num structural plate pipe num description this section describes the requirements for constructing structural plate pipe pipe arches stock passes and underpasses .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection aluminum alloy structural plate pipe num asphalt mastic for field coating num class b bedding num galvanized coating num highstrength bolts and fasteners num structural plate pipe num num equipment for applying asphalt mastic provide equipment that uses a highpressure spray .
num construction num general use galvanized bolts washers and nuts .
use bolts long enough to engage the full length of the nut .
cover pipes to prevent damage during construction .
num size and thickness designations the department specifies sizes based on steel plate structures and will accept aluminum alloy structural plate pipe structures as an alternate .
determine aluminum alloy structure size from the specified equivalent size table .
for steel or aluminum determine the plate thickness by the fill heights or provide thickergage metal at no additional cost to the department .
num use equally thick plates within a structure .
in elliptical structures use a bottom plate or plates wide enough to provide at least num percent of the structure periphery with the heaviest thickness specified .
for pipearches stock passes and underpasses use bottom plates including corner plates of the heaviest thickness specified .
fourteen calendar days before fabrication submit four sets of installation drawings to the engineer .
show proposed details for structural plates the locations of bolt holes and the type size thickness and number of plates bolts and washers .
match mark plates that are not standard .
show match marks on the installation drawings .
obtain fill heights and pipe lengths from the engineer before ordering .
num excavation and bed preparation excavate in accordance with subsection num excavation .
place the structure on an earth foundation of uniform density .
for structures with a specified corner pressure of num tonft² num kpa prepare bedding in accordance with a class b installation in subsection num pipe bed preparation .
prepare as class c bedding for other installations .
num assembly of plates assemble plates and tighten bolts in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the type of structure .
torque bolts from num ftlbs num nm to num ftlbs num nm .
before extending an existing structural plate pipe with a beveled end section remove individual plates to obtain a nearvertical end .
num field coating when specified fieldcoat structural plate pipe with asphalt mastic coat interior and exterior pipe faces and steel mitered ends .
before coating remove foreign matter from surfaces .
apply uniformly to obtain a thickness of at least num in numµm measured on corrugation crests .
apply with highpressure spraying equipment .
brush or trowel in small areas where spraying is impractical .
the underside of bottom plates may be coated during assembly .
structural plate pipe num num num num num num num num num num num structural plate pipe num num num num num backfilling place and compact in accordance with subsection num backfilling .
completely backfill and compact below corner plates .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure structural plate pipe _____ in mm structural plate pipearch _____ _____ in mm and structural plate stock pass _____ _____ in mm by the foot meter along the invert centerline from end to end .
the length for payment will not exceed the length staked .
the engineer will measure structural plate pipe extensions after removal of the existing beveled end section if applicable from the end of the existing pipe along the invert to the end of the new pipe .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest structural plate pipe _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m structural plate pipearch _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m structural plate stock pass _____ _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m num section num vacant section num vacant num vacant num num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num num num num section num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num description this section describes the requirements for constructing manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num asphalt mastic for field coating num curing materials num fly ash num frames grates and covers num galvanized coating num joint material num paint num pipe joint mortar num portland cement num manhole risers and tops num reinforcing steel num slide gates num structural steel num structural timber and lumber num water num provide douglas fir timber for stop gates .
num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num num construction num general provide precast manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes from plants certified in accordance with subsection num plant certification .
do not place street drainage structures gratings or access covers in sidewalk curb ramps or pedestrian paths .
excavate and backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts .
provide and place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
the department will allow an cinch per foot num mm per meter taper in walls to ease form removal .
use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
form mix and place concrete in accordance with applicable sections of subsection num construction .
cure exposed concrete with wet burlap or curing membrane applied in accordance with subsection num curing concrete for at least num hours .
place pipes in the inlet box or riser as specified .
preform holes for precast barrels and grout outlet pipes with grout approved by the engineer .
grout connections and broken areas smoothly to form a watertight inlet or manhole .
place pipe sections flush on the inside of the structure wall and projecting far enough outside to properly connect with the next pipe section .
form or hand trowel inverts and slope to facilitate water movement in the direction of flow .
slope shelves numvnumh or steeper .
set metal frames in a fullmortar bed .
num inlets provide precast concrete inlet structures or castinplace .
num median drains when the inlet box joins two or more pipes provide a drop of at least num in num mm between inverts of the inlet and outlet pipes .
use only one of the three grate types specified .
num num num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num num num num num num num num num num num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num num num num curb inlets for a type a inlet the department will allow substitution of a type b or c. for inlet frames and grates use cast or fabricated structural steel .
fabricate in accordance with section num structural steel .
the department does not require shop inspection or drawings .
when using precast inlet lids warp curb sections and road surfaces to match the lid .
num manholes use precast concrete cones riser sections and slab covers .
use precast or cast inplace concrete bases for manhole types a b c and d cast bases in place for type e manholes .
use manhole sleeves with connecting pipes on sanitary sewers to ensure watertightness .
finish joints inside and out with asphaltic waterproof mortar or mastic .
use mortar within num minutes after its preparation .
seal joints outside with asphaltic waterproofing compound or other methods approved by the engineer .
construct reinforced concrete collars around the manhole ring for all manhole types .
num catch basins and diversion boxes construct catch basins and diversion boxes to the dimensions and grades specified .
locate flow gates for diversion boxes as specified and place as follows num .
stop gate .
as specified construct using stop timbers stacked on top of each other .
num .
steel slide gate .
install over the pipe end as recommended by the manufacturer .
num cleaning and painting paint miscellaneous structural steel pieces or provide as galvanized .
do not paint galvanized pieces .
clean and paint structural steel in accordance with the applicable portions of subsection num painting or subsection num field painting .
required coats may be applied in the shop or field .
use brown for the final coat .
galvanize in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
the department does not require the painting of castings or wrought iron items .
num num num adjusting manholes and inlets when specified adjust the grade of existing structures by removing frames covers and grates and reconstructing walls as required .
reset cleaned frames at the required elevation .
after resetting clean the structure of any foreign matter and keep clean until approval .
num measurement and payment the engineer will measure inlet type _____ manhole type _____ catch basin type _____ diversion box type _____ inlet adjustment manhole adjustment and slide gate _____ by the each .
the department will pay as follows num manholes inlets catch basins and diversion boxes num num num pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest catch basin type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea diversion box type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea inlet adjustment ea ea ea ea ea ea inlet type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea manhole adjustment ea ea ea ea ea ea manhole type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea slide gate _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea num num vacant section num vacant num section num epoxy resin injection num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing and injecting epoxy resin for repairing cracks delaminations and voids in portland cement concrete .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection epoxy resin num num equipment use a handgun or pressure pot for injection .
with the engineers approval a machine capable of metering and mixing components to within num percent of specified properties and injecting resin may be used .
provide instruments to periodically check nozzle pressure .
num construction work in accordance with and give the engineer a copy of the epoxy resin manufacturers recommendations .
during injection maintain a nozzle pressure of from num psi to num psi num kpa to num kpa .
clean repair surfaces of deposits detrimental to adhesion .
alter void areas at the surface as necessary to allow installation of injection ports or tees .
space ports or tees to completely and efficiently fill voids .
once in place seal the void surface with a fastsetting cement paste mixture or epoxy mortar .
after the resin obtains its initial cure remove ports tees and seal without marring the concrete surface .
clean adjacent areas .
num epoxy resin injection num num num num num num num num num num epoxy resin injection num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure epoxy resin injection as a complete unit by the gallon liter or by the foot meter .
measurement by the foot meter will be along the surface of the crack delamination or void .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest epoxy resin injection gal ft ls l m ls gal num ft ls l num m ls gal ft ls l num m ls num section num vacant section num vacant section num vacant num vacant num num slotted drains num num num section num slotted drains num description this section describes the requirements for installing slotted drains .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following material subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num class b bedding num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num curing materials num fly ash num galvanized coating num portland cement num reinforcing steel num rubber gaskets num structural steel num water num num equipment ensure that equipment meets the following equipment subsection batch plant num mixers num placing equipment num num num construction num fabrication fabricate slotted drains from galvanized num gage num mm thick steel pipe .
use a closeriveted and soldered annular pipe or a continuouslywelded helical pipe .
use num gage num mm galvanized metal end caps and coupling bands .
fabricate the grate assembly from structural steel in accordance with section num structural steel .
the department does not require shop inspection or drawings .
galvanize the grate in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
num installation do not install slotted drains in sidewalk curb ramps or pedestrian paths .
excavate in accordance with subsection num excavation .
use watertight pipe coupling bands and end plugs .
use rubber gaskets with the coupling bands to ensure watertightness .
use a metal or concrete end plug that matches the pipe corrugations .
for end plugs and for concrete used as backfill around slotted drains use class b concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design .
the engineer may approve a local commercial mix .
the department does not require a cement sample or aggregate gradation tests .
use class b bedding material or concrete for the pipe bed .
use concrete for the top portion of the trench immediately above the bedding as specified .
when constructing a concrete pipe bed prevent floating of the pipe .
when placing curb or paving material over slotted drains cover the opening to keep out foreign material .
do not extend the slot above the paving material or gutter section .
num repair of damaged coating repair damage to spelter coatings in accordance with subsection num repair of galvanizing .
do not backfill the pipe before inspection and approval of repairs by the engineer .
num slotted drains num num num num num num num num num num slotted drains num num num measurement and payment the engineer will measure slotted drain _____ in mm by the foot meter of pipe .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest slotted drain _____ in mm ft m num ft num m ft num m num division num traffic control and roadway lighting num num num num num num electrical devices section num electrical devices num description this section describes the requirements for providing and installing materials and equipment for traffic signals roadway lighting and other electrical systems and for modifying existing systems .
num materials and equipment provide new equipment and materials approved by the national electrical code nec and underwriters laboratories ul and in accordance with the following materials subsection admixtures num aggregate for concrete num anchor bolts num fly ash num galvanized coating num gravel for drains num grout num joint materials num portland cement num reinforcing steel num water num use nonmetallic additive with nonshrink grout .
ensure that the concrete batch plant and mixers meet the requirements of subsection num equipment .
provide and use an air compressor that produces clean oilfree compressed air .
num conduits provide rigid galvanized steel conduit in accordance with ul publication ulnum ansi cnum or federal specification wwcnum .
provide schedule num and schedule num polyvinyl chloride pvc rigid nonmetallic conduit in accordance with national electrical manufacturers association nema standard tcnum .
num num provide schedule num highdensity polyethylene hdpe smoothwall coilable electrical plastic duct in accordance with nema standard tcnum .
ensure the duct is marked at intervals no greater than num in num mm to show the ul listing vendor name duct size sequential footage meter marking and duct striping .
for liquidtight flexible metal conduit provide a product that is ullisted for use as a grounding conductor and consists of a liquidtight nonmetallic sunlight resistant jacket over a flexible inner metal core .
for intermediate steel conduit provide a product in accordance with ul publication num for intermediate metallic conduit .
num conduit hardware for conduit hardware provide products in accordance with applicable sections of the nec ul ansi and nema standards .
provide steel hardware that is galvanized cadmiumplated or stainless steel .
num pull box for pull boxes and covers in open ground or sidewalk installations provide as follows dimensions are width length depth num .
type a pull box .
measuring approximately num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm and designated type anum .
num .
type b pull box .
measuring approximately num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm and designated type bnum .
num .
type rb pull box .
measuring approximately num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm and designated type rbnum .
num .
type s pull box .
measuring approximately num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm and designated type snum .
provide pull boxes made from reinforcedpolymer concrete or molded high density polyethylene .
provide pull box covers made from reinforced polymer concrete marked wydot with a nonskid surface and equipped with two recessed hexhead bolt lock downs and two lift slots .
ensure that boxes and covers are gray in color and meet or exceed hnum load specifications .
num num num num num num electrical devices num num num electrical devices num num service points num service point equipment and materials on service points provide ullisted bonded and grounded equipment as follows num .
weatherproof enclosure .
ensure a weatherproof enclosure with a lighting contactor meeting all the following requirements num .
contactor case installed on the service point .
num .
contacts of fine silver silveralloy or other superior low contact resistance material .
num .
for each outdoor lighting contactor a builtin manualoffauto select switch mounted on the enclosure and featuring snap action positiveon positiveoff operation and a listing for the application .
num .
a hinged lockable nema numrtype enclosure .
num .
a valvetype num volt lighting arrester .
num .
photoelectric control .
provide a photoelectric control that num .
features failsafe operation .
if the photo control components become inoperative ensure that the lamp or lamps remain energized .
num .
mounts in all lockingtype receptacles that meet eeinema specifications .
num .
is rated for a maximum load of num watts incandescent or num voltamperes highintensity discharge .
num .
load center or enclosure with circuit breakers .
provide circuit breakers appropriately rated to protect the equipment and conductors against overcurrent in a lockable serated nema numrtype enclosure and with permanent markings indicating the electrical device they are protecting .
num num .
wooden posts .
for service points provide new treated structural timber in accordance with subsection num structural timber and lumber .
num service point types num .
overhead service points .
for overhead service points provide a new service pole num ft num m long of class num or better wood in accordance with the current edition of ansi num specifications and dimensions for wood poles a load center lighting contactor rigid steel conduit pvc conduit weather head ground wire cables and all other materials necessary for installation .
num .
underground service points .
for underground service points provide a dimensioned numfoot num m wooden post a load center lighting contactor rigid steel conduit pvc conduit ground wire cables and all other materials necessary for installation .
num .
solar service points .
for solar service points provide the specified size and type and include all necessary materials and equipment .
num ground rod grounding and bonding for bonding and grounding jumpers provide copper wire or copper braid as specified .
ensure that equipment grounding conductors are colorcoded to nec requirements .
num traffic signalroadway lighting poles provide poles and mast arms of materials in accordance with the current edition of aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals and designed for a wind loading from a num mph num kmh fastestmile wind speed .
ensure that complete shop drawings meet department standards and show the steel designation minimum yield strength and design yield strength .
submit plans and working drawings to the bridge program for approval in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
obtain the state bridge engineers approval of the drawings before ordering steel poles and mast arms .
num num num electrical devices num num requirements when measured at the midpoint of the pole do not allow a greater variation from straight than shown in table num pole straightness requirements table num pole straightness requirements num num electrical devices num provide open ends of shafts or arms with removable caps .
for poles without pedestal bases provide with hand holes reinforced with a frame .
make provisions in poles for grounding .
configure geometrically and load poles and mast arms as specified .
num classification num .
type i poles .
may be steel or aluminum and mount on a pedestal base .
use for sign installations flashing beacon installations and post top mounting of traffic signal indications or traffic signal controller cabinets .
provide steel poles as one continuous piece of schedule num galvanized steel pipe in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
num .
type ii steel poles .
design to accommodate sidemount traffic signal indications to provide a luminaire mounting height of num ft num m and to accept installation of a traffic signal mast arm with signal indications a luminaire extension and luminaire mast arm .
num .
type iii steel poles .
provide with a luminaire mast arm providing a luminaire mounting height of num ft num m and designed to accept installation of a traffic signal mast arm with signal indications and sidemount traffic signal indications .
pole height ft m permissible variation in mm num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num num num .
type iv steel poles .
provide with a traffic signal mast arm and a pole top cover held by set screws without a flange for lighting extension attachment .
num .
type v steel poles .
provide with a traffic signal mast arm and luminaire mast arm providing a luminaire mounting height of num ft num m. num .
type vi poles .
provide steel or fiberglass poles designed for post mounted luminaires and providing specified mounting heights .
num .
type vii poles .
provide steel or fiberglass poles designed for single or twin mast arm mounting of luminaires and providing specified mounting heights .
num .
type viii steel poles .
provide for roadclosure drop gate installations and with a luminaire mounting height of num ft num m. num pedestal base provide the pedestal base to mount on a concrete foundation using four internal anchor bolts sized in num in num mm num mm and with a threaded top to accept threaded galvanized pipe with an outside diameter of num in num mm .
provide an numinch num mm square hand hole and cover to access the interior of the base for splicing cable and attaching anchor bolts .
secure the cover to the base by numinch num mm bolts .
num steel poles and mast arms provide galvanized poles mast arms and anchor bolts in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
provide steel poles and mast arms with a circular crosssection fabricated from sheet steel in accordance with astm a num astm a numm grade num astm a num astm a numm astm a num or from weldablegrade sheet steel with a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa after fabrication .
for steel requiring coldworking to obtain final properties use num psi num mpa as the maximum yield strength in the design review .
num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num num num electrical devices give the bridge program and engineer certified test reports verifying the minimum yield strength and yield strength used for design .
use the mill test reports for asreceived steel or when the asreceived steel has a lower yield strength than required or designed for provide test data including steel tensile properties after coldforming for specific heats and thicknesses showing that your method of coldforming consistently increases steel tensile properties to meet the specified minimum yield strength and yield strength used for design .
provide poles and mast arms fabricated from fulllength sheets or shorter lengths with each section fabricated from no more than two pieces of sheet steel .
when using two pieces ensure that the longitudinal welded seams are located directly opposite one another .
when buttwelding sections together place longitudinal welded seams on adjacent sections to form continuous straight seams from base to end .
strengthen buttwelded transverse joints by inserting at each joint a minimum no .
num u.s. standardgage metal sleeve that is at least num in num mm long centered at the joint with the same taper and chemical composition as the pole or mast arm and with the entire outside surface of the sleeve in full contact with the inside of the pole or mast arm .
make continuous welds and extend weld metal at the transverse butt joint to the sleeve making the sleeve an integral part of the joint .
grind exposed longitudinal seam welds and transverse butt welds flush with the base metal .
weld in accordance with the current edition of aashto standard specifications for structural supports of highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
the engineer may inspect poles in the shop or field this does not preclude rejection of any material or finished member later found to be defective .
before fabrication give the engineer two complete copies of chemical and physical tests .
num fiberglass poles provide poles with a smooth finished surface constructed by the filament winding process using fiberglass and thermosetting ultraviolet polyester resin with no clay fillers .
ensure that the filament is wound continuously with uniform tension and placed helically at low angles for axial strength with additional windings placed in a circular manner for compressive strength .
design poles for direct burial installation .
num pigment the resin the same color as the final coating with pole color uniform throughout ensure a final coating of weatherresistant pigmentedpolyurethane is applied .
provide luminaire mounting configurations that num .
are predrilled for mast arm attachments and supplied with mast arms or num .
have hotdip galvanized tenons epoxybonded to the fiberglass shaft .
provide each pole with a numinch numinch num mm num mm hand hole and aluminum hand hole cover .
secure the cover with stainless steel screws or bolts as specified by the manufacturer .
provide each pole with a conductorentrance hole located num in num mm above the pole base and capable of accommodating a numinch num mm conduit .
include a rubber grommet to seal the entrance .
for protection during shipping and storage double spiralwrap each pole individually with cushioned paper .
incorporate a fulllength zip string in the wrapping to ease removal .
num identifying plates provide traffic signal and roadway lighting poles with an identifying plate or tag sized num in num in num mm num mm from the pole manufacturer and permanently attached to the pole num in num mm above the pole base plate .
do not attach the plate to the handhole cover .
num traffic signalroadway lighting pole foundation provide each anchor bolt with two nuts and two washers .
num cable and conductors provide wire with the underwriters laboratories ul label on each reel coil or container .
provide stranded copper conductors in accordance with nec requirements .
the department will specify conductor insulation types by the letter designations used in article num of the nec .
num num num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num num num num electrical devices ensure that conductor insulation types specified meet nec requirements .
num wiring general requirements use only conductor insulation for color coding .
do not use color tape for identification on conductors no .
num awg and smaller .
num lighting cable provide in accordance with international municipal signal association imsa specification num .
num multiconductor traffic signal cable provide in accordance with imsa specification num .
num loop detector wire provide in accordance with imsa specification num .
num vehicle detector shielded leadin cable num .
loop detector .
for multistrand shielded insulated cable used as a leadin cable from the pull box where detector cables enter from the pavement to the amplifier in the controller cabinet provide a numconductor no .
num awg stranded polyethylenejacketed foil shielded cable filled with waterblocking material or a numconductor no .
num awg stranded foilshielded polyethyleneinsulated and jacketed cable in accordance with imsa specification num .
num .
video detector .
for video detector shielded leadin cable provide one of the following conductors enclosed in one external insulating jacket num .
a numconductor jacketed cable for individual conductors provide no .
num awg or no .
num awg as specified by the video detector manufacturer or num .
an rgnumu no .
num awg belden num .
num num splicing kit before installing obtain the state traffic engineers approval of splicing kits .
provide kits for various conductor sizes as follows num .
no .
num awg or larger .
provide connectors rated for num vac and consisting of an insulated bus and sealing sleeves .
ensure the bus is designed for submersible use or direct burial and the sleeves are constructed of hightemperature rubber to provide independent reliable seals .
num .
no .
num awg or smaller .
provide insulated springtype connectors encased in an insulating sealing compound .
num connector kitfused and unfused provide ullisted connector kits rated for num vac and num a operation intended for the application and designed for breakaway operation allowing separation without breaking or stretching conductors .
provide kits designed to eliminate the possibility of electrical shock when the kit is opened by placing exposed currentcarrying components in the harmless load side connection .
identify the hot side of the kit with a permanent red marking .
permanently mark the load side housing load side .
provide each kit with sufficient silicone compound to lubricate the metal parts and rubber housing for easy assembly .
size each y or iconnector kit individually to accommodate the conductor size and insulation thickness specified .
ensure that each fused connector kit accepts a fuse with the specified ampere rating .
for the fused legs of num vac circuits provide twopole fused connector kits .
for the fused leg of num vac circuits provide singlepole fused connector kits .
positively join the through electrical legs in a manner that allows disassembly from each other without damage .
adapt the loadside contact to the loadside cable and keep it in proper position with a rubber loadside housing .
fasten the lineside contact to the lineside cables with a bolt and steel lock nut with a nylon insert and keep in proper position with a rubber lineside housing .
for fused y or iconnector kits provide a product made of waterresisting synthetic rubber that can be buried or installed in sunlight and with a waterleaf around the load and lineside cables and around both parts of the body at the point of disconnection .
num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num electrical devices num for unfused y or iconnector kits provide a pin contact attached to the load side housing instead of a fuse .
num road closure drop and swing gates provide road closure drop and swing gate assemblies as specified including all appurtenances required for installation .
num solidstate time clock for solidstate time clocks provide a product in accordance with applicable sections of the nema standards publication traffic control systems for equipment construction and environmental and operating standards .
num vehicle traffic signal indication num .
vehicle traffic signal indication housing .
provide vehicle traffic signal indications in accordance with the institute of transportation engineers ite vehicle traffic control signal heads and the mutcd and manufactured or equipped with all the following num .
cast aluminum signal sections .
num .
blanked tunnel visors num in num mm or longer that are formed from corrosionresistant aluminum alloy sheet with twiston attaching ears to facilitate installation .
num .
a final coat of factoryapplied synthetic resin black enamel on the housing door and outside of the tunnel visors .
num .
factoryapplied alkyd black synthetic baking enamel with minimum gloss reflectance inside tunnel visors .
num .
vehicle traffic signal indication incandescent .
provide a onepiece modified parabolic specular alzak aluminum reflector and lamps with at least num hours rated life and that meet ite traffic signal lamps standards .
num .
vehicle traffic signal indication led .
provide in accordance with ite vehicle traffic control signal heads and the mutcd .
num num pedestrian traffic signal indication num .
pedestrian traffic signal indication housing .
provide pedestrian traffic signal indication in accordance with ite pedestrian traffic control signal indications and the mutcd and manufactured or equipped with all the following num .
a dustproof weatherproof housing consisting of a onepiece corrosionresistant aluminum alloy diecasting suitable for posttop or bracket mounting .
num .
a hinged housing door held securely to the housing body by a corrosionresistant locking device .
num .
a housing design and clamshelltype mounting hardware that allow complete interchangeability among manufacturers .
num .
a final coat of factoryapplied synthetic resin black enamel on the housing and door .
num .
pedestrian traffic signal indication incandescent .
for incandescent pedestrian traffic signal indications provide optical units consisting of a walking personhand symbol message and equipped with all the following num .
an eggcratetype visor designed to eliminate sun phantom installed parallel to the face of the message and held in place with stainless steel screws .
num .
a reflector assembly consisting of a singlepiece double parabolic reflector formed from polycarbonate plastic sheet at least num in num mm thick and textured on the lamp side .
num .
two incandescent lampholders .
num .
signal lamps in accordance with ite traffic signal lamps standards .
num .
pedestrian traffic signal indication led .
provide in accordance with ite pedestrian traffic control signal indications and the mutcd .
num electrical devices num num num num num num num electrical devices num num louvered back plates provide back plates made of numhnum aluminum alloy sheet at least num in num mm thick and factorypainted with alkyd black synthetic baking enamel with minimum gloss reflectance and that properly fit the specified indications .
num traffic signal indication mounting hardware for mounting signal indications provide watertight assemblies consisting of singlepiece numinch num mm steel pipes and necessary fittings slipfitters and terminal compartments made of cast bronze or ductile iron .
ensure that steel mounting hardware has a factoryapplied final coat of synthetic resin black enamel .
provide mounting assembly members of the specified dimensions as measured between the axis through the center of the terminal compartment or slipfitter .
ensure there are no sharp edges or protrusions that might damage conductor insulation .
equip with positivelocking serrated fittings that allow fastening at increments up to num degrees and that prevent rotation when mated with similar fittings on the indications .
for each sideofpole signal mounting provide a terminal compartment with a raintight cover fitted with a terminal block containing num terminal positions each with two screwtype terminals .
ensure each terminal position will accommodate at least five no .
num awg conductors .
when used to bracket mount signals provide a compartment designed to bolt securely to the pole .
for posttop signal mounting provide a slipfitter with cadmiumplated set screws that fits over a tapered end or numinch num mm outsidediameter pipe .
for slipfitters used to posttop mount signals with brackets provide with an integral terminal compartment .
for mastarm mounting of traffic signal indications provide an adjustable mounting system constructed of highstrength lightweight aluminum .
ensure a universal configuration for mounting signal heads on poles and mast arms that is completely adjustable to accommodate any size or shape of traffic signal indication and provides complete horizontal and vertical alignment of traffic signal indications .
num num inpavement vehicle detectors num .
saw cut loop detector .
for loop detector conductors provide a no.num awg stranded conductor with a tube jacket in accordance with imsa specification num .
num .
prefab loop detector .
for loop detector conductors provide a no.num awg stranded conductor in accordance with imsa specification num or num .
num .
microloop detector .
provide a microloop detector consisting of one probe and a corresponding polyurethanejacketed connecting cable made of four no .
num awg colorcoded conductors .
ensure the conductors are bundled together by means of from num to num twists per foot num to num twists per meter of cable .
seal the probe and cable against moisture and ensure that the probe produces an inductance change compatible with the operating requirements of the vehicle loop detector amplifier when a vehicle passes .
ensure that the detector operates as designed in temperatures from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc and in relative humidity from num percent to num percent .
ensure a nominal inductance of num microhenries and that the connectingcables inductance does not exceed num microhenries per num ft num microhenries per num m. num outofpavement vehicle detectors provide a microwave detector unit that produces a lowpower microwave beam to detect vehicles as they pass .
ensure the detector operates as designed in temperatures from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc in the departments num controller configuration and that inputs and outputs are compatible with operational requirements of the vehicle detector amplifier .
provide a mounting bracket and associated wiring and ensure the detector is sealed against moisture .
num loop detector sealant provide loop detector sealant that num .
is moisturecuring and selfleveling cures without heat and remains flexible after curing to withstand normal pavement movement .
num num num electrical devices num num num electrical devices num num .
allows vehicular traffic over the filled saw cut immediately after installation without tracking or stringing .
num .
has a minimum shelf life of nine months and is designed for installation on roadways with surface temperatures from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
num .
is temperaturestable and maintains the integrity of the loop detector from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
num .
exhibits minimal shrinkage during and after installation and resists the effects of weather vehicular fluids deicing chemicals and salt without affecting detector operation .
num pedestrian detectors provide pedestrian detectors with precision push button or piezoelectric switches with screw terminals .
ensure that pedestrian detectors are raised or flush with the housing meet ada requirements have dimensions no smaller than num in num mm and activate with less than num lb num kg of force .
ensure that the pedestrian detectors assembly is waterproof and constructed so that it is impossible to receive electrical shock under any weather condition .
detectors shall be factory painted with synthetic resin black enamel .
num roadway lighting luminaire provide with a multitap ballast and the optical configuration specified .
provide lamps in accordance with the following num .
numwatt highpressure sodium clear .
ansi code number snum .
num .
numwatt metalhalide clear .
ansi code number mnum .
num .
numwatt highpressure sodium clear .
ansi code number snum .
num .
numwatt metalhalide clear .
ansi code number mnum .
num .
numwatt highpressure sodium clear .
ansi code number snum .
num num rest area lighting luminaire provide with a multitap ballast lamp and the optical configuration specified .
num overhead sign lighting luminaire provide with a multitap peaklead autotransformer ballast and a numwatt metalhalide clear ansi code number mnum lamp .
num underpass lighting luminaire when specified supply with a galvanized or stainlesssteel wire guard over the luminaire refractor and attach it to the luminaire housing by external galvanized bolts .
num equipmentvacant num construction num general follow local ordinances .
when the contract complies with but is more restrictive than local or national standards or requirements use the contract requirements .
use an electrical contractor and electricians licensed by the state of wyoming .
use standards or methods set forth by the supplier or manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
install materials and equipment in accordance with nec provisions and manufacturers requirements .
use installation procedures and wiring in accordance with the edison electric institute eei nema ul electronic industries alliance eia astm insulated power cable engineers association ipcea ansi and applicable local ordinances .
when replacing existing systems conduct work to leave existing systems operational until the new system is in place and operational unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
cut roadway lighting poles traffic signal poles and mast arms that are removed and not reinstalled into three pieces and dispose of or salvage as approved by the engineer .
num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num num electrical devices num num product submittals submit five copies of product submittals for lighting signal and electrical equipment to the state traffic engineer .
for each item include manufacturer names sizes electrical ratings and identifying numbers .
for nonstandard or special equipment include detailed scale drawings and wiring diagrams .
indicate the project number road route stations and county on each submittal and forward a copy of the letter of transmittal to the engineer as notification .
the state traffic engineer will mark submittals approved approved as corrected or not approved and distribute as follows num .
original copy to the engineer .
num .
one copy to the traffic program .
num .
one copy to the district traffic engineer .
num .
remaining copies to the contractor .
approval will take num working days .
the department is not responsible for materials purchased or supplied or labor performed before approval of product submittals .
for items not approved determine the proper material or equipment and resubmit for approval .
num shop drawings submit shop drawings for roadway lighting poles and traffic signal poles including grouting procedures to the state bridge engineer in accordance with subsection num working drawings .
num excavation and backfill do not excavate or drill for the installation of conduit foundations or other appurtenances before locating all underground and overhead utilities .
excavate immediately before installing conduit and other appurtenances and no more than necessary for installation .
minimize damage to streets sidewalks landscaping and other improvements .
place excavated material in a position that does not cause damage or obstruct surface drainage or vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
num after backfilling keep excavations smooth and welldrained until permanent repairs are made .
backfill excavations and restore sidewalks pavement and landscaping at each location before excavating elsewhere .
num traffic signalroadway lighting pole foundation use drilled shaft foundations placed monolithically in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations .
when placing foundations in sidewalks provide an expansion joint between the foundation and abutting sidewalk .
place foundations in firm material extend the specified length if additional depth is necessary .
when obstructions prevent construction of a proposed foundation relocate the foundation as approved by the engineer .
in urban areas form exposed foundation tops and finish to curb or sidewalk grade .
in all areas finish to present a neat appearance .
in rural areas or areas with no curb or sidewalk do not extend any portion of the foundation section above finished grade more than num in num mm .
for poles with breakaway devices install the foundation to allow for proper operation of the device .
hold conduit ends and anchor bolts in place with a template until the concrete sets .
use forms that are true to line and grade .
when they will not be reused and do not obstruct other work break down existing foundations num in num mm below ground level .
remove and dispose of existing foundations before installing a new foundation at the same location .
num traffic signalroadway lighting poles do not erect poles within num hours of placing drilled shaft foundations or until the foundation obtains num percent of its ultimate design strength fc .
plumb standards by adjusting anchor bolt nuts before placing grout .
use shims to plumb standards with transformer bases the department does not require an additional nut and washer for leveling .
set traffic signal poles and transformer bases on foundations and seal with grout as approved by the state bridge engineer .
after the pole is in proper position place nonshrink grout under the base plate and finish to provide a neat appearance .
num num num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num cable and conductors use stranded copper conductors throughout all systems except for the grounding electrode conductor .
ensure that conductor color coding is continuous throughout the installation .
cable together conductors within fixtures or cabinets using self clinching nylon cable ties or other approved methods .
arrange wiring within controller cabinets neatly and lace or enclose in plastic tubing or a raceway .
tape and neatly stow spare roadway lighting and traffic signal conductors .
inside traffic signal and roadway lighting poles use lighting cable between the top of connector kits and luminaire heads .
use multiconductor signal cable for signal systems in underground conduit and as an aerial cable supported by a messenger .
install the exact number of conductors specified .
use approved methods to install cables in conduit without injuring the jacket insulation or conductors .
place cables within a single conduit at the same time .
if necessary to ease pulling use a lubricant that meets the manufacturers recommendations and does not injure cables .
when pulling multiconductor cables into a conduit tape cable ends to exclude moisture and keep them taped until splices are made or terminal appliances are attached .
place cable in trenches without dragging or stretching .
pull cables through wire inlets without damaging the cable .
place a firm rubber pad or other suitable material around the inlets bottom opening to separate the cable from rough edges and the protruding tab for fastening the cover .
join conductors by methods as specified or as approved by the engineer .
ensure that finished connections and terminals meet cable manufacturers recommendations .
when installed in screw terminals terminate stranded conductors smaller than no .
num awg in crimpstyle terminal lugs .
do not use crimpstyle terminals for solid wire .
splice roadway lighting and overhead sign lighting cables in pull boxes hand holes and junction and terminal boxes where readily accessible .
splice traffic signal light conductors in pull boxes terminal boards in controller cabinets or terminal boards in the terminal compartment of bracketmounted signals on signal poles .
num splice active currentcarrying conductors in pull boxes using weatherprooftype splice kits .
splice neutral conductors and equipmentgrounding conductors using approved connectors and insulate with material in accordance with nec requirements for waterproof installation .
provide at least num ft num m of slack for wiring and cables inside each traffic signal or roadway lighting pole .
provide at least num ft num m of slack at each pull box and at the ends of each run at all other locations .
when specified install small permanent identification bands on traffic signal cables and roadway lighting conductors for cable identification .
attach the bands securely to each end of each conductor in each pull box and near the end of each conductor where conductors are terminated .
bands may be omitted where insulation color clearly indicates circuit and phase .
do not use bands as a substitute for insulation color identification .
num vehicle detector shielded leadin cable make each run of shielded leadin cable for vehicle detectors continuous without splices from the controller cabinet to the camera attachment point with num ft num m of slack at each end of the run .
num connector kitfused and unfused use fused and unfused y or iconnector kits as specified to make continuous electrical connections for multiple electrical equipment in pole bases and at other specified locations .
join the through electrical legs in a manner that allows for disassembly without damage .
adapt the load side contact to the load side cable and retain securely in the proper position within a rubber load side housing .
fasten the line side contact to the line side cables with a bolt and steel lock nut with a nylon insert and retain it securely in the proper position with a rubber line side housing .
permanently mark the load side housing with a plate or tag designating the load side .
num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num electrical devices num num vehicle trafficpedestrian signal indication num traffic signal indication mounting hardware plumb or level mounting assembly members arrange symmetrically and assemble securely .
orient each side of polemounting hardware assemblies to provide maximum horizontal clearance to the side street or adjacent roadway .
conceal conductors .
num vehicle traffic signal indication mount vehicle traffic signal indications plumb as specified by the manufacturer and aim them in accordance with the mutcd and as approved by the engineer .
direct indications away from traffic or cover until ready for operation .
num pedestrian traffic signal indication mount pedestrian traffic signal indications plumb as specified by the manufacturer and aim them as approved by the engineer .
direct indications away from traffic and pedestrians or cover until the traffic signal is ready for operation .
num louvered back plates attach louvered back plates to signal indications to provide a dark background with no light showing between the backplate and signal indication or between sections .
fasten back plates consisting of two or more sections using rivets or aluminum bolts and peen after assembly to prevent loosening .
num inpavement vehicle detectors num .
sawcut loop detector .
the department considers the term sawcut loop detector to refer to the complete installation including saw cut loop detector wire and sealant .
the engineer will determine locations of loop detectors .
wash blow out and dry saw cuts before installing conductors .
after installing them fill slots with sealant .
for each detector use a continuous unspliced copper conductor ending in the pull box next to the loop .
in the pull box seal tube jacket ends against moisture by num following the loop detector manufacturers recommendations .
wire the detectors to the leadin cable and ensure that they provide detection as specified .
num .
prefab loop detector .
the department considers the term prefab loop detector to refer to the complete installation before pavement placement of a preformed loop detector consisting of loop detector wire installed in sealed pvc conduit with a diameter no greater than num in num mm .
for each detector use continuous unspliced conductors ending in the pull box next to the loop .
num loop detector sealant submit the sealant manufacturers installation recommendations including any shelf life requirements to the engineer seven calendar days before installing .
when manufacturers recommendations are more restrictive than those specified here follow the manufacturers recommendations .
before installing loop detector wiring or sealant clean and dry saw cuts with compressed oilfree air .
when required by the manufacturer stir sealant thoroughly before installation .
do not apply in rain or any weather condition that hinders sealant curing .
store sealant in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
do not exceed storage shelf life .
num pedestrian detectors install pedestrian detectors and pedestrian instruction signs on the crosswalk side of the pole .
ensure that arrows on pedestrian instruction signs point in the same direction as the corresponding crosswalks .
num electrical traffic device tests before final acceptance in accordance with subsection num final acceptance perform a functional test to demonstrate that every system part works as specified .
a shutdown of electrical systems during functional tests caused by damage from public traffic a power interruption or unsatisfactory performance of department furnished materials does not constitute discontinuity of the system test .
num num num num num electrical devices num electrical devices num num .
trafficsignal system tests .
begin turnon and functional tests between num a.m. and num p.m. on any working day monday through thursday not preceding a legal holiday .
before turning on install specified equipment signs and pavement markings and verify its operability .
direct louvers visors and signal heads to provide maximum visibility .
test all trafficsignal circuits thoroughly before turning on new or modified traffic signal systems .
be available to correct field wiring problems when new or modified trafficsignal systems are put into operation .
the functional test for each new or modified traffic signal or traffic signal system consists of at least num calendar days of continuous satisfactory operation .
correct malfunctions resulting from the contractors work at no additional cost to the department and repeat the test until this requirement is met .
num .
lighting system tests .
the functional test for each lighting system and sign illumination system consist of at least num calendar days of continuous satisfactory operation in accordance with the regular lighting schedule .
correct malfunctions resulting from the contractors work at no additional cost to the department and repeat the test until obtaining five calendar days of continuous satisfactory operation .
direct the photoelectric control northward and check to determine if light sources other than sunlight interfere with normal operation of the lightsensitive cell .
num .
flashing beacon system tests .
begin turnon and functional tests between num a.m. and num p.m. on any working day monday through thursday not preceding a legal holiday .
the functional test for each new or modified flashing beacon consists of at least num calendar days of continuous satisfactory operation .
correct malfunctions resulting from the contractors work at no additional cost to the department and repeat the test until this requirement is met .
num num .
road closure system tests .
conduct the test under the engineers supervision and in a manner to not confuse traffic .
correct malfunctions resulting from the contractors work at no additional cost to the department .
num conduits num general install conduit system wiring as specified and in accordance with the requirements of the utility company or agency for which the system is being installed .
larger thanspecified conduit may be used at no additional cost to the department provided it extends the entire length of the run from outlet to outlet do not use reducing couplings .
extend conduit ending in standards or pedestals no more than num in num mm above the foundation and slope towards the hand hole opening .
to leave the greatest space clear locate conduit entering through the bottom of pull boxes near the end walls .
at outlets align the conduit entrance with the direction of the run .
extend conduit that ends in pull boxes to the specified minimum distance above the crushed rock .
use grounding bushings for metal conduit terminations inside pull boxes or pole bases to bond the entire conduit system install a separate grounding conductor for pathtoground faults .
in new construction install specified conduits before placing the finished roadway surface .
lay conduit at least num in num mm below grade in sidewalk and curbed paved median areas and num in num mm below finished grade elsewhere .
when conditions preclude trenching install rigid conduit using approved jacking or boring methods without disturbing pavement .
with the engineers approval and at no additional cost to the department small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate obstructions .
construct required jacking or boring pits at least num in num mm clear of pavement edges on urban projects and at least num ft num m from shoulder edges on rural projects .
do not undermine pavement or soften subgrade with excessive water .
clean existing underground conduit incorporated into a new system with a mandrel or cylindrical wire brush and blow out with oil free compressed air .
replace disturbed sod concrete and asphaltic material as approved by the engineer .
num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num num num num num electrical devices the department specifies the locations of conduit runs for general purposes only determine exact locations onsite to avoid underground obstructions or utilities .
run conduit that parallels curbs next to the back of the curb where this conflicts with existing facilities place as approved by the engineer .
when installing new conduit without wiring or cables install a no.num awg green bonding conductor in the conduit and cap each conduit end .
install polyethylene duct in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
replace duct that has been damaged or contains dirt or debris .
num couplings make cuts square and true so that ends butt together for their full circumference .
ream conduit ends to remove burrs and rough edges .
do not use slip joints or running threads to couple conduit .
when bending conduit outside the factory form a radius as large as practical and at least six times the conduits inside diameter do not crimp or flatten .
num .
metal conduit .
use a threaded union coupling when a standard through coupling can not be used .
tighten couplings until conduit ends are brought together providing a good electrical connection for the entire length .
thread the ends of metal conduit and cap with pipe caps .
when wiring begins remove caps and provide the threaded ends with conduit bushings .
paint threads and damaged coating on ferrous metal conduit with rustpreventive paint .
num .
nonmetallic conduit .
cut with approved tools and use solventweld connections .
cap conduit ends until wiring begins .
num pull boxes the department specifies the minimum number of pull boxes required .
at no additional cost to the department and with the engineers approval additional pull boxes may be installed for convenience .
the engineer will determine final locations and elevations for pull boxes .
use type s pull boxes with numinch num mm or smaller conduit and no.num awg or smaller wire .
num fill the bottom of pull boxes with gravel in accordance with subsection num gravel for drains and install with covers level with the finished sidewalk surface .
where no sidewalk is present install with covers slightly higher than the surrounding ground and grade the area to provide drainage away from the pull box .
on rural lighting projects mark and identify pull box locations as specified .
num service points use bonded and grounded ullisted equipment on service points .
install and construct service points at the locations determined by the serving utility the engineer or both .
serving utilities will determine the position of service equipment when a service is installed on a utilityowned pole .
provide ground rods grounding devices and connections in accordance with the applicable nec requirements .
ensure groundrodtogroundresistance meets the applicable nec requirements .
ground metal conduit and enclosures on service poles .
on servicepole conduit for overhead services terminate with a weather head or seal against water as approved by the utility company .
install surfacemounted conduits straight and true .
arrange with the utility company for electrical power and contact the local jurisdiction for home rule requirements for service installations .
complete service connections and pay permit fees in accordance with subsection num permits licenses and taxes .
num ground rod grounding and bonding ensure that metallic cable sheaths metal pull box covers metal conduit equipmentgrounding conductors ballast and transformer cases service equipment sign switches and metal poles and pedestals are mechanically and electrically secure and form a continuous grounded system .
provide and use a copperweld ground rod of the length and diameter specified .
use groundrod clamps sized to accommodate the ground rod and approved for the application .
ground one side of the secondary circuit of seriesmultiple and stepdown transformers .
provide and install a ground electrode at each service point bond to service equipment as specified .
ground all metallic equipment on wooden poles .
bond standards and pedestals with a bonding wire or braid attached to the bolt installed in the lower shaft portion .
do not allow the grounding jumper to num num num num num num num num electrical devices num num num num electrical devices enter the slip plane when installing slipbase standards or inserts bond with a bonding strap attached to the bolt installed directly across from the hand hole .
in nonmetallic conduit run a bonding conductor continuously in all circuits .
where nonmetallic conduit is installed for future use the conductor may be omitted .
to bond metallic conduit in concrete or plastic pull boxes use galvanized grounding bushings and bonding jumpers .
for metallic conduit in steel pull boxes bond with locknuts .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
the following systems as complete units num .
bridge lighting system .
num .
conduit system______ .
num .
electrical system .
num .
flashing beacon system .
num .
overhead sign lighting system .
num .
road closure system .
num .
roadway lighting system .
num .
remove conduit system .
num .
rest area lighting system .
num .
traffic signal system .
num .
tunnel lighting system .
num .
underpass lighting system .
num num .
when specified the engineer will measure num .
conduit boring conduit hardware conduitflexible metal ____ in mm conduitrigid pvc ____ in mm conduit rigid stl ____ in mm remove conduit and trenching and backfilling as a complete unit or by the foot meter .
num .
electrical conductors by the complete unit .
num .
pull box type ____ remove pull box and reset pull box by the each .
num .
service point lighting service point signal service point solar ground rod remove service point and modify service point by the each .
the pull box and ground rod near the base of an overhead service point are incidental to the service point installation .
num .
stl pole type ____ conc pole type ____ install lighting pole remove lighting pole reset lighting pole modify lighting pole remove pole foundation and safety cover by the each .
num .
single conductor wire ____awg remove single conductor wire signal cable __ conductor __ awg lighting cable __conductor __ awg loop detector wire and loop detector shielded leadin cable by the foot meter .
num .
splicing kit connector kitfused ___ connector kitunfused ___ by the each .
num .
signal controller remove signal controller reset signal controller signal controller cabinet remove signal controller cabinet reset signal controller cabinet and modify signal controller cabinet by the each .
num .
signal controller aux eqp remove signal controller aux eqp and reset signal controller aux eqp by the complete unit .
num .
time clock remove time clock and reset time clock by the each .
num electrical devices num num num num electrical devices num .
signal indication ___ remove signal indication and reset signal indication by the each .
num .
ped signal indication remove ped signal indication reset ped signal indication and ped instruction sign ____ and ped detector by the each .
num .
louvered backplate ___ by the each .
num .
mast arm framework post top framework side bracket framework remove framework and reset framework by the each .
num .
___ luminaire remove ___ luminaire and reset ___ luminaire by the each .
num .
microloop detector completeinplace and including complete installation of each individual microloopdetector probe consisting of a drilled core sawed slot connecting cable and sealant by the each .
num .
sawcut loop detector prefab loop detector and microwave detector by the each .
num .
loop detector sealant by the gallon liter .
the engineer will consider rigid steel conduit or rigid nonmetallic polyvinyl chloride conduit contained within drilled shaft foundations and pull boxes and stubbed or noncontinuous conduit incidental to other contract pay items and will not measure or pay for such conduit directly .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest bridge lighting system ls ls ls conduit system _____ ls ls ls electrical system ls ls ls flashing beacon system ls ls ls num num electrical devices pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest overhead sign lighting system ls ls ls road closure system ls ls ls roadway lighting system ls ls ls remove conduit system ls ls ls rest area lighting system ls ls ls traffic signal system ls ls ls tunnel lighting system ls ls ls underpass lighting system ls ls ls conduit boring ls ft ls m ls ft ls m ls ft ls m conduit hardware ls ls ls conduitflexible metal _____ in mm ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls m conduitrigid pvc _____ in mm ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls m conduitrigid stl _____ in mm ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls m remove conduit ls ft ls m ls ft ls m ls ft ls m trenching and backfillling ls ft ls m ls ft ls m ls ft ls m electrical conductors ls ls ls num num electrical devices pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest pull box type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea remove pull box ea ea ea ea ea ea reset pull box ea ea ea ea ea ea service point lighting ea ea ea ea ea ea service point signal ea ea ea ea ea ea service point solar ea ea ea ea ea ea ground rod ea ea ea ea ea ea remove service point ea ea ea ea ea ea modify service point ea ea ea ea ea ea stl pole type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea conc pole type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea install lighting pole ea ea ea ea ea ea remove lighting pole ea ea ea ea ea ea reset lighting pole ea ea ea ea ea ea modify lighting pole ea ea ea ea ea ea remove pole foundation ea ea ea ea ea ea safety cover ea ea ea ea ea ea single conductor wire _____ awg ft m ft m ft m remove single conductor wire ft m ft m ft m signal cable _____ conductor _____ awg ft m ft m ft m num num electrical devices pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest lighting cable _____ conductor _____ awg ft m ft m ft m loop detector wire ft m ft m ft m loop detector shielded leadin cable ft m ft m ft m splicing kit ea ea ea ea ea ea connector kitfused _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea connector kitunfused _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea signal controller ea ea ea ea ea ea remove signal controller ea ea ea ea ea ea reset signal controller ea ea ea ea ea ea signal controller cabinet ea ea ea ea ea ea remove signal controller cabinet ea ea ea ea ea ea reset signal controller cabinet ea ea ea ea ea ea modify signal controller cabinet ea ea ea ea ea ea signal controller aux eqp ls ls ls remove signal controller aux eqp ls ls ls reset signal controller aux eqp ls ls ls num num electrical devices pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest time clock ea ea ea ea ea ea remove time clock ea ea ea ea ea ea reset time clock ea ea ea ea ea ea signal indication _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea remove signal indication ea ea ea ea ea ea reset signal indication ea ea ea ea ea ea ped signal indication ea ea ea ea ea ea remove ped signal indication ea ea ea ea ea ea reset ped signal indication ea ea ea ea ea ea ped instruction sign _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea ped detector ea ea ea ea ea ea louvered backplate _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea mast arm framework ea ea ea ea ea ea post top framework ea ea ea ea ea ea side bracket framework ea ea ea ea ea ea remove framework ea ea ea ea ea ea reset framework ea ea ea ea ea ea _____ luminaire ea ea ea ea ea ea remove _____ luminaire ea ea ea ea ea ea reset _____ luminaire ea ea ea ea ea ea num num num num electrical devices num referenced sections for direct payment the engineer will pay for electrical power from the time of turnon to the completion of the contract .
when specified the engineer will measure and pay for drilled shaft foundations in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations .
pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest saw cut loop detector ea ea ea ea ea ea prefab loop detector ea ea ea ea ea ea microloop detector ea ea ea ea ea ea microwave detector ea ea ea ea ea ea loop detector sealant gal l gal l gal l num section num signs delineators and reference markers num description this section describes the requirements for providing and installing permanent roadside and overhead signs delineators and markers .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following materials subsection bolts and fasteners num delineator posts num epoxy mastic paint num galvanized coating num highstrength bolts and fasteners num overhead sign supports num retroreflectors num roadway sign supports num sheet aluminum for sign panels num signs and traffic devices num structural steel num retroreflective sheeting num for permanent signs provide sheet aluminum num in num mm thick .
for main loadcarrying tension members at least ½ in num mm thick provide in accordance with the notch toughness requirements in subsection num structural steel .
the department designates the diameter of round timber posts as determined from a circumferential measurement made num in num mm above the ground .
the department specifies dimensioned timber posts by nominal sizes and will accept american lumber standard dressed sizes as minimum net sizes .
num num num num num signs delineators and reference markers num num num equipment ensure that the concrete batch plant and mixers meet the requirements of subsection num equipment .
num construction num reference markers install reference markers at the locations staked .
provide reference post panels manufactured from aluminum num in num mm thick .
num posts ensure that post size drilled hole size and vertical hole location are in accordance with the specified details for breakaway posts .
do not order posts until the engineer has checked post lengths in the field rounding measurements as follows num .
timber sign poststo the next highest numinch num mm increment .
num .
steel poststo the next highest numinch num mm increment .
num .
steel supports breakawayto the next highest numinch num mm increment .
provide either dimensioned or round timber posts do not combine .
around posts set directly in the ground backfill and compact with suitable material in layers up to num in num mm thick to set firmly .
hold driven posts in alignment during installation and protect post tops with a cap during driving .
for square tubularsteel sign posts drive an anchor section into the ground to within num in num mm above the surface .
extend a telescoping support post into the anchor at least num in num mm and attach the post to the anchor with a bolt and nut .
num drilled shaft foundations construct drilled shaft foundations for sign posts to specified dimensions and in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations .
securely fasten reinforcing steel anchor bolts and conduit when specified to prevent dislocation num num num num num num num num signs delineators and reference markers num num num num num num num signs delineators and reference markers num while placing concrete .
place concrete against undisturbed earth unless casing is used and cure at least num calendar days before sign erection .
final grade in accordance with subsection num finishing to leave the foundation top flush with the surface .
num sign panels provide sign panels free of dents wrinkles and holes .
when formed in multiple sections ensure that joints are tight and smooth .
ensure that retroreflective sheeting is applied to the panels in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations and with adjacent strips matched for color to provide a surface free of imperfections and uniform nighttime appearance and brilliance .
ensure that the panel background and tabs are clearcoated or edgesealed before the legend is applied and that sign edges and faces are clearcoated or edgesealed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications for the type of sheeting applied .
repair marred paint by repainting after erection .
install fasteners backing strips and other incidentals as specified .
ensure that the bolts do not protrude above the sign panel surface .
after erection clean sign faces and repair marred or damaged surface coating with the same material as the original coating .
num removal and resetting of signs without damaging the sign or post remove and stockpile existing signs to be reset .
reset sign posts and sign panels as specified .
provide additional mounting hardware to reset sign panels on new or existing posts at no additional cost to the department .
replace removed posts that are too short to be reset as specified .
backfill holes left by sign removal with approved material in layers num in num mm thick .
compact each layer to at least the density of the adjacent material .
remove existing concrete foundations to at least num in num mm below the ground surface but remove them completely when installing a new foundation at the same location .
num overhead and breakaway signs submit shop drawings for overhead signs to the state bridge engineer in accordance with section num working drawings .
num num after fabrication blastclean steel components of overhead signs in accordance with society for protective coatings sspcsp num .
paint with one coat of epoxymastic paint .
mix apply and allow paint to dry in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure it has a dry film thickness of at least num mil num µm .
do not damage painted sign surfaces during transport repair damaged areas in the field by applying a second coat of epoxymastic .
instead of painting and if suitable for the structure components may be galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
for breakaway sign supports ensure fabrication in accordance with specified details and galvanization in accordance with subsection num galvanizing .
num delineators remove existing delineators and do not reuse .
layout delineator locations .
match the delineator reflector color to the adjacent edgeline stripe color .
install delineators as shown in the contract .
position delineators to face traffic and obtain the most effective retroreflection .
num measurement and payment num general the engineer will measure num .
delineators type _____ by the each .
num .
reference markers and reference marker panels as the number of each installed .
num .
reset signs as a complete unit .
num .
sign panels aluminum and sign panels plywood by the square foot square meter of sign panel face installed .
num .
sign posts sq tubular stl and sign posts rnd tubular stl by the each .
num .
sign posts stl pipe breakaway other than steel pipe for overhead signs by the pound kilogram with the weight mass calculated as the length of each post multiplied by the theoretical weight per foot mass per meter excluding the weight mass of galvanizing material for the size of pipe post ordered and installed .
num num num num num signs delineators and reference markers num num num signs delineators and reference markers num .
sign posts wood ____ in mm and sign posts wood ___ in mm rnd by the foot meter .
num .
stl breakaway sign support ___ by the complete unit or the foot meter .
num .
stl overhead sign support as a complete unit .
the department will pay as follows pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest delineators type _____ ea ea ea ea ea ea reference markers ea ea ea ea ea ea reference marker panels ea ea ea ea ea ea reset signs ls ls ls sign panels aluminum sf mnum num ft num m num sf num mnum sign panels plywood sf mnum num ft num m num sf num mnum sign post rnd tubular stl ea ea ea ea ea ea sign post sq tubular stl ea ea ea ea ea ea sign posts stl pipe breakaway lb kg num lb num kg lb kg sign posts wood _____ _____ in mm ft m ft num m ft num m sign posts wood _____ rnd ft m ft num m ft num m stl overhead sign support ls ls ls stl breakaway sign support _____ ls ft ls m ls num ft ls num m ls ft ls num m num num referenced sections for direct payment the engineer will measure and pay for new sign posts needed to replace removed sign posts that are too short in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
when specified the engineer will measure and pay for drilled shaft foundations in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations .
num num num signs delineators and reference markers num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num section num temporary traffic control num description this section describes the requirements for furnishing placing maintaining repairing and removing temporary traffic control devices .
num materials num general use temporary traffic control devices that meet the testing requirements of the manual for assessing safety hardware mash or nchrpnum test level num .
maintain and submit certification records in accordance with subsection num documentation .
use temporary traffic control devices and flagger paddles fabricated with retroreflective sheeting in accordance with subsection num retroreflective sheeting .
num drums cones and tubular markers use drums cones numinch num mm cones and tubular markers that are plastic and predominantly orange .
use drums and numinch num mm cones that have alternating stripes two orange and two white with orange on top that are retroreflective and equal width .
num signs use the same sign sheeting material for each sign face on any sign installation .
if hinged signs are used ensure that the hinge does not block any part of the sign message .
permanent sign posts that meet mash or nchrp num test level num may be used as approved by the engineer .
use surfaced foursided snums untreated timber for sign posts .
num sign panels construct sign panels of either num num num .
plywood .
at least num in num mm medium density exterior grade bb overlaid fir plywood sheets meeting the requirements of the product standards psnum for construction and industrial plywood published by the u.s. department of commerce .
num .
aluminum .
sheet aluminum num in num mm or num in num mm thick meeting the requirements of subsection num sheet aluminum for sign panels .
num .
other materials meeting mash or nchrpnum .
num backing angles use sign panels backed with num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm galvanized steel or aluminum backing angles and mounted to the post with num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm galvanized steel clip or aluminum angles except that sign panels num in num in num mm num mm or smaller may be backed as follows num .
aluminum panels num in num mm thick and backed with metal backing angles or num in num in num mm num mm dimensional lumber .
num .
aluminum panels num in num mm thick and unbacked .
num .
plywood panels num in num mm thick and unbacked .
use galvanized bolts locknuts and washers that meet the requirements of subsection num bolts and fasteners to attach the sign panels to the backing members .
use locknuts that have a fiber or nylon insert .
use elevator bolts with heads flush with the surface of the sign panel .
num striping paint and glass beads use commercially manufactured yellow or white highway striping paint for temporary pavement markings and apply it without dilution .
make the painted pavement markings reflective by dropping or spraying glass beads onto the wet paint .
use retroreflective beads that meet the requirements of aashto m num type i .
num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num temporary pavement striping tape use temporary retroreflective pavement striping tape that is pressuresensitive and manufactured for use as pavement striping .
num temporary raised pavement markers use temporary raised pavement markers that are the same color on the face and body as the markings for which they are substituted have a dimension of at least num in num in num mm num mm are constructed of a high impactresistant plastic material and have at least num in² num mm² of retroreflective area in each face .
use markers that are designed for adhesion to the road by either hot melt bitumen epoxy or butyl pads .
use an adhesion method that allows for easy removal of markers without pavement damage .
num flags use flags num in num mm square except on signs use flags num in num mm square or larger .
use flags with weighted corners or reinforcing to keep the flag extended away from the post .
do not use mesh flags .
num portable plastic water filled barrier use portable longitudinal crashworthy plastic barrier that meets the following requirements num .
mash or nchrpnum test level num .
num .
approximate dimensions of num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm length width height .
num .
white and orange striped in accordance with the mutcd .
num .
provide a crashworthy end terminal or barrier that acts as its own crashworthy end treatment or flare barrier outside the clear zone .
num temporary concrete barrier and end terminal provide temporary concrete barrier and terminals meeting the requirements of the contract .
if the barrier is to remain the property of the contractor and num does not have to connect to state furnished barrier it is acceptable to furnish another temporary concrete barrier type meeting the requirements of mash or nchrpnum test level tlnum with a maximum dynamic deflection of num ft num m. furnish fhwa letter of acceptance for the barrier type and connection detail and evidence of maximum dynamic deflection to the engineer .
provide crashworthy terminals where terminated within the clear zone or flare outside clear zone .
use class b concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete and incorporate grade num num reinforcing steel .
finish with an ordinary surface and with a numinch num mm chamfer on corners .
use anchor pins connecting pins and other miscellaneous hardware that meet or exceed the requirements of astm a num astm a numm .
coat exposed steel with one coat of shop primer applied at a minimum wet thickness of num mil num µm .
use bidirectional delineators approved by the state traffic engineer that match the color of the adjacent edgeline pavement stripe .
attach delineators to the barrier and terminal in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num equipment num sequential chevron use portable wheelmounted units that meet the requirements of the mutcd and provide or are capable of all the following num .
a num in num in num mm num mm panel .
num .
flash in both the left and right directional modes .
num .
an automatic dimmer switch for reducing the nighttime illumination level by num percent or other levels as needed .
num .
a manual override backup switch .
replace units that are not reliable or do not provide the necessary constant light source .
maintain sequential chevrons in working order at all times .
chevrons may be powered by a generator on site utility power or solar power .
ensure that the power source is able to maintain constant operation .
generator power will be allowed only as approved by the engineer .
num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num construction num general furnish install locate maintain and remove construction traffic control devices .
if changes to the traffic control plan are proposed prepare a revised traffic control plan and submit it to the engineer at the preconstruction conference or as requested by the engineer in accordance with subsection num preconstruction conference .
do not change traffic operations from the details and standard plans included in the contract unless an alternate plan is submitted to and approved in writing by the engineer .
ensure the alternate plan is the same quality and detail as the one shown in the contract .
modify the plan as the situation warrants and submit the revised plan to the engineer for approval .
if traffic or workers may be affected do not begin work until the necessary construction traffic control devices are in place and approved by the engineer .
when placing maintaining and removing traffic control devices provide the traffic control necessary for the safety of the public and the workers at no additional cost to the department .
schedule work to minimize the number and duration of required traffic control setups .
whenever possible sequence work operations so that traffic control can be removed at night to allow full use of the roadway .
construction traffic control device spacing is approximate adjust it to fit field conditions .
to provide maximum visibility of warning devices to oncoming motorists consider roadway conditions obstacles geometrics and permanent signing when placing construction signs .
changes in location and spacing are subject to approval by the engineer .
check construction sites periodically day and night to ensure adequate traffic control is in place .
completely cover or remove existing traffic control devices conflicting with construction traffic control as approved by the engineer and return them to their previous locations as necessary at the completion of the work .
ensure the method of cover does not damage or puncture the existing sign .
remove or completely cover construction traffic control devices during seasonal suspensions and when not in use or needed .
num num when anchoring traffic control devices sand bags or an approved alternate may be used for ballasting not exceeding num in num mm in height above ground level .
do not ballast devices by heavy objects such as rocks chunks of concrete or plant mix .
when construction work is suspended in accordance with subsection num suspension of work remove unneeded construction traffic control devices including posts .
num documentation maintain certification records that each temporary traffic control device meets the mash or nchrpnum testing requirements specified .
furnish appropriate documentation to the engineer upon request .
when temporary traffic control is paid by traffic control device tcd units and unless agreed otherwise provide a daily record of the traffic control device units and flagging hours used on the project for that day to the engineer .
include all of the information required on the daily traffic control device record form enum in the daily record .
if form enum is not used use a form with consistent layouts for every daily traffic control record submitted on the project .
discuss and agree on the submittal process for the daily traffic control record with the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
num traffic control maintenance submit the names of a designated traffic control maintainers and the telephone number where the contractors superintendent and maintaining personnel can be contacted at any time to the engineer before installing any traffic control .
provide cellular or other portable phone service when needed to ensure the availability of the superintendent and maintaining personnel .
provide a maintainer if traffic is being diverted or protected by channelizing devices barricades portable signs flagging or pilot car operations .
ensure the traffic control maintainers is available to respond to notification by the engineer a law enforcement official or a page from a portable traffic signal to perform traffic control maintenance .
ensure the traffic control maintainers performs the necessary traffic control device maintenance by keeping the devices in the proper location and in good num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num condition .
provide the number of traffic control maintainers necessary to meet the specified requirements .
ensure traffic control devices are maintained while in use on the roadway .
num channelizing devices mark initial channelization device locations with paint so that replacement devices can be installed in the proper locations without measuring again .
in rural areas cones numinch num mm cones or numinch num mm tubular markers may be used instead of drums as channelizing devices during the daytime only .
the name and phone number of the channelizing device owner may be shown on the nonreflective surface at the bottom of the device or on the back of signs in letters and numbers that are a nonreflective color and not over num in num mm in height .
num signs num general road work next __ miles and end road work signs are not required for projects less than num mi num km in length or less than num calendar days in anticipated duration .
use road work ahead warning signs on major approach ramps or roads in close proximity to construction areas as approved by the engineer .
ensure the backs of signs are not distractive to motorists and contain no visible message design or reflectivity except as provided herein .
ensure backing angle materials are covered by sign sheeting .
if the duration of a sign installation is less than num calendar days the sign mounting may be a portable .
if the duration of a sign installation is num calendar days or more use a fixed sign mounting unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
use sign posts that do not extend above the sign and are installed plumb .
determine sign post lengths .
use break away holes for timber posts as specified and do not allow any additional or plugged break away holes within the visible post section .
num num num num if necessary request detail layouts of temporary traffic control signs lettering from the engineer .
flags may be added to construction signs for better daytime visibility .
use flags on the flagger ahead and the be prepared to stop signs .
if sign panels installed without backing will be in use throughout the suspension install backing angles in accordance with subsection num backing angles before the suspension of work .
num special signs special signs that are unique to the project i.e .
signs not specified or included in part vi of the mutcd and signs containing a message which is unique to the project may be furnished by the contractor or the department as specified .
the engineer will stake locations for special signs .
furnish posts hardware and equipment for fixed and portable installations determine post length and erect special signs .
upon removal special sign panels will be the property of the department posts hardware and portable installation equipment belong to the contractor .
num portable signs and mounts when portable traffic control devices are not in use remove them as far from traffic as possible and at a minimum outside of the clear zone specified as approved by the engineer .
position them so as not to confuse approaching motorists .
num flagging use flaggers that have completed and passed a flagger training program approved by the state construction office before flagging .
a threeday grace period will be allowed to meet this requirement in an unplanned emergency situation .
ensure that flaggers are tested every three years and that they have a current certification card in their possession when they are on the project .
ensure that flaggers wear a strong yellowgreen vest or an orange and strong yellowgreen combination vest with reflectorization on the front back and sides and a strong yellowgreen hard hat full hard hat covers are acceptable and they have a paddle and flag optional in their possession at all times .
the color num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num of strong yellowgreen for vests and hard hats is for flagger use only .
supply and maintain the vest hard hat paddle and flag in a like new condition .
do not place company name or logo on the flagger vest .
ensure that flaggers have positive communication between flagging stations appropriate to the various types of operations .
this communication may include but is not limited to the following num .
hand signals .
num .
passing of a baton .
num .
radio communication .
num .
combinations of the above .
use flagger radios for communication between flagging stations only .
use radios that are good quality and reliable so that communications are continuous for various types of operations including no sight and long distance situations .
do not use radios in electrically sensitive areas involving blasting or instances where the radio transmissions interfere with other established communication mediums .
for nighttime flagging use overhead lights that are on site and operational before their intended use provide full illumination of the flaggers and do not create glare for the flagger or motorist .
num no passing zones nopassing zone signs may be used to delineate no passing zones after the centerline has been marked in the following situations num .
traffic volumes less than or equal to num aadt .
up to num calendar days .
num .
traffic volumes greater than num aadt .
up to three calendar days .
use temporary pavement markings if nopassing zones are required for durations longer than those specified in the previous paragraph .
place nopassing zone signs before removing the existing center line striping .
num num num place temporary signing striping or barrier markers for nopassing zones at the same location as the existing permanent nopassing zones .
the department will determine temporary nopassing zones in extenuating circumstances .
num temporary pavement markings num general use retroreflective temporary pavement markings that are paint tape raised pavement markers or motorist guidance markers either white or yellow as specified .
do not use motorist guidance markers when interstate or divided highway traffic is placed twolane twoway .
use paint with beads for temporary pavement markings on all pavement lifts except the final surface treatment plant mix wearing course chip seal seal coat or concrete pavement .
final surface treatment is defined as the existing surfacing on interstate or divided highway lanes that is designated to remain in place over the winter or the surface after the final surface designated in the contract has been applied .
use yellow temporary centerline markings on twolane twoway highways .
use white temporary lane line markings and white or yellow edge line markings on single direction multilane highways .
when interstate divided highway traffic is placed twolane twoway use white edge lines and yellow pavement markings dividing opposing traffic .
ensure that the application surfaces for temporary pavement markings are free of foreign matter which would interfere with adhesion .
apply temporary pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
place temporary pavement markings to provide delineation by the end of each days operations .
place the markings in line with existing centerline or lane line markings at the beginning or end of the paving section .
taper the markings at the beginning or end of the paving section to line up with existing centerline or lane line markings .
motorist guidance markers or temporary raised pavement markers may be approved for final lifts of plant mix pavement chip seals seal coats and concrete pavement surfaces .
place temporary motorist guidance markers tabs in line with existing centerline or lane line markings .
num num num num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num temporary traffic control num maintain the temporary pavement markings in their proper location and in a clean undamaged effective condition while in use .
collect and properly dispose of removed temporary pavement markings and their protective coverings .
when pavement markings are required but can not be applied because of the surface type install channelizing devices for the following num .
centerline delineation .
may be used for centerline delineation day or night as required by the engineer .
num edge of roadway delineation .
use for edge of roadway delineation day and night .
num temporary pavement striping tape temporary pavement striping tape may be used in the following circumstances num .
intermediate lifts of plant mix pavement .
striping tape may be applied in emergency situations only .
if a removable type is used remove it before placing the next lift of plant mix pavement .
num .
final lift of plant mix pavement or existing pavement .
use removable striping tape .
after the permanent striping operations remove temporary pavement striping tape without damaging the pavement surface .
num conflicting pavement markings remove or cover conflicting pavement markings as approved by the engineer for work zone traffic control anticipated to be in place longer than three calendar days .
remove the markings without damaging the pavement surface or cover the markings with removable nonreflective preformed tape in accordance with the mutcd and approved by the engineer .
if existing striping is removed temporary striping may be used for increased motorist guidance .
use temporary striping that consists of paint removable tape temporary motorist guidance markers or raised pavement markers .
num num num paint apply paint at the rate of num ft²gal num m²l which is a wetpaint thickness of num mil num µm .
apply beads at the rate of num lbgal num kgl of paint .
num sequential chevrons place the units at specified locations or as directed by the engineer and keep them on the project for as long as needed .
replace units that are not reliable do not have automatic dimmers or do not provide the necessary constant light source within the times indicated in subsection num liquidated damages .
num permanent striping permanent striping will be placed by the department .
striping will be placed by department personnel for projects that are suspended in accordance with subsection num suspension of work .
num portable plastic water filled barrier install as specified .
use an environmentally safe antifreeze when freezing conditions are anticipated or encountered .
num temporary concrete barrier and terminal num general use only one type of barrier and only one type of barrier connection as approved by the engineer on the project .
use barrier and end terminals that are in good condition as determined by the engineer .
place barrier in smooth lines with connecting and terminal anchor pins fully inserted and pulling against the connecting pins to establish a tight connection .
drive terminal anchor pins into the ground .
repair or replace barrier or terminals that are damaged as approved by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num barrier to become property of the department provide barrier that meets all the following requirements num num num num num num num num num temporary traffic control num num num num num temporary traffic control num .
of the exact length specified .
num .
with three types of lifting mechanisms num .
lifting hook .
num .
lifting holes .
num .
fork lift slots .
num .
with delineators attached as follows num .
barrier .
on both sides and the top of the sections .
num .
end terminals .
two on top and two on each side .
num barrier to become property of the contractor provide barrier that meets all the following requirements num .
at least one lifting device .
num .
the length specified or longer .
num .
with delineators attached as follows num .
barrier .
at a minimum delineators on top and the side exposed to traffic .
num .
end terminals .
two on top and two on each side .
num traffic control supervisor ensure the traffic control supervisor understands wydot requirements items in the contract the contractors proposed operations and part vi of the mutcd and holds a current certification as a wydot traffic control supervisor .
furnish proof of certification to the engineer at the preconstruction conference or before starting work whichever occurs first .
duties include the following num num num num .
ensure a set of contract documents is available for use at all times .
num .
ensure all devices including replacements have been delivered to the project before installation .
num .
inspect the condition of all traffic control devices to be used on the project before installation .
num. review the project day and night within num hours of the installation of the traffic control devices monthly and after each change in the traffic control setup .
within one working day of the review provide the engineer written documentation of the time and date of review condition of traffic control devices and layout and a list of modifications required or performed .
num .
propose changes to improve flow of traffic through the work zone .
num .
prepare modify and submit traffic control plans in accordance with subsection num general .
num .
provide the engineer with a numhour contact number .
num .
return the engineers call within two hours of the time of the call .
be on site for num .
the layout installation and removal of the traffic control devices when switching and returning traffic on interstate projects .
num .
the initial layout when any changes are made to the layout installation and removal of traffic control devices on projects that do not require traffic to cross over .
num. review of problems within num hours of notification from the engineer .
num temporary traffic control num num num num num temporary traffic control num measurement and payment num general when temporary traffic control is paid by traffic control device tcd units the engineer will verify the quantities on the daily traffic control device record submitted by the contractor and if approved will use this record as the basis for measurement and payment for tcd units and flagging hours when applicable .
correct the record if requested and resubmit .
payment will not be made for quantities documented on a record when the corrected form is not received by the engineer within two working days after the mutually agreed to resubmission date .
the engineer will measure num .
temporary traffic control by the lump sum .
additional flagging locations required by the engineer beyond that specified in the contract will be measured and paid for per hour to the nearest quarter hour .
payment for the accepted quantities of additional flagging will be an adjustment to the contract lump sum bid price for temporary traffic control and will be made at the predetermined hourly wage rate or quarterhour fraction thereof specified in the contract plus num percent of that rate .
additional temporary traffic control devices required by the engineer beyond those specified in the contract and replacements for category i and category ii temporary traffic control devices destroyed by traffic will be measured and paid for per each traffic control device tcd unit .
payment for category ii devices destroyed by traffic will be limited to the number of devices exceeding four in a single incident of damage .
the number of tcd units for payment will be determined by multiplying the accepted quantities of each of the various devices by the tcd unit value specified for the device in the tcd unit schedule .
payment will be an adjustment to the contract lump sum bid price for temporary traffic control and will be made at a price of num per tcd unit .
num .
special signs in accordance with subsection num special signs .
num .
category ___ tcd units per each unit .
the unit value of each tcd will be as specified in the traffic control device unit schedule num included in the contract .
the number of tcd units will be determined by multiplying the number of each of the various devices by the tcd unit value specified for the device in the traffic control device unit schedule .
num .
category ii tcd units for drums and temporary barrier placed parallel to the centerline of the roadway that are relocated laterally only once at each location but will measure for payment at subsequent locations .
the engineer will measure in accordance with the following guidelines num .
moves across centerline and lane lines on twolane non divided multilane and urban roadways .
moves across centerline and lane lines to change lanes of closure will not be measured for payment except the taper will be measured for payment as a new setup if the existing taper is in place for more than seven calendar days .
num .
moves from one lane to another on the interstate or similar median divided multilane highways .
moves to the opposite directional lane i.e .
eastbound lane to westbound lane will be measured for payment as a new setup .
num .
tapers .
if it is required that the taper be moved longitudinally the new taper will be measured for payment .
num .
special requirements .
labor to make minor moves to comply with department requirements or special situations such as oversize loads etc .
will be measured for payment as force account work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work when the work involves more than one hour per a fiveworking day week .
num .
category iv tcd units for striping paint or tape as the sum of the lengths of the individual stripes or segments placed .
num .
tcd unit rates for signs that are not included in the traffic control device unit schedule other than special signs which are unique to the project by the rate for the sign with the area in square feet square meters that most closely approximates the area of the sign being installed .
num temporary traffic control num num temporary traffic control num num .
flagging by the hour .
flagging will be used to pay for the portable signal when the signal is used in accordance with standard plan num numc .
num .
cones and tubular markers used as channelizing devices as category iii tcd units once daily without regard to the number of relocations .
the number measured for payment will not exceed the maximum number in use at any one time during a day .
num .
tubular markers used as roadside delineation as a category i tcd unit per each installation .
num .
if pay items for particular tcd categories are included in the traffic control device unit schedule but are not included in the contract as pay items and the engineer specifies or authorizes the use of temporary traffic control devices in those categories tcd units for each such device will be paid at the unit price of num per tcd unit .
num .
sequential chevron by the each or as a complete unit .
num .
plastic water barrier and temporary concrete barrier by the foot meter .
the engineer will measure the length of one section of barrier and multiply that length by the number of sections to determine the length for payment .
lateral repositioning of the barrier for the contractors convenience will not be measured and paid for directly .
num .
temporary concrete terminal by the each .
relocation of portable traffic control devices within a num ft num m radius or less will not be measured for payment .
this applies to those devices that are temporarily moved from the edges of the traveled ways to allow for normal operation of the roadway .
if portable signs are mounted on wcnum barricades the engineer will measure and pay for the portable sign installation only .
if the engineer requests a wcnum barricade with arrow or other specified signs attached to be placed at a particular location measurement and payment will be made for each installation and for each subsequent relocation request .
the engineer will measure and pay to reinstall traffic control devices removed for seasonal suspensions .
num num num num the department will pay as follows num temporary traffic control pay item pay unit measure to the nearest pay to the nearest category ____ tcd units ea ea ea ea ea ea flagging hr h num h num hr num h plastic water barrier ft m num ft num m ft m sequential chevron num ea ls ea ls ea ls ea ls ea ls ea ls temporary concrete barrier ft m num ft num m ft m temporary concrete terminal ea ea ea ea ea ea temporary traffic control num num ls ls ls num when paid by lump sum once the traffic control devices have been placed num percent of the lump sum item will be paid .
thereafter the percentage paid will equal the percentage of the work complete up to and including num percent .
the remaining num percent will be paid when the sequential chevrons are no longer required for guidance and protection .
if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the pay mechanism is not an accurate pay out for the work performed the percentages may be changed .
num the engineer will adjust the lump sum payment if adjustments are required .
num num num temporary traffic control num referenced sections for direct payment when specified the engineer will measure and pay for num .
traffic control devices not shown in the traffic control device unit schedule as force account work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
num .
flagging in accordance with section num temporary traffic control .
num .
special sign panels furnished by the contractor that are unique to the project as force account work in accordance with subsection num extra and force account work .
transporting department furnished special signs to the project will be paid at one category i tcd unit per mile num kilometer .
num damaged devices replace devices that are destroyed or deemed irreparable at no additional cost to the department except in the following instances num .
category i devices .
category i devices destroyed by traffic will be measured for payment once as an additional installation when replaced .
num .
category ii devices .
category ii devices destroyed by traffic will be measured for payment once as an additional installation when damage in a single incident exceeds four devices .
num liquidated damages during periods of work the engineer will assess liquidated damages in the amount of num if damaged or deficient devices are not properly maintained within num minutes of notification or attempted notification as specified in subsection num traffic control maintenance .
during periods of nonwork the engineer will assess liquidated damages in the amount of num if damaged or deficient devices are not properly maintained within two hours after notification or attempted notification as specified in subsection num traffic control maintenance .
thereafter in either of the above cases additional liquidated damages in the amount of num will be assessed for each successive twohour period during which the required maintenance is not performed .
num num num num num temporary traffic control if more than num percent of the number of one type of device in use on the roadway is damaged in a single incident of damage the assessment of liquidated damages will be waived for a period not to exceed eight hours after the notification as specified in subsection num traffic control maintenance provided suitable arrangements are made with the engineer for interim traffic control measures .
the engineer will assess liquidated damages in the amount of num per working day for each and every working day that the traffic control supervisor reports are received after the required time .
these damages will be in addition to the overtime charges specified for failure to complete contract work on time and will be assessed simultaneously with the overtime charges .
num num num num division num materials num num manufactured product certifications the department requires that manufactured products delivered to the project be accompanied by the manufacturers certification or by a certification of materials form tnum with all supporting test data in accordance with the materials testing manual that the materials meet contract specifications .
the department does not require such certification for materials manufactured by the contractor and tested by job control and check samples or by an authorized testing agency .
the engineer may approve the use of manufactured materials delivered to the site without the required certifications by using an engineers verification of specification compliance form tnum if num .
the product has been precertified by the materials program num .
the item costs less than num meets the requirements stated in the materials testing manual for approval of materials without certification and is marked or labeled with the brand name specified or the test specification to which it was manufactured or num .
the use is temporary and the contractor retains ownership .
in an emergency the engineer may approve use of an item or items before the required certifications have been received .
the engineer will evaluate and document each such circumstance based on its own merits .
for this purpose the department considers an emergency as a condition requiring prompt action to num .
protect the immediate safety or welfare of the public num .
avoid seriously affecting the normal progress of construction or num .
produce a benefit to the department and the public .
the use and incorporation of materials without the required certification does not constitute acceptance .
num point of sampling when directed by the engineer obtain material samples for material acceptance in accordance with the materials testing manual .
sample from the following points point of sampling num num num num num num num point of sampling num num .
aggregates .
num sample the last stockpile prior to final placement of the aggregate material .
num sample from the conveyor belt used to load the hauling unit for final placement of the material .
num when not using a conveyor belt .
num stockpile or storage bin .
stockpile num conveyor belt num windrow plant mix materials pmb rpmb pmp rpmp pmwc subbase num base num maintenance stockpile num pervious backfill material bridge approach backfill material num gravel for drains chip seal microsurfacing concrete num blotter bed course material class b bedding riprap stone filled gabions stone mattress aggregates filter aggregate flowable backfill grout num num .
miscellaneous materials .
point of sampling num sodium chloride project site portland cement delivery or storage unit performance graded asphalt binder between storage tank and mixer liquid cutback asphalt by supplier at time of loading emulsified asphalt by supplier at time of loading geotextile impermeable plastic membrane project site paving fabric project site geogrid project site hotpoured elastic sealant applicator nozzle preformed expansion joint filler project site preformed elastometric compression joint seal project site compressed joint material project site paint submitted by supplier or project site reinforcing steel project site spiral steel project site dowel bars project site galvanized wire products project site recycled plastic posts see subsection num testing project site water for concrete see subsection num water at source highstrength bolts nuts washers see table num required test bolts project site num num num num point of sampling the point of sampling may be adjusted if mutually agreed to by the engineer and contractor .
if a mechanical sampler is used correlate test results with belt samples using the correlation of aggregate gradations form tnumag .
num section num cement and admixtures num portland cement num general use masonry cement in accordance with astm c num .
use portland cement in accordance with astm c num as follows num .
structural concrete .
type ii low alkali .
num .
pavement concrete .
type ii low alkali .
num .
commercial additives .
types i or ii .
num .
base or subbase treatment .
types i or ii .
use portland cement from only one mill for any brand and type unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
keep cement dry the engineer will reject cement that has partially set or contains caked lumps .
do not use salvaged cement from discarded or used bags .
num type v portland cement use low alkali cement in accordance with astm c num .
num fly ash use fly ash in accordance with astm c num and astm c num for class c or f. before use obtain approval of the source from the materials program approval will be based on test results provided by the fly ash supplier using the following sampling frequencies num .
daily individual samples for five days num .
weekly composite samples for four weeks and num .
monthly composite samples for six months .
num num num num num cement and admixtures num num num cement and admixtures num num num num num provide the abovespecified test results from a laboratory independent from the supplier .
the materials program may accept results from previous testing in lieu of the above .
a list of approved sources of fly ash is available from the materials program .
the requirements in astm c num table num also apply if the materials program determines that the aggregate sources are reactive .
num blended hydraulic cement use blended hydraulic cement in accordance with astm c num for type i pm pozzolanmodified portland cement .
use pozzolan in accordance with astm c num and astm c num .
if the pozzolan consists of fly ash obtain approval from the materials program prior to its use .
use portland cement in accordance with subsection num portland cement .
num admixtures use concrete admixtures in accordance with the following num .
airentraining admixtures .
meet the requirements of aashto m num astm c num .
num .
waterreducing accelerating or setretarding admixtures .
meet the requirements of aashto m num astm c num .
do not use admixtures containing calcium chloride .
num .
silica fume admixture .
use a dry compacted form in accordance with aashto m num including table num .
num synthetic fibers use num percent polypropylene collated fibrillated fibers with the physical properties shown in table num synthetic fiber properties .
num table num synthetic fiber properties ensure the polypropylene fibers are specifically manufactured from virgin polypropylene containing no reprocessed olefin materials .
ensure product documentation includes certification from the original manufacturer of the fibers .
cement and admixtures num num property value specific gravity min .
num modulus of elasticity num to num psi num to num mpa tensile strength num to num psi num to num mpa length graded num to num in num to num mm num num curing materials num section num curing materials num curing materials provide materials in accordance with table num curing materials .
the latest section num in the materials testing manual preapproves all products .
table num curing materials num provide compounds meeting all current voc requirements and having flash points of at least num f num c. material specification burlap cloth jute or kenaf aashto m num class num sheet materials aashto m num astm c num impervious curing compoundsnum basic aashto m num astm c num class a premium white aashto m num astm c num type num class b and table num or astm cnum type ii class a premium clear astm c num type i or id class a num table num pams compound properties num applies only to aashto m num astm c num type num .
num evaporation retardant for evaporation retardant provide a thin monomolecular film producing compound designed to reduce the surface evaporation rate .
preapprove evaporation retardants through the materials program .
num curing materials num property minimum maximum astm total solids by weight of compound num c num reflectance tionum pigmentnum num e num drying time minutes set to touch track free num num c num water loss in num hours lbft² kgm² num num c num flash point ºf ºc num num d num d num voc content lbgaln.w .
gln.w .
num num d num num num aggregate num num num num num section num aggregate num general before producing aggregate remove vegetation topsoil and overburden from the pit area to be used .
ensure that the materials are free of deleterious substances and do not contain an excess of thin flat elongated soft or disintegrated pieces .
ensure that aggregates for plant mix base pavement wearing course microsurfacing and chip seal do not have adherent films of clay or other matter that could prevent thorough coating with asphalt .
when crushed aggregate is specified for subbases bases or plant mix pavements crush boulders with diameters up to num in num mm and distribute uniformly throughout the material .
the department defines a gradation requirement as the percentage of material by weight mass that passes through a laboratory sieve with square openings and of a size or designation in accordance with aashto m num astm e num .
the department defines coarse aggregate as material retained on a no .
num num mm sieve and fine aggregate as material that passes through a no .
num num mm sieve .
for quarried aggregate material rejected during primary crushing may be used in subbase or crushed base provided the combined material meets applicable specifications dispose of other rejected material as directed by the engineer .
if quarrying from limestone from an available or mandatory source listed in the contract crush the quarried material with a primary crusher to num in num mm or less without allowing more than num percent to pass through a numinch num mm sieve .
num aggregate for concrete num fine aggregate use washed fine aggregate in accordance with aashto m num but not exceeding the limits in table num deleterious substance limits fine aggregate for concrete .
num table num deleterious substance limits fine aggregate for concrete ensure the sum of the above materials and other deleterious substances such as shale alkali mica coated grains or soft and flaky particles does not exceed num percent by weight mass .
ensure aggregate gradation is in accordance with table num gradation requirements fine aggregate for concrete .
table num gradation requirements fine aggregate for concrete num coarse aggregate wash coarse aggregate to remove adherent soil coatings and reduce the amount of material passing a no .
num num µm sieve at least num percent .
use aggregate consisting of crushed stone or gravel meeting the requirements of aashto m num but not exceeding the limits in table num deleterious substance limits coarse aggregate for concrete .
when specified provide aggregate in accordance with subsection num polish resistant aggregate .
aggregate num num num num substances max .
by weight mass clay lumps num coal and lignite num material passing a no .
num num µm sieve num sieve passing d in num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num num aggregate num num table num deleterious substance limits coarse aggregate for concrete ensure coarse aggregate gradation for silica fume modified concrete meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements coarse aggregate for silica fume modified concrete .
provide aggregate with an la abrasion loss less than num percent when tested in accordance with aashto t num and that loses no more than num percent of its weight mass when tested in sodium sulfate solution in accordance with mtm num .
ensure that the aggregate meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements coarse aggregate for concrete .
table num gradation requirements coarse aggregate for silica fume modified concrete substances max .
by weight mass shale or coal num clay lumps num material passing a no .
num num µm sieve num other deleterious substances such as friable thin elongated or laminated pieces num all deleterious substances combined num num sieve passing min .
max .
num in num mm num d in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num num table num gradation requirements coarse aggregate for concrete num for these and for class a concrete used for pavement ensure that at least num percent of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has at least one fractured face .
num aggregate for mortar for mortar use aggregate in accordance with aashto m num .
num aggregate for subbase and base num general for base and subbase use coarse aggregate consisting of hard durable particles or fragments of stone or gravel use fine aggregate consisting of crushed stone crushed gravel or natural sand .
num aggregate num num passing sieve structural concrete portland cement concrete pavementnum classes a b class snum num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm num num num in num mm num to num num num to num in num mm num to num num in num mm num to num num to num d in num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num num aggregate num num num num subbase for subbase use crushed or natural stone or gravel in accordance with the following num .
pit run subbase .
use the maximum size specified .
remove oversize material at the source .
num .
crusherrun subbase .
use crusherrun material of the maximum size specified .
num .
crushed subbase .
ensure that at least num percent of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has at least one fractured face .
num crushed base for crushed base provide and use base aggregate that meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements subbase and base table num aggregate properties subbase and base and that is not moisture sensitive as determined by the materials testing manual .
ensure that at least num percent of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has at least one fractured face .
num gradation and properties provide and use subbase and base that meets the requirements of table num num gradation requirements subbase and base and table num aggregate properties subbase and base .
num table num gradation requirements subbase and base table num aggregate properties subbase and base num aggregate sieve grading j gr l k w passing num in num mm num num in nummm num to num num num num num in num mm num num to num num to num num to num in num mm num to num num in num mm num to num num to num num to num d in num mm no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num properties subbase crushed base crushed base gravel roads la abrasion loss max .
num num num liquid limit max .
num num num plasticity index num to num num to num num to num rvalue min .
num num num soundness mgsonum loss for coarse aggregate max .
num num num soundness mgsonum will be tested on coarse aggregate .
num aggregate num num num num aggregate for flexible pavement num general use aggregate that is tough and sound of uniform quality and crushed to size .
stockpile coarse and fine aggregates separately .
use aggregate consisting of crushed stone or crushed or natural gravel do not use pit run filler or rap unless designated in the contract .
num pit run filler when specified use nonplastic granular pit run filler that meets the requirements of table num gradation properties pit run filler and table num aggregate properties pit run filler .
stockpile in its own pile .
table num gradation properties pit run filler sieve grade num grade num passing d in num mm num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num table num aggregate properties pit run filler property grade num grade num fine aggregate angularity max .
num num plasticity index np np num num reclaimed asphalt pavement crush and screen reclaimed asphalt pavement rap greater than num in num mm so that all material is prepared for recycling and a uniform mixture is maintained .
handle screen and crush material so as not to produce unnecessary fractured aggregate or cause undue degradation .
ensure that num percent of rap used for recycled plant mix pavement passes through a num in num mm sieve .
stockpile in its own pile .
num recycled plant mix pavement ensure that the combined virgin aggregate gradation meets the narrow band specification developed during the mix design .
num gradation and properties size grade and combine aggregate fractions for the mixture including rap when specified in proportions such that the resulting composite blend meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements marshall and superpave mixes .
table num gradation requirements marshall and superpave mixes num aggregate sieve passing nominal maximum size num in num mm in num mm num in num mm d in num mm num in num mm num num in num mm num to num num in num mm num to num num to num num num in num mm num to num num to num num to num num d in num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num num aggregate num num for specific types of aggregate provide in accordance with table num aggregate properties flexible pavements .
table num aggregate properties flexible pavements num num denotes that num percent of the coarse aggregate has one or more fractured faces and num percent has two or more fractured faces .
num based on the minus no .
num num mm fraction of the composite blend .
num soundness mgsonum will be tested on coarse aggregate .
num aggregate for plant mix wearing course num general for plant mix wearing course use crushed stone or gravel for aggregate in accordance with the requirements for aggregate type i in table num aggregate properties flexible pavements and table num gradation requirements plant mix wearing course .
when specified provide aggregate in accordance with subsection num polish resistant aggregate .
property aggregate type i ii iii iv v la abrasion loss max .
num num num num num flat and elongated num ratio max .
num num num num sand equivalent min.num num num num num num fractured faces min.num num num num num num fine aggregate angularity min.num num num num num num plastic indexnum np np np np np soundness mgsonum loss max .
num num num num num num num num table num gradation requirements plant mix wearing course num polish resistant aggregate provide aggregate that is in accordance with one of the test methods in table num polish resistant aggregate requirements .
table num polish resistant aggregate requirements num alternatively the insoluble residue may be determined in accordance with the materials testing manual procedure no .
num .
num base the skid number on historical skid numbers accumulated for a period of at least five years for a pavement that has carried traffic exceeding num accumulated numkip equivalent single axle loads .
num aggregate for microsurfacing use num percent crushed stone or gravel of which num percent is retained on a numinch num mm sieve before crushing .
ensure a sand equivalent of at least num percent a maximum soundness mgsonum loss of num percent on the coarse aggregate and an la abrasion loss of no more than num percent supply the test results .
submit the job mix formula in accordance with subsection num composition of plant mix ensure accordance with table num gradation requirements microsurfacing .
num aggregate num num sieve passing num in num mm num d in num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num test method description specification astm d num insoluble residue min .
num num aashto t num num hour polish value min .
num aashto t num skid number min.num num num num aggregate num num table num gradation requirements microsurfacing when specified provide aggregate in accordance with subsection num polish resistant aggregate .
num aggregate for chip seal for chip seal provide and use aggregate types in accordance with the following num .
types b c and k. nonplastic crushed stone or gravel of which before crushing at least num percent is retained on a numinch num mm sieve .
num .
types b and c. process produced aggregate over a slotted screen that has openings num in num mm wide by at least in num mm .
do not use material that passes through the screen .
num .
type d. crushed stone or gravel or clean pea gravel .
num .
types b c d and k. la abrasion loss maximum of num percent .
num .
type e. crushed sandgravel .
num .
type s. screened or pitrun sand .
num .
types e and s. plasticity index no greater than num .
sieve passing d in .
num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num num provide and use aggregate wellgraded from coarse to fine and in accordance with table num gradation requirements chip seal .
table num gradation requirements chip seal when specified provide aggregate in accordance with subsection num polish resistant aggregate .
num aggregate for blotter for blotter material provide aggregate with a plasticity index of num or less and in accordance with table num gradation requirements blotter .
num aggregate num num sieve passing type b c d e k s num in num mm in num mm num num num num in num mm num to num num num to num num to num num num d in num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num aggregate num num num table num gradation requirements blotter for chip seal applications provide blotter aggregate with the same color as the chip seal aggregate .
num aggregate for bed course material provide and use aggregate consisting of sand gravel crushed stone or other approved material of which num percent passes through a numinch num mm sieve .
num aggregate for class b bedding provide and use aggregate in accordance with table num gradation requirements class b bedding .
table num gradation requirements class b bedding sieve passing d in num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num sieve passing d in num mm num no .
num num µm num to num num num gravel for drains provide and use aggregate that is crushed or natural sand and gravel or other freedraining material approved by the engineer and that meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements gravel for drains use grading b if not specified .
table num gradation requirements gravel for drains num aggregate for maintenance stockpiles num type a provide and stockpile aggregate consisting of clean hard durable particles of crushed gravel or stone having a percentage of wear of no more than num .
for a maximum nominal size of num in num mm ensure that num percent of the material is retained on a numinch num mm sieve before crushing .
for a maximum nominal size of d in num mm ensure that num percent is retained on a dinch num mm sieve before crushing .
ensure that the material meets num aggregate num num sieve passing grading a b c num in num mm num num in num mm num to num num num in num mm num to num in num mm num to num num d in num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num num num aggregate num the requirements of table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type a .
for the fraction passing the no .
num num mm sieve ensure a liquid limit no greater than num and a plasticity index no greater than num .
table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type a num type b provide and stockpile aggregate consisting of clean hard durable particles of crusherrun gravel or screened stone obtained from designated portions of the pit .
ensure that the material has a plasticity index no greater than num and meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type b. sieve passing num in num mm d in num mm in num mm num num in num mm num to num num d in num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num mm num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type b num type c provide and stockpile aggregate consisting of crusherrun scoria meeting the requirements of table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type c. num aggregate num sieve passing in num mm num in nummm d in num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm modified num in num mm num in num mm num to num num num in num mm num to num num d in num mm num to num num num no .
num num mm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num table num gradation requirements maintenance stockpiles type c num aggregate num num num sodium chloride for maintenance stockpiles provide and stockpile type num sodium chloride meeting the requirements of aashto m num astm d num .
ensure that gradation samples taken after delivery meet the requirements of table num gradation requirements sodium chloride .
table num gradation requirements sodium chloride provide and stockpile sodium chloride to which the producer has added yellow prussiate of soda yps or other chemical additive approved by the engineer at a rate of not less than num ppm .
ensure that the sodium chloride is delivered to the mixing site in bags or other containers acceptable to the engineer or in bulk lots and that the manufacturers name and the net weight mass is marked on each bag or container or in the case of bulk lots on the shipping or delivery invoice .
sieve passing d in num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num sieve passing num in num mm num d in num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num mm num to num num num aggregate for pervious backfill material provide and use nonplastic aggregate consisting of crushed gravel crushed rock manufactured sands or combinations thereof .
ensure the material has a liquid limit no greater than num and meets the requirements of table num gradation requirements pervious backfill material .
table num gradation requirements pervious backfill material for reinforced bridge approach fills ensure that the materials provided and used have an internal friction angle of at least num degrees .
num aggregate for riprap num general use aggregate consisting of hard durable crushed quarried or natural stone or broken concrete .
ensure an apparent specific gravity of at least num an absorption no greater than num percent that the pieces are free of weak laminations and cleavages and that at least num percent weigh num lbs num kg or more .
do not provide material that will disintegrate in water or weather .
num handplaced riprap provide and use stones at least num in num mm thick and weighing at least num lb num kg .
use choke stones consisting of fragments or spalls to fill the voids between the riprap stones .
num aggregate num num num num sieve passing num in num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num num num aggregate num num num num num num num machineplaced riprap provide and use stone graded with enough smaller stones uniformly distributed throughout to stabilize the installation .
num grouted riprap provide and use stone in accordance with the requirements for handplaced or machineplaced riprap .
num wireenclosed riprap provide and use round or angular stones of which at least num percent are retained on a screen or wire having num in num mm square openings .
num stonefilled gabions provide and use round or angular stones of which num .
at least of num percent are retained on a screen with numinch num mm square openings num .
no more than num percent are retained on a screen with numinch num mm square openings and num .
num percent pass through a screen with numinch num mm square openings .
num stone mattress provide and use round or angular stones of which at least num percent are retained on a screen or wire with num in num mm square openings .
num filter aggregate for riprap provide and use aggregate consisting of hard durable particles or fragments of crushed stone or natural gravel screened or crushed to meet the requirements of table num gradation requirements riprap filter aggregate .
num table num gradation requirements riprap filter aggregate num aggregate for flowable backfill provide and use nonplastic aggregate with a liquid limit no greater than num and meeting the requirements of table num gradation requirements flowable backfill .
table num gradation requirements flowable backfill num aggregate num sieve passing num in num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num sieve passing in num mm num no .
num num µm num to num num asphalt materials num num num num num section num asphalt materials num performance graded asphalt binder provide pgab in accordance with the high and lowgrade temperatures specified .
num binder properties provide binder in accordance with aashto m num excluding pressure aging vessel residue tests for dynamic shear physical hardening and direct tension .
when the difference between specified high and lowgrade temperatures is at least num provide binder that also is in accordance with aashto t num with at least num percent elongation recovery .
test at num ºf num ºc using rtfo residue and sever the specimen immediately after elongation .
do not provide or use pgab with fibers or other discrete particles larger than num in num µm or with carcinogenic modifiers .
base asphalt may be modified with no greater than num percent phosphoric acid .
ensure the total phorsphous content does not exceed num ppm .
num source qualification ensure that the supplier is qualified annually for each facility shipping pgab .
ensure the supplier submits documentation and samples required for qualification to the materials program at least num calendar days before the suppliers qualification expires .
num .
request for authorization .
ensure that the supplier submits a written request to the materials program for authorization to ship specific grades of pgab to department projects .
the department will not grant authorizations lasting longer than num months .
num .
approval sample .
ensure the manufacturer submits approval samples annually for its facilities .
approval samples consist of pgab for both mix design and authorization .
if approved by the materials program a manufacturer may submit approval samples from its common product i.e .
formulation laboratory to qualify multiple facilities .
submit approval samples and documentation as follows num num num .
for authorization num .
num gal num l of pgab in two numquart num l containers for each single pgab grade num .
classification test results and other applicable properties described in subsection num binder properties and num phosphorus content of each different asphalt binder as determined by astm d num d num or d num .
num .
for mix design num .
num gal num l of pgab in two numgallon num l containers for each different pgab expected to be used during the next num months indicating the grade or multiple grades applicable to the sample num .
a temperature versus rotational viscosity chart in degrees fahrenheit versus pascalseconds degrees celsius vs pascalseconds showing a minimum range of from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc and with data points at every num ºf num ºc num .
a written statement clearly indicating the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges in degrees fahrenheit celsius for unmodified asphalt binders this corresponds to rotational viscosities from num pas to num pas and num pas to num pas in accordance with aashto t num for modified asphalts indicate recommended temperatures num .
specific gravity and num .
the type or class of modifier .
the materials program will test the samples for applicable properties described in subsection num binder properties .
if the authorization sample fails ensure the manufacturer submits an additional source approval sample for the appropriate grades including both num asphalt materials num num asphalt materials num authorization and mix design sample quantities .
for each separate grade of pgab the department will not test more than two samples for authorization .
perform additional sample testing beyond these two samples by an independent third party laboratory selected through mutual agreement with the materials program at no additional cost to the department submit testing results to the materials program .
num .
quality control plan .
ensure that the pgab supplier submits to the materials program its proposed quality control plan including sampling and testing protocols laboratory certifications transport procedures etc .
for manufacturing and shipping .
ensure that the plan is in accordance at a minimum with aashto r num sections num through num except as modified by the appropriate technical sections of these standard specifications and this specification regarding initial testing frequency of testing and reporting requirements .
num testing ensure that supplier testing is in accordance with aashto r num section num and that samples tested are production pgab obtained from sales or shipping tanks .
num .
daily quality control .
ensure that the supplier tests daily for dynamic shear and rotational viscosity on the original binder for each grade of pgab .
the department requires only one dynamic shear and rotational viscosity test if multiple projects are using the same grade on any given day .
num .
specification compliance testing .
ensure that the supplier tests for applicable properties described in subsection num binder properties each grade of pgab at the quantity time interval or both detailed in the suppliers quality control plan .
ensure that the supplier performs additional testing whenever there is a change in binder or modifier source or a major change in pgab properties .
the department defines such a change as a variation in any measured property of num percent or more from the averaged value of the three previous consecutive tests or a variation of num percent or more from the previous test value .
the department will consider both its own quality assurance test results and suppliers specification compliance test results for determining if a major change has occurred .
num num .
reporting .
ensure the supplier submits test reports in electronic format to the materials program on a weekly basis include all test data for the previous week .
ensure data is submitted in spreadsheet format compatible with microsoft excel version num .
num liquid cutback asphalt for liquid cutback asphalts provide and use in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num but without applying the sayboltfurol viscosity alternate .
num emulsified asphalt provide and use a blend of asphalt binder water emulsifiers and polymer if specified .
when specified polymerize using at least num percent polymer by weight mass of the asphalt binder .
ensure that emulsions show no separation such as a whitemilky appearance after mixingstirringagitating in tank are smooth and homogeneous throughout and are in accordance with the materials testing manual .
provide pumpable emulsion suitable for application through a distributor without plugging or reducing flow through filters piping or nozzles .
for the type of emulsified asphalt specified provide in accordance with the following num .
anionic .
aashto m num and astm d num .
num .
cationic .
aashto m num and astm d num .
num .
recycling agents .
aashto r num and astm d num and astm d num num .
other .
table num applicable requirements emulsified asphalt .
num asphalt materials num num num num num num asphalt materials table num applicable requirements emulsified asphalt property aashto or astm test method emulsion type hfrs nump hfms nump hfms numps hfms numss hfms num cmsnump crsnump cqs numhp css numhp ranum demulsibility num ml num n caclnum tnum min .
max .
num num num num num num flash point coc ºf ºc tnum min .
num num residue num min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num oil distillate by volume tnum max .
num num sieve tnum max .
num num num num num num num num storage stability num hours tnum max .
num num num num num num num miscibility coagulation num min .
none particle charge tnum pass viscosity saybolt furol num f num c sec tnum min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num f num c num num num f num c tests on distillation or evaporation residue solubility in trichloroethylene tnum min .
num num num num num num kinematic viscosity cst mm²sec tnum min .
max .
num num penetration sec num in num mm tnum min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num float test numºf num ºc sec tnum min .
num num num num ductility in mm tnum min .
num num num num num f num c num num num num num f num c num num softening point ºf ºc tnum min .
num num elastic recovery num ºf num ºc num min .
num num num f num c num num num f num c num num for mixingtype emulsions use num pt num ml num n caclnum for the solution .
num for cationic emulsions use num pt num ml num cnumhnumnaonums sodium dioctyl sulfosucinate for the solution .
demulsibility is not applicable to cmsnump .
num modify and perform the aashto t num distillation procedure in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num the aashto t num modified evaporation test for percent residue consists of heating a num oz num g sample to num ºf num ºc until foaming stops cool immediately and calculate results .
num test procedure is aashto t num use distilled water in place of num percent sodium oleate solution .
num storage stability is not applicable to cqsnumhp .
num test procedure is aashto t num use numn caclnum solution in place of distilled water .
num test procedure is aashto t num sever the specimen immediately after elongation .
num dust control agent num dust control oil provide and use oil in accordance with table num dust control oil properties .
table num dust control oil properties num asphalt materials num test astm method minimum maximum kinematic viscosity num ºf num ºc cst mm²sec d num num num flash point coc ºf ºc d num num num relative density num ºf num ºc d num num num water and sediment d num num num num asphalt materials num num num dust control brine solution provide and use a solution containing from num to num percent magnesium chloride as tested in accordance with astm e num in uncontaminated water the department allows small amounts of sodium potassium and sulfate with other trace ions .
num asphalt mastic for field coating for field coating structures provide and use asphalt mastic in accordance with aashto m num .
num section num geotextiles membrane and fabrics num general when storing keep geotextile membrane and fabric rolls wrapped for protection against moisture weather and extended ultraviolet exposure .
elevate the rolls and protect with a waterproof cover .
label or tag each roll to provide product identification sufficient for inventory and quality control .
num geotextile and impermeable plastic membrane provide impermeable plastic membrane consisting of a polypropylene polyethylene or polyester geotextile with a bonded polypropylene or polyethylene film .
in the manufacture of woven or nonwoven geotextiles and threads used in joining geotextiles by sewing use fibers consisting of longchain synthetic polymers composed of at least num percent by weight of polyolefins or polyesters .
form fibers into a stable network while retaining their dimensional stability relative to each other including selvages .
provide both in accordance with table num geotextile and membrane requirements minimum average roll values as applicable for the specified use .
clearly label each roll with the product name type of material and the lot or batch identification .
use highstrength polyester polypropylene or kevlar thread for sewn seams do not use nylon .
num geotextiles membrane and fabrics num num num num num num num geotextiles membrane and fabrics table num geotextile and membrane requirements minimum average roll valuesnum fabric and membrane property test method drainage filtration erosion control silt fence separation stabilization nonwoven embankment retaining wall reinforcement impermeable plastic membrane subgrade reinforcement performance criteria during service life equivalent or apparent opening size us standard sieve in mm astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num thickness mils mm astm d num num num permittivity secnum astm d num num num num num num num cmsec num num strength requirements wide width tensile strength ultimate lbsft knm astm d num num num wide width tensile strength num strain lbsft knm astm d num num num grab tensile strength lb n astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num elongation at failure min .
astm d num num num num num num num num trap tear strength lb n astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num puncture strength lb n astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num seam efficiency astm d num num num num num num num environmental requirements ultraviolet resistance strength retention after num hours of exposure astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num property values with the exception of apparent opening size in these specifications represent minimum average roll values marv in the weakest principal direction i.e .
average test results of any roll in a lot sampled for conformance or quality assurance testing shall meet or exceed the minimum values provided herein .
num permeability coefficient astm d num .
num nonstabilized or low susceptible geotextiles shall not be exposed to ultraviolet radiation for more than five calendar days .
num paving fabric provide and use material in accordance with aashto m num table num with a roll width of at least num ft num m. ensure the material has a minimum asphalt retention of num galyd² num lm² .
when submitting the certification for the paving fabric include notarized test results for grab strength ultimate elongation and weight mass per unit area for samples taken from the lot delivered to the project .
take the number of test samples specified in procedure a of astm d num .
a production lot is defined in astm d num section num for an individual roll of fabric .
for glass fiber reinforced paving fabric provide composite material that consists of a polymer coated fiberglass structural grid bonded to a nonwoven paving fabric meeting or exceeding the following requirements num geotextiles membrane and fabrics num num num num geotextiles membrane and fabrics composite requirements unit weight num ozydnum num kgmnum min peel strength astm d num num lbft num kgm min grid requirements tensile strength astm d num num lbin num kgmm min ultimate elongation astm d num num max grid jct .
strength griggnum num lb num kg min aperture sizenum md and xd num in num mm to num in num mm paving fabric requirements asphalt retention of fabric astm d num num galydnum num lmnum min grab tensile strength astm d num num lb num kg num centerline to centerline submit both the notarized test results from the abovelisted tests performed on samples taken from the same lot of composite material delivered to the project and the certification for the glass fiber reinforced paving fabric to the engineer .
ensure the number of samples taken for testing are in accordance with astm d num for the quantity of composite material produced for that lot .
num table num glass fiber reinforced paving fabric num section num erosion control and reclamation num seed and fertilizer num general provide and use seeds in accordance with the wyoming seed law w.s .
num num through num and the federal seed act .
purchase seeds through a dealer licensed with the wyoming department of agriculture .
provide and use fertilizer in accordance with the wyoming fertilizer law w.s .
num through num .
num seeds provide and use seeds in containers with plainlylabeled tags attached by the supplier showing the following num .
seeds species genus and variety num .
seeds common name num .
percentage of pure seed crop seed inert material weed seeds by weight mass germination and hard seed num .
month and year of the germination test num .
seeds origin num .
lot or mixture number or other lot identification num .
suppliers full name and address num .
name and quantity of each kind of restricted noxious weed seeds per pound kilogram pursuant to the wyoming seed law do not provide seed containing any noxious weed seeds prohibited by any states law num .
net weight mass of seed in each container and num .
words poisonous treated in bold print on the label of seeds treated with chemicals toxic to humans livestock or wildlife .
num erosion control and reclamation num num num num erosion control and reclamation num before seeding give the engineer copies of a certification signed by the vendor and certifying that each lot of seed has been tested by a state testing laboratory commercial seedtesting laboratory or registered member of the society of commercial seed technologists .
ensure that the testing laboratory is in accordance with association of official seed analysts testing rules .
give the engineer copies of seed analysis reports prepared by the respective seed testing authority .
provide seed tested less than num months before use .
the department will accept a tetrazolim tz viability test instead of the germination portion of the service sample seed analysis report prepared by the seed testing laboratory .
the wyoming department of agriculture reserves the right to randomly sample seed entering the state or delivered to the project w.s .
num .
ensure that the total percentage of crop seed does not exceed num percent by weight mass .
provide species and varieties of seed or blends of seeds in accordance with the pure live seed pls rates specified .
provide and use coolseason grass or legume seed with at least num percent pure live seed .
provide and use warmseason grass or wildflower seed with at least num percent pure live seed .
num fertilizer provide and use fertilizers as follows num .
with nitrogen n derived from ammonia compounds such as ammonium nitrate urea and ammonium sulfate num .
with phosphorous p derived from ammonium phosphate or super phosphate not raw rock num .
with potassium k derived from potash ores or natural salt brines num .
in the following npk ratios and to supply the specified pounds kilograms of available nitrogen per acre hectare num .
fertilizer type i .
num .
num .
fertilizer type ii .
num diammonium phosphate or num monoammonium phosphate .
num num num num num .
fertilizer type iii .
num with at least num percent of the nitrogen source in slow release form either by sulfurcoated urea ureaformaldehyde polymer or polymercoated urea .
num .
fertilizer type iv .
num plus num percent iron as ferric sulfate fenumsonum and num percent elemental sulfur .
num .
fertilizer type v. composted manure of the type specified cattle horse hog sheep poultry etc .
mixed with a carbon source and with at least num percent organic matter transformed by heat and aerobic microbes into a nutrientrich weedfree plant food .
ensure that the composted manure contains no more than num percent water by weight mass mature and stable nitrogen with no obvious ammonia odors no weeds and no harmful bacteria .
provide with each shipment a certified statement from a commercial testing laboratory stating that the manure complies with the wyoming fertilizer law as to nutrient content the percentages of water organic matter and soluble salts and the cn ratio .
the department does not require bagging .
num .
fertilizer type vi .
num ammonium sulfate plus num percent elemental sulfur or num ammonium nitrate .
num mulch straw or hay num dry mulch provide and use dry mulch consisting of smallgrain straw or grasshay and free of noxious weeds or undesirable plant species pursuant to w.s .
numa viiixxi w.s .
numaviiixi federal law p.l .
num other local county regulations and classified by another state as undesirable injurious or poisonous .
also ensure that num .
the crop has been inspected and certified by proper authorized officials in the state of origin num .
the crop has been inspected in the field of origin including the surrounding ditches fence rows roads easements rightsofway and buffer zones num erosion control and reclamation num num num erosion control and reclamation num num num .
the crop has been inspected before cutting or harvesting num .
mulch crop shipments are accompanied by an original transit certificate form wdanum or similar original certificate issued by authorized officials in the state of origin .
the engineer will not accept photocopied certificates and will reject shipments not accompanied by an original form .
the department considers officials authorized to issue a transit certificate to be a representative as follows num .
from wyoming num .
a state weed and pest control district or num .
the state department of agriculture .
num .
from another state num .
a representative of the states department of agriculture num .
the states weed supervisor or weed superintendent num .
an extension agent from the states university or num .
any individual designated by the states law .
the engineer may accept mulch crops containing designated or restricted noxious weeds other undesirable plant species or weeds classified as noxious by another state if the certification documents that by thorough visual inspection before cutting or harvesting it has been determined that num .
the crop or field was treated no later than the prohibited species bud stage to prevent seed formation or ripening .
treatment may include but is not limited to burning mowing cultural methods or chemical treatment .
num .
the prohibited species propagative parts will not produce new plants .
num hydraulic mulch for hydraulic spreading or in hydraulic seeding provide and use mulch made of virgin wood fibers prepared so as to be free of growth or germinationinhibiting factors .
ensure also that the mulch num num .
is appropriately colored to facilitate metering num .
will remain in uniform suspension in water under agitation num .
blends with seed fertilizer and other additives to form a homogenous slurry num .
has been processed with heat and pressure to soften the wood chips so that the mechanical refining yields fibers of a suitable shape and size and num .
will form a blotterlike ground cover after application with moisture absorption and percolation properties and the ability to cover and hold seeds in intimate contact with the soil without inhibiting the penetration of seedlings .
the department will allow the use of nonvirgin or nonthermally processed wood and recycledpaper mulches on slopes numvnumh or flatter and as components of dry mulch tack mixtures .
ensure that material for mulch is shipped in packages marked with the manufacturers name and the airdry weight mass based on the weight mass standard for wood cellulose of the technical association of the pulp and paper industry .
the airdry weight may include a moisture content from num to num percent .
give the engineer the manufacturers statement certifying that the material provided has been laboratory and fieldtested and meets the departments requirements and intent .
num sod provide and use nurserygrown num percent kentucky bluegrass consisting of two or more varieties and no more than num percent weeds .
in areas south of us num and lower than num ft num m nurserygrown num percent turftype tall fescue sod consisting of two or more turftype varieties adapted to plant hardiness zone num may be used .
ensure that the num percent of allowable weeds does not include undesirable perennials annual grasses or plant parts .
the department will not allow noxious weeds .
provide and use machinecut sod strips with from d in to num in num mm to num mm of soil adhering to the root system .
keep sod rolls moist and protected from the sun and wind by tarps or shade cloth .
do not use sod that num erosion control and reclamation num num num num num num erosion control and reclamation num num .
is dried num .
has adhering soil that breaks tears or crumbles or num .
was cut and harvested more than num hours before placement .
num erosion control blanket num general when the department uses the word or to specify more than one type of erosion control blanket provide and use only one type .
provide the blankets packaged in plastic or papercomposite wrappers .
num erosion control blanket type jute provide and use matting composed of a plain uniform open weave of new unbleached singlestrand jute yarn .
ensure that the yarn is of looselytwisted construction and does not vary in thickness by more than onehalf its normal diameter .
ensure a minimum of num yarn counts per width warp and a minimum of num yarn counts per linear yard num meter weft in accordance with astm dnum .
ensure the weight mass of the matting is num lbyd² num gm² and num lbyd² num gm² minimum when smolderresistant is specified .
num erosion control blanket types stnum and stnum provide and use a machinemade mat consisting entirely of agricultural straw weighing approximately num lbyd² num gm² and of consistent thickness with the straw evenly distributed .
ensure that the blankets are sewn with durable thread treated with an epalabeled fumigant to kill weed seeds and pests and as follows for each type num .
stnum .
covered on top with photodegradable polypropylene netting weighing approximately num lbnum ft² num gnum m² .
num .
stnum .
covered top and bottom with lightweight polypropylene netting weighing approximately num lbnum ft² num gnum m² .
num num num num erosion control blanket type stc provide and use a machinemade mat that is num .
num percent agricultural straw weighing at least num lbyd² num gm² and num percent coconut fiber weighing num lbyd² num gm² num .
of consistent thickness with straw and coconut fiber evenly distributed num .
covered on top with heavyweight polypropylene netting containing ultraviolet additives to resist breakdown and weighing at least num lbnum ft² num glnum m² num .
covered on the bottom with a lightweight photodegradable polypropylene netting weighing approximately num lbnum ft² num gnum m² num .
sewn with durable thread and num .
treated with an epalabeled fumigant to kill weed seed and pests .
num erosion control blanket types exnum and exnum provide and use a machinemade excelsior mat of curled consistentwidth wood fibers evenly distributed throughout the mat .
ensure a weight of at least num lbyd² num gm² and that blankets are covered with photodegradable polypropylene mesh netting as follows for each type num .
exnum .
on top .
num .
exnum .
top and bottom .
num erosion control blanket type exnum provide and use a machinemade excelsior mat of curled wood num percent of which has fibers at least num in num mm long evenly distributed .
ensure a weight of at least num lbsyd² num gm² and that blankets are encased top and bottom with highstrength polypropylene netting stitched to form a matrix .
num erosion control and reclamation num num num num num erosion control and reclamation num num num num coconut fiber ditch lining type coc provide and use a machinemade mat of num percent coconut or equivalent fibers weighing at least num lbyd² num gm² of consistent thickness and with the fiber evenly distributed .
cover the blanket top and bottom with heavyweight uv stabilized polypropylene netting weighing approximately num lbnum ft² num gnum m² sew with uvstabilized durable thread to form a matrix .
num erosion control agent for erosion control provide and use a concentrated liquidpolymer agent that num .
consists of at least num percent solids by weight mass num .
effectively prevents soil erosion caused by wind and water num .
when cured allows water and air to penetrate the soil surface and does not reemulsify in water num .
is nontoxic to seed plant or animal life and num .
does not stain concrete or painted surfaces .
num erosion control netting provide and use a polypropyleneextruded oriented net with openings of num in num mm or smaller weighing approximately num lbnum ft² num kgnum m² and colored to resist uv breakdown .
num mulch tack num type ar for tackifier provide and use an acryliccopolymer emulsion consisting of at least num percent resin solids by weight mass disbursed in water .
ensure that the product is nonflammable nontoxic to both plants and animals and contains a lowtemperature coalescing agent glycol or similar to accelerate curing at near freezing temperatures .
ensure that the cured film resists alkaline degradation allows exchange of air and soil moisture and does not disperse in water .
num num num type mc for tackifier provide and use a natural mucilage gum made from psyllium plantago insularis seed husks .
ensure that the product num .
is a freeflowing noncorrosive powder num .
binds the slurry to the soil surface when mixed with water and wood fiber and num .
contains no growth or germinationinhibiting factors .
num type gu for tackifier provide and use a natural polysaccharidegum made from guar cyamopsis tetragonoloba endosperm and combined with a mechanical or chemical crosslinking agent to resist rewetting .
ensure that the product num .
is a freeflowing noncorrosive powder num .
binds the slurry to the soil surface when mixed with water and wood fiber and num .
contains no growth or germinationinhibiting factors .
num burlap bag curbs provide and use burlap in accordance with aashto m num class num and consisting of numounce num g or heavier material treated with copper napthenate or other approved agent to provide mildewresistance .
provide in numinch num mm widths sewn to form a tube .
num num num erosion control and reclamation num num num joint materials num section num joint materials num silicone joint sealant provide and use a nonsag or selfleveling onepart silicone that is formulated specifically for sealing sawed joints in portland cement concrete pavement and in accordance with astm d num except as noted in table num silicone joint sealant requirements .
table num silicone joint sealant requirements num samples air cured num calendar days nonsag or num calendar days selfleveling from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
num briquettes molded in accordance with aashto t num sawed in half and bonded with approximately num mil num mm of sealant and tested using clips meeting aashto t num .
dry to a constant weight mass in an oven at a temperature from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc and test in tension at a loading rate of num inmin num mmmin .
test limit test method ultimate elongation num min .
astm d num section num weathering uv and ozone resistance num hours no chalking cracking or bond loss astm c num tack free time num to num minutes nonsag num minutes max .
selfleveling astm c num specific gravity num to num nonsag num to num selfleveling astm d num method a bond to concrete mortar num psi num kpa min .
nonsag num psi num kpa min .
selfleveling num num num ensure that sealant is delivered in the manufacturers original sealed container with the original manufacturers label attached and intact .
ensure that the label is tamperproof nonremovable and legibly marked with the manufacturers batch or lot number and the expiration date of the manufacturers shelflife warranty .
before approving sealant for use on department projects based on certification the department requires the sealant manufacturer to establish sealant performance of less than num percent failure cohesive or adhesive in one year on inplace field applications .
provide sealant with a shelf life of six months from the date of manufacture .
do not use sealant that has exceeded the shelf life warranty expiration date sealant may be retested in accordance with astm c num and recertified for six months from the retest date .
perform retesting at no additional cost to the department the department will not pay costs incurred in procuring and testing outofcompliance materials .
num hotpoured elastic sealant provide and use sealant in accordance with aashto m num type i wy modified or aashto m num type iv wy modified as specified .
use aashto m num wy modified if the sealant type is not specified .
to enhance performance materials including recycled rubber and fillers such as calcium carbonate to prevent rubber particles from sticking together may be blended into the sealant mixture do not allow the incorporation of wire fabric or other deleterious matter .
as applicable ensure that sealant is in accordance with table num hotpoured elastic sealant specification limits .
num joint materials num num num num num num joint materials num num table num hotpoured elastic sealant specification limitsnum num for unit information see the appropriate test method .
num elastic joint sealant provide and use a twocomponent polyurethane or polysulfidebase product sealant in accordance with the physical flow and strength requirements of astm c num type m grade ns class num use t. num preformed expansion joint filler provide and use a product in accordance with aashto m num and punched to admit the dowels .
property aashto or astm test method sealant type aashto m num type i wy modified aashto m num type iv wy modified min .
max .
min .
max .
cone penetration m num type i and iv num num num flow m num type i and iv num num bond m num type i num bond num extension m num type iv num relative density d num wy modified num num softening point ºf ºc d num num num num num preformed elastomeric compression joint seals provide and use a product in accordance with aashto m num astm d num manufactured to a size and shape proposed by the manufacturer after approval by the engineer based on submission of the following num .
proposed seal type and dimensions including computations that show the material will be in compression over the temperature range from num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc and num .
recommended joint width and depth dimensions .
when recommended by the manufacturer use an approved lubricantadhesive compatible with the seal in accordance with astm d num to provide lubrication and bond for the seal .
num compressed joint material provide and use opencell polyurethane foam impregnated with waterrepellant material in a single or factorybonded layered unit .
ensure that the density of the impregnated compressed and packaged material is at least num lbsft³ num kgm³ that the uncompressed thickness of the material is at least four times as large as the specified applicable gap width and that the compressed material conforms to the depth and gap size specified .
provide and use adhesive for installation and sealant for splices as recommended by the jointmaterial supplier .
provide a product approved by the bridge program .
store materials in accordance with the suppliers recommendations .
num backer rod for installations with silicone sealant provide and use backer rod in accordance with astm d num type num or type num .
for installations with hotpoured elastic sealant provide and use backer rod in accordance with astm d num type num with a melting temperature higher than the sealants application temperature .
num waterstop provide and use waterstops manufactured from pvc in accordance with us army corps of engineers specification crdcnum .
joint materials num num num num num num num num num pipe num num num num section num pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num general for reinforced concrete pipe provide and use in accordance with table num num reinforced concrete pipe specifications .
table num reinforced concrete pipe specifications for circular pipe the department considers pipe wall design and the use of elliptical reinforcement optional .
for precast flared ends provide and use sections in accordance with requirements for the pipe size and type provided with equivalent wall thickness concrete and reinforcement as specified therein for class ii aii or heii .
the engineer will approve reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with section num under the abovementioned aashto specifications modified as follows the engineer will determine acceptability of pipe in all diameters and classes by compression tests on concrete cores or cured concrete cylinders by absorption tests on selected samples from the wall of the pipe by materials certifications for materials required by sections num basis of approval and num materials by results of materials tests required in accordance with section num design and by inspection of the finished pipe including the quantity and placement of reinforcement to determine its conformance with the design specified .
material aashto specification circular pipe and fe m num m numm elliptical pipe and fe m num m numm pipe arch and fe m num m numm num num ensure that plants producing rcp and hercp are certified in accordance with subsection num general .
num manhole risers and tops as specified provide precast reinforcedconcrete manhole risers and tops in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm .
num reinforced concrete pipe type v cement with fly ash use cement meeting the requirements of subsection num type v portland cement and class f fly ash meeting the requirements of subsection num fly ash .
use num to num percent fly ash by weight mass .
num epoxy coated reinforced concrete pipe prior to the application of the epoxy coating prepare the interior and exterior surfaces of the reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with the requirements of joint surface preparation standard sspcsp numnace no .
num surface preparation of concrete table num severe service moisture content per astm d num .
epoxy coat the interior and exterior surfaces of the reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with the requirements of sspcps num epoxy polyamide painting system except section num .
num reinforced concrete stock passes for reinforced concrete stock passes provide and use sections made and with materials in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm .
determine stock passsection classes in accordance with fill height requirements and the fill height table specified .
provide flared end sections made in accordance with the same requirements except that the department requires only one reinforcement cage for the open portion .
num reinforced concrete siphon pipe for reinforced concrete siphon pipe provide and use pipe in accordance with and in classifications meeting astm c numm .
for siphon drains provide and use type psm polyvinylchloride pvc pipe with cemented joints in accordance with astm d num .
num pipe num num num num num num num num pipe num num num num num plastic pipe for underdrain num general for plastic underdrain provide and use pvc or polyethylene pe pipe and fittings in accordance with table num plastic pipe specification requirements .
table num plastic pipe specification requirements num provide standard fittings in accordance with aashto m num .
for pvc bushings and saddle connections provide and use commercialgrade solvent cement and primer made specifically for use with pvc and pe pipe and fittings .
num hardware cloth for drains for drains provide and use nummesh wire hardware cloth made from galvanized steel or commercialgrade aluminumalloy wire with a minimum diameter of num in num µm before galvanizing .
num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num general identify culverts by stamping each section as outlined in aashto m num .
provide and use conduit and coupling bands in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm and aashto m num .
type of pipe pipe and fitting specification class of pipe fittings perforation specification pvc astm d num sdr num astm d num corrugated pvc aashto m num aashto m num corrugated pe aashto m num type s num aashto m num aashto m num type s aashto m num num num ensure that damage incurred in fabrication is repaired before shipment .
ensure that damaged spelter coating is repaired in accordance with subsection num repair of damaged coating and that polymeric coating is repaired by coating the damaged area with a similar and compatible polymeric coating .
num fabrication when specified ensure that the vertical diameter of round pipe is shopelongated by num percent .
ensure that pipe fabricated with resistancespotwelded seams is in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm modified as follows num .
when double welding is required do not make adjacent welds closer than two spotweldnugget diameters center to center .
num .
weld so that at least num ozft² num gm² of spelter coating is retained on the spot weld and no base metal is exposed when the area adjacent to the weld is wire brushed .
the department does not consider discoloration of spot weld surfaces cause for rejection .
num .
do not spot weld longitudinal seams on corrugated aluminum pipe .
for pipe with helical seams fabricate pipe so that seams will not affect the pipes shape nominal diameter or strength .
the engineer will reject pipe with seams indicating slippage or unraveling .
reroll the ends of helical pipe to produce at least two annular corrugations .
the engineer will accept buttwelded joints at sheet ends if a good weld is made and damaged spelter coating is repaired as specified sawed ends are allowed .
num corrugations ensure that the following specified corrugations are in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm and m num num .
numb in num in num mm num mm .
num .
num in num in num mm num mm .
num .
num in num in num mm num mm .
num pipe num num num num num num num num num pipe num num num num num ensure that corrugations specified as num in num in num mm num mm are from num in to num in num mm to num mm center to center with a depth of at least num in num mm .
num bituminouscoated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches provide and use conduits and coupling bands coated in accordance with aashto m num for the type of bituminous coating .
when no coating type is specified use aashto mnum type a .
fully coat coupling bands .
num corrugated steel pipe for underdrains as specified for underdrains provide and use corrugated steel pipe in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm for the specified sizes any one of the four classes may be provided .
num bituminouscoated corrugated steel pipe for underdrains as specified for underdrains provide and use bituminouscoated corrugated steel pipe coated in accordance with aashto m num type a but to a coating thickness of at least num in num µm .
fully coat coupling bands .
ensure that perforations meet the specified minimum diameter after coating .
num polymericprecoated galvanized steel pipe provide and use polymericprecoated galvanized steel pipe in accordance with aashto m numm and aashto m numm with a polymeric coating at least num mil num µm thick inside and outside .
make the pipe with helical lock seams do not rivet or weld seams .
provide and use coupling bands and flared ends that are galvanized and coated with bituminous material .
num aluminumcoated pipe provide and use aluminumcoated pipe in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm and aashto m num joined with bands of the same base metal and coating .
num num num num corrugated aluminumalloy pipe as specified for culverts and underdrains provide and use corrugated aluminum alloy pipe in accordance with aashto m numm and aashto m numm .
ensure that corrugations specified as num in num in num mm num mm are in accordance with aashto m numm .
num corrugated metal units provide and use corrugated steel units made from galvanized steel sheet in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm .
when used in conjunction with nongalvanized pipe provide corrugated metal units that are bituminous coated in accordance with aashto m num type a .
as specified provide and use aluminum alloy units made from aluminum alloy sheets in accordance with aashto m numm .
when used in conjunction with siphons or when specified for watertight installations provide units with joints sealed by closeriveting welding soldering gasketed bands or other approved means .
num structural plate pipe provide and use structural plate pipe in accordance with aashto m numm .
ensure that corrugations specified as num in num in num mm num mm are from num in to num in num mm to num mm center to center with a depth of from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
ensure fabrication as follows num .
forming plates .
provide plates factoryformed from corrugated metal sheet of the gauges and dimensions specified for circular structural plate pipe ensure a factoryformed num percent elliptical .
for pipe arches ensure that plates form a crosssection made up of four circular arcs tangent to each other at their junctions and symmetrical about the vertical axis .
ensure that the top is an arc of from num to num degrees the bottom is an arc of from num to num degrees and that the top is joined to the bottom by an arc of from num to num degrees with a radius of at least num in num mm .
for plates cut for forming skewed or sloped ends ensure that burned edges are free from oxide and burrs .
place legible identification numerals on each component plate to designate its position in the finished structure .
num pipe num num num num num num num pipe num num num stagger joints so that no more than three plates come together at any one point .
num .
punching plates .
for bolt holes punch so that plates with like dimensions and curvature and with the same number of bolts per num in num mm of seam length are interchangeable .
stagger bolt holes along longitudinal seams in two rows num in num mm apart with one row in the valley and one row in the crest of corrugations .
space holes along circumferential seams no more than num in num mm apart .
ensure that the distance from the center of the hole to the plate edge is at least num times the bolt diameter .
in longitudinal seams ensure that hole diameter does not exceed bolt diameter by more than c in num mm .
num aluminumalloy structural plate pipe provide and use pipe in accordance with aashto m numm and aashto m numm and made from plates formed and punched in accordance with subsection num structural plate pipe .
num corrugated steel siphon pipe provide and use corrugated steel siphon pipe in accordance with aashto m numm and aashto m numm .
num welded steel siphon pipe provide and use welded steel siphon in accordance with american water works association awwa cnum with an inside protective coating in accordance with awwa cnum cnum or cnum and an outside protective coating in accordance with awwa cnum cnum or cnum .
with the state bridge engineers approval other coatings may be used .
num ductile iron water pipe provide and use ductile iron water pipe in accordance with awwa cnum and with mechanical joints in accordance with awwa cnum .
provide pipe bends and fixtures made from ductile or cast iron class num in accordance with awwa cnum and with mechanical joints in accordance with awwa cnum .
ensure that pipe and fixtures are cementmortarlined in accordance with awwa cnum that num num valve boxes are castiron with a diameter of num in num mm and sufficiently long for the pipe depth .
provide cast iron covers with water stamped on top and a directional arrow for the valve opening .
num nestable metal pipe provide and use pipe and pipe arch made from corrugated metal sheets in modular halfround sections with side flanges or fasteners for inplace assembly .
num pipe joint mortar provide and use mortar consisting of one part portland cement two parts approved sand and water as necessary to obtain the required consistency .
num preformed flexible joint sealants for concrete pipe provide and use preformed flexible joint sealants in accordance with aashto m num astm c num .
for steel pipe provide and use in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm .
num steel mitered end sections use galvanized steel sheet metal in accordance with aashto m numm .
when a grate is specified provide and use schedule num galvanized steel pipe grate bars in accordance with subsection num steel pipe .
num slide gates provide commercially prefabricated corrosionresistant slide gates of the size corresponding to the opening provided by the pipe and designed to operate and be watertight under the specified head of water .
ensure slide gates use a steel frame at least num in num mm thick and adjustable cast iron wedge blocks to ensure a proper seating closure .
num pipe num num num num num num num paint num num num section num paint num general based on specified ingredients provide and use paint that is a homogeneous blend of its constituent components stable in storage free from grit and coarse particles with no rosin or rosin derivatives unless specifically allowed .
unless specifically prohibited the department will allow beneficial additives such as antiskinning agents antisettling agents or wetting aids .
ensure that paint is shipped in sealed containers constructed and packed to withstand rough handling and plainly marked with contents batch number date of manufacture and the manufacturers name and address .
the engineer will reject containers received in a damaged condition .
provide paints in accordance with federal color standard num and table num num paint color standards num delta e units .
table num paint color standards num copper phthalocyanine blue green shade phthalocyanine green blue shade perylene vermillion and quinacridone red .
num natural or synthetic red iron oxide blue shade natural burnt umber chrome yellow medium red shade and lampblack .
num benzimidazolone yellow copper phthalocyanine blue green shade and natural raw umber .
num yellow iron oxide hydrated natural or synthetic red iron oxide blue shade and lampblack .
num yellow iron oxide hydrated copper phthalocyanine blue red shade benzimidazolone yellow phthalocyanine green blue shade and natural raw umber .
color federal number tinting compounds blue num num brown num num gray num num gray tan num num green num num white num num ensure maximum percentage by weight mass of lead pb is no greater than num percent num ppm .
ensure paint coatings dry to a smooth finish without visible cracking grit seeding or skins .
num testing and sampling requirements submit paint samples for testing by the department as follows num .
project quantities of less than num gal num l. the department does not require a sample and will approve paint based on certification include paint analysis test results from the supplier with certification .
num .
project quantities of num gal num l or more .
ensure the manufacturer submits either num qt num l of premixed paint or components to prepare num qt num l of paint to the materials program at least num calendar days before use .
include with sample all test results certifications and transmittance ir spectra if applicable .
submit samples in metal frictiontop cylindrical paint cans that are clearly marked with the batch number quantity of the batch type of paint manufacturers name and address project number and the painting contractors name .
do not use screw top cans or plastic bottles for sample containers .
for inorganic zinc epoxy and acrylic latex products submit manufacturers transmittance ir spectra per astm d num for each batch of each component vehicle activator etc .. num .
field samples .
if manufacturer samples can not be submitted take representative paint samples for each different paint in the presence of the engineer as follows num .
use only dry clean sample cans .
remove all debris and other deleterious materials from the num qt num l sample can .
num .
set the paint bucket pail or drum to be sampled on a level solid surface .
remove lid carefully alkyd or num paint num num num num num paint oil base paints have layer of solvent and resin on top and waterborne paints may have an ammonia float layer on top .
avoid inhaling fumes .
num .
use a stirring rodstick to check the bottom of the container for skins and settlement .
remove skins .
lift any settlement off the bottom prior to remixing .
num .
position the mixer and remix contents for num minutes to a smooth and homogeneous consistency .
num .
remove mixer .
use a cup to dip sample from the freshly mixed paint to fill the num qt num l sample can to within num in num mm of the top lip of the can .
immediately place lid on sample can and secure with four lid clips .
reattach lid on paint bucket pail or drum .
num .
give num qt num l sample can and documentation to the engineer .
previously tested and approved paint may be used for a period not to exceed num months from its most recent date of department approval or its maximum shelf life from date of manufacture whichever is shorter .
the department maintains a current list available from the materials program of pretestedapproved paints that do not require samples .
num ingredients provide and use paint made from ingredients in accordance with table num paint ingredients .
num num table num paint ingredients num paint ingredient specification inorganic pigments titanium dioxide astm d num type ii zinc dust astm d num zinc oxide astm d num french process aluminum paste astm d num class b type ii calcium carbonate astm d num type gc grade i chrome oxide green astm d num diatomaceous silica astm d num type a lampblack astm d num magnesium silicate astm d num max .
oil absorption num wet ground mica astm d num iron oxide pigments natural red astm d num num min .
fenumonum synthetic red astm d num yellow hydrated astm d num organic pigments copper phthalocyanine blue astm d num phthalocyanine green astm d num quinacridone red federal standard num perylene vermillion federal standard num benzimidazolone yellow federal standard num natural raw umber federal standard num natural burnt umber federal standard num chrome yellow medium federal standard num table continued on next page num table num paint ingredients continued num paint num num num system aalkyd bridge paint system num general ensure that primer and intermediate field coats are applied to structural steel accordance with sspc paint specification no .
num .
num shop primer num properties ensure the provision and use of primer having properties in accordance with table num properties of alkyd primer .
ingredient specification vehicles long oilalkyd resin solution federal specification ttrnumd type i class a epoxy resin sspc paint no .
num liquid type polyamide resin sspc paint no .
num raw linseed oil astm d num boiled linseed oil astm d num highsolids alkylsilicate sspc paint no .
num thinners mineral spirits astm d num manufacturers recommendation dryers liquid dryers astm d num num table num properties of alkyd primer num composition ensure the provision and use of primer having composition in accordance with sspc paint specification no .
num table num composition sspcpaint num type i .
num intermediate field coat num general for intermediate field coats provide and use a zinc oxide rawlinseedoil alkyd primer with num lb num kg of lampblack pigment added for each num gal num l of primer .
the lampblack may be added to the primer dry or as a paste in the linseed oil in which case use enough paste to equal num lb num kg of dry pigment per num gal num l of paint .
ensure lampblack pigment is added during batching at the manufacturers facility do not fieldtint .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with subsection num properties .
num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with sspc paint specification no .
num table num composition sspcpaint num type i .
num paint num property value viscosity ku num to num density lbgal kgl num num min .
dry time hard hours num max .
finish gloss at num f num c num min .
num num num num num paint num num alkyd topcoat num general for topcoat except gray tan provide and use tinted gloss alkyd paint in accordance with sspc paint specification no .
num type iv as modified here .
for gray tan provide tinted lowgloss alkyd paint provide in accordance with sspc paint specification no .
num type ii as modified herein .
ensure the paint is intended for brush or spray application on steel surfaces coated with primer and intermediate field coats .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of alkyd topcoat .
table num properties of alkyd topcoat property value blue brown gray tan green density lbsgal kgl minimum num num num num num num num num water percent by weight mass num max .
fineness of dispersion rating num min .
cleanliness rating a min .
flash point ºf ºc num num min .
sag resistance mils µm num num max .
viscosity ku num to num dry time dry through at num mils num µm hours num max .
finish gloss at num ºf num ºc minimum rating num num num num num num num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of alkyd topcoat .
table num composition of alkyd topcoat num provide magnesium silicate and calcium carbonate for reinforcing compounds .
num provide tinting compounds in accordance with table num paint color standards .
num paint num component percent by weight mass blue brown gray tan green pigment topcoat num to num num to num num to num num to num coarse particles and skins retained on no .
num num µm sieve num max .
extracted component only chrome oxide green num min .
titanium dioxide num min .
num min .
num to num zinc oxide num min .
num reinforcing compoundsnum num max .
num max .
num max .
num max tinting compoundsnum num max .
vehicle topcoat num to num num to num num to num num to num extracted component only long oilalkyd resin solution num min .
num min .
num min .
mineral spirits and dryers num max .
num max .
num max .
num num paint num num num system bzincrich epoxy and latex bridge paint system num zincrich primer num general ensure the provision and use of an inorganic zinc highsolids alkylsilicate primer that is shop applied in accordance with manufacturers recommendations by brush or spray on new structural steel .
num properties ensure the provision and use of primer having properties in accordance with table num properties of zincrich primer .
table num properties of zincrich primer num composition ensure the provision and use of primer in accordance with requirements for composition specified in sspc paint no .
num highsolids alkylsilicate type numc inorganic zincrich primer and aashto m num type numa zincrich selfcuring readytomix primer .
do not use pigments with chromate .
ensure the provision and use of primer having composition in accordance with table num composition of zincrich primer .
property value viscosity ku num to num density lbgal kgl num num min .
volatile organic content lbgal kgl num num max .
dry time hard at num f num f num c num c and num to num percent relative humidity hours num max .
num num num table num composition of zincrich primer num epoxy intermediate field coat num general ensure the provision and use of a twopart epoxy polyamide paint as field primer or intermediate field coat and suitable for brush or spray application when reconstructing or overcoating existing structures .
alkydtype paint is not allowed .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of epoxy intermediate field coat .
table num properties of epoxy intermediate field coat num paint num num component proportion total solids percent by weight mass of primer num to num zinc dust percent in dry film num to num property value density lbgal kgl num num to num num volatile organic content lbgal kgl num num max .
dry time hard hours num max .
adhesion elcometer lbin² mpa num num min .
num num paint num num num component percent by weight mass volatile compounds solvents etc .
num max .
nonvolatile nv filmforming solids pigment and binder natural or synthetic red iron oxide pigment num min .
num min .
magnesium silicate extender pigment num min .
wet ground mica extender pigment num min .
base component solids vehicle binder nv solids pigment num composition ensure the provision and use of epoxy intermediate field coat in accordance with requirements for composition specified in sspc paint no .
num for intermediate coat .
ensure the epoxy intermediate field coat consists of a twopart epoxy including the following num .
base containing an epoxy resin that is a diepoxide condensation product of biphenol a and epichlorhydrin with the terminal epoxide group and num .
curing agent containing volatile solvent and a liquid type polyamide resin that is a condensation product of dimerized fatty acids and polyamines .
ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of epoxy intermediate field coat .
table num composition of epoxy intermediate field coat num num latex topcoat provide and use an industrial singlecomponent readytouse semigloss num percent acrylic latex waterbornetype paint in accordance with subsection num latex emulsion paint .
num aluminum paint num general provide and use a readymixed aluminum paint intended for use as a field topcoat and suitable for brush or spray application over previously applied primer on concrete masonry and metal .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of aluminum paint and table num properties of vehicle component of aluminum paint .
table num properties of aluminum paint paint num num property value viscosity no .
num ford cup seconds num to num density lbgal kgl num num min .
water percent by weight mass num max .
dry time set to touch num hours num to num dry time hard num hours num max .
film comparison num smoothness color luster and opacity matches with standard comparison paint num num film comparison num after storage full tightly closed container for num days at temperature num gas pressure after num day storage num none visible on container num num num num wetfilm thickness is num mils num µm .
num paint flowed onto a clean glass panel supported at num dried at temperature num for num hours panel protected from air drafts during drying .
num dryingstorage temperature is num f num f num c num c. num standard comparison paint is mixture of num g aluminum paste and num l long oil alkyd varnish .
table num properties of vehicle component of aluminum paint num paint num num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of aluminum paint .
property value viscosity tubes c to e gardner bubble viscometer cp pasec num num to num num water percent by weight mass num max .
dry time set to touch hours num to num dry time hard hours num max .
water immersion num f num f num c num c for num hours no serious defects after removal hours num min .
volatile matter percent by weight mass num min .
phthalic anhydride quantitative based on nonvolatile percent by weight mass num min .
num table num composition of aluminum paint num white paint num general provide and use a white paint intended for use as a field topcoat and suitable for brush or spray application over previously applied primer on concrete masonry and metal .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of white paint .
table num properties of white paint num paint num num component percent by weight mass pigment aluminum paste num min .
num min .
coarse particles and skins retained on no .
num num µm sieve num max .
vehicle long oil alkyd resin solution num min .
num max .
mineral spirits num max .
property value viscosity stormer viscometer num to numg load ku num to num density lbgal kgl num num min .
dry time set to touch hours num to num dry time hard hours num to num num num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of white paint .
table num composition of white paint num paint num num latex emulsion paint num general provide and use an acrylic latex emulsion paint intended for use as a field topcoat and suitable for brush or spray application over previously applied primer on concrete masonry and metal .
provide and use paint in accordance with sspc paint no .
num .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of latex emulsion paint .
ingredient percent by weight mass pigment titanium dioxide num min .
num min .
zinc oxide num min .
magnesium silicate and diatomaceous silica num max .
vehicle long oilalkyd resin solution num min .
num max .
boiled linseed oil num min .
mineral spirits and dryers num max .
num num num table num properties of latex emulsion paint num paint num component percent by weight mass gray white blue brown gray tan green emulsion nonvolatile solids num min .
num min .
vehicle varies with color pigment varies with color extracted pigment component only titanium dioxide num min .
varies with color zinc oxide num min .
reinforcing and tinting compoundsnum num max .
property value density lbsgal kgl varies with color hiding power contrast ratio unitless num min .
viscosity ku num to num dry time set to touch hours num max .
dry time hard hours num max .
num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of latex emulsion paint .
table num composition of latex emulsion paint num provide magnesium silicate and calcium carbonate for reinforcing compounds and tinting compounds in accordance with table num paint color standards .
num num epoxy mastic paint num general provide and use a twopart one coat high build selfpriming modified aluminum epoxy mastic paint intended for use as a field topcoat that is suitable for brush application over inorganic or organic zinc primers rusted steel aged alkyd coatings epoxy coatings and tightly adhering epoxycoal tar coatings .
ensure paint contains rust inhibitors that effectively control undercutting and is aluminum colored well ground and not caked skinned or settled in the container supply as a two part package with a num volumetric mix ratio .
num properties ensure the provision and use of paint having properties in accordance with table num properties of epoxy mastic paint .
num paint num num num table num properties of epoxy mastic paint num the catalyzed mixture thin num percent by volume with the specific thinner spray applied at num mils num µm wetfilm thickness .
num uniform num mils num µm coating applied to sand blasted steel panel cured for two weeks at num fnum f num c num c coated panel uniformly bent around num inch num mm diameter mandrel .
num uniform num mils num µm coating applied to wirebrushed weatherrusted steel panel num inch num mm vertical scribe in middle of panel panel exposed to num percent salt fog at num f num c for six months .
num paint property value viscosity cp pasec num num to num num density lbgal kgl num num to num num volatile organic content lbgal kgl num num max .
dry time hard hours num max .
adhesion elcometer lbin² mpa num num min .
pot life at num f num c hours num min .
shelf life months num min .
film build num visible evidence of runs or sags percent num max .
mandrelbent plate num visible evidence of cracking or loss of adhesion percent num max .
salt fog exposure num pinpoint rusting or cinch num mm blisters percent num max .
salt fog exposure num undercutting from the scribe millimeter num max .
num paint num num num composition ensure the provision and use of paint having composition in accordance with table num composition of epoxy mastic paint for the base and curing agent combined .
table num composition of epoxy mastic paint component proportion total solids percent by weight mass num min .
total solids percent by volume num min .
aluminum paste percent by volume num min .
num section num concrete repair num concrete patching material num general ensure aggregate extension in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations use aggregate in accordance with table num extension aggregate gradation requirements .
table num extension aggregate gradation requirements num horizontal repair material provide and use a concrete repair product preapproved by the materials program or equivalent nonchloride nonvapor barrier highalumina cementitious mortar in accordance with astm cnuma and table num horizontal repair material .
num concrete repair num sieve size percent passing d in num mm num no .
num num mm num num num num concrete repair num table num horizontal repair material num verticaloverhead repair material provide and use a concrete repair product preapproved by the materials program or equivalent nonchloride nonvapor barrier highalumina cementitious mortar designed for vertical and overhead applications in accordance with astm cnuma and table num verticaloverhead repair material .
property test value neat material compressive strength astm c num num psi num mpa in num hours num psi num mpa in num days final set num minutes min .
freezethaw resistance astm c num num min .
num cycles drying shrinkage astm c num num max .
num days with maximum aggregate extension compressive strength astm c num num psi num mpa in num hours num psi num mpa in num days bond strength astm c num modified num psi num mpa in num hours num table num verticaloverhead repair material num bondbreaking compound for bond breaking provide and use liquid membraneforming bondbreaking compound in accordance with aashto m num astm c num type num class a or b or other approved release agent .
obtain the engineers approval before use .
num caulking filler for caulking filler provide and use a standard commercial silicone sealer designed for concrete surfaces and containing at least num percent silicone .
num foam core board for filling joints provide and use foam core board at least d in num mm thick with num in num mm high num in num mm long tabs on top and consisting of closedcell foam faced on each side with poster board or plastic referred to by office suppliers as foam core or a dense closedcell foam insulation faced with plastic or foil .
if necessary provide a thicker foam core board for transverse cracks or larger transverse joints .
num concrete repair num num property test value neat material compressive strength astm c num num psi num mpa in num hours num psi num mpa in num days final set num minutes min freezethaw resistance astm c num num min .
num cycles drying shrinkage astm c num num max .
num days bond strength astm c num modified num psi num mpa in num hours num num num concrete repair num num num dowel bar retrofit concrete provide and use a concrete product preapproved by the materials program or equivalent in accordance with table num dowel bar retrofit concrete material .
table num dowel bar retrofit concrete material property test value neat material compressive strength astm c num num psi num mpa in num h num psi num mpa in num h shrinkage in num days astm c num num percent max .
final set num minutes min .
with maximum aggregate extension flexural strength calif. test num num psi num mpa in num h bond to dry pccp calif. test num num psi num mpa in num h bond to saturated surface dry pccp calif. test num num psi num mpa in num h sieve size percent passing d in num mm num no .
num num mm num provide and use coarse aggregate extension in accordance with subsection num course aggregate and table num dowel bar retrofit concrete gradation requirements .
table num dowel bar retrofit concrete gradation requirements num ensure a coarse aggregate extension no greater than eight parts coarse aggregate to ten parts dry patching material by weight mass .
provide dry patching material consisting of the manufacturers cementitious material and fine aggregate .
if the fine aggregate is not included as part of the manufacturers product blend it with the cementitious material at a proportion recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
use fine aggregate in accordance with subsection num fine aggregate .
num epoxy resin for repairing concrete with epoxy resin provide and use a class suitable for the concrete temperature at the time of use .
the engineer may approve the use of other polymer adhesives .
ensure accordance with the following num .
injection material .
astm c num type i grade num .
num .
bonding compound .
astm c num type v grade num .
num concrete repair num num num num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num num num num num num section num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num reinforcing steel num general bundle and tag reinforcing steel with weatherresistant tags .
num reinforcing steel bars provide and use reinforcing steel bars in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
provide grade num or num grade num or num ties and stirrups and grade num grade num for all other bars .
for epoxycoated reinforcing steel bars ensure coating in accordance with astm a num astm a numm including the certification requirements in sections num and num .
from the epoxy coating manufacturer obtain patching or repair material that is compatible with the coating inert in concrete and suitable for field use .
provide and use galvanized reinforcing steel bars tie wires and bar supports in accordance with astm a num astm a numm class num coating .
use spiral reinforcement in accordance with astm a num .
num steel bar mats use fabricated steel bar mats for concrete reinforcement in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm for deformed intermediate grade new billet steel for either clipped or welded mats .
num weldedwire fabric provide and use weldedwire fabric in accordance with aashto m num aastho m numm .
num dowel bars and tie bars num general provide and use sawcut epoxycoated smooth dowel bars in accordance with aashto m num type b free of burrs or projections restricting movement .
num num num provide dowels of at least grade num steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num in aashto m numm dowels may be cut from longer coated bars .
the department does not require epoxy coating of cut dowel bar ends .
provide epoxycoated tie bars in accordance with subsection num reinforcing steel bars .
tie bars may be cut from longer bars .
for existing pavement thicker than num in num mm provide and use numinch num mm diameter bars num in num mm long .
for existing pavement equal to or less than num in num mm thick provide and use numinch num mm diameter bars num in num mm long .
num dowel bar end caps provide and use nonmetallic dowel bar end caps with inside protrusions that allow for num in num mm movement of the bar at each end and prevent compression of the cap against the end of the bar during installation .
num dowel bar sleeves provide and use metal sleeves for dowel bars of an approved design to cover from num in to num in num mm to num mm of the dowel with a closed end and suitable stop to hold the end of the sleeve at least num in num mm from the end of the dowel bar .
num dowel bar release agent use a dowel bar release agent preapproved by the materials program .
num chairs for supporting and holding dowel bars in place provide epoxycoated or nonmetallic chair devices capable of ensuring a clearance of at least num in num mm between the bottom of the bar and the surface upon which the chair is placed and designed to prevent movement of the bar during placement of the grout .
num wire rope or wire cable provide wire rope or cable in accordance with aashto m num for the specified diameter and strength class .
num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num num num num num steel wire strand provide steel wire strand in accordance with astm a num for the nominal diameter grade and coating class specified .
num prestressing steel provide and use hightensile wire strand in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
with the approval of the state bridge engineer of submitted computations hightensile wire strand in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num hightensile wire in accordance with astm a num or hightensilestrength alloy bars meeting the requirements of this section may be substituted .
ensure that the crosssectional area of steel wire strand is within num in² num mm² of the nominal steel areas shown in table num of astm a num .
ensure that hightensilestrength alloy bars have been thermally stressrelieved to produce a suitable uniform metallurgical structure and individually proof tested during manufacturing to at least num percent of the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate strength .
provide bars in accordance with table num prestressing steel mechanical properties .
table num prestressing steel mechanical properties mechanical properties regular grade special grade ultimate tensile strength min .
psi mpa num num num num yield strength measured by the num extensionunderload method min .
psi mpa num num num num elongation min .
in num bar diameters after rupture num num reduction of area min .
num num modulus of elasticity at num of manufacturers min .
guaranteed ultimate strength min .
psi mpa num num num num num num num num num ensure that diameter tolerances are in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
use only one grade of bars for any individual member unless allowed otherwise by the engineer .
num wireenclosed riprap gabions and revet mattresses for enclosing riprap provide and use num in num in num mm num mm vmesh wovenwire fabric with double strand numgage num mm horizontal wires and numgage num mm singlestrand cross wires .
provide wire in accordance with astm a num class num or better .
for gabions and revet mattresses provide and use a woven wire fabric in accordance with astm a num style num .
provide galvanized numgage num mm smooth steel lacing and tie wire galvanized numgage num mm hog rings at numinch num mm spacing may be used to fasten ends sides and top panels .
for steel stakes provide numfoot num m crane rails nominal numinch num mm standard pipe or angles num in num in d in num mm num mm num mm .
rail pipe or angles free from rust or damage that could affect the stakes strength may be reused .
num reinforcing steel wire rope and wire enclosures num num num num num num section num fence and cattle guards num general fence requirements provide wire coated as follows num .
barbed and twisted barbless .
in accordance with aashto m num .
num .
woven wire fabric .
in accordance with aashto m num .
num .
industrial .
in accordance with aashto m num .
use one of the following num .
coating type a aluminum alloy wire and barbs only num .
coating type z coating class num or num .
coating type za coating class num .
use class c for industrial fence .
num barbed wire provide twowire strands with twopoint round barbs spaced at intervals no greater than num in num mm or fourpoint round barbs spaced at intervals no greater than num in num mm double wrapped in accordance with aashto m num either num .
design number numr or num .
design number numr .
use either num .
steel line wire and barbs num .
aluminum alloy wire and barbs .
use the same aluminum alloy for both line wire and barbs or num .
high tensile steel wire minimum breaking strength num lbf num kgf .
for braces tie wires and wire stays provide numgage or larger steel wire .
num fence and cattle guards num num num num num num num twisted barbless wire provide twisted wire consisting of two strands of numgage steel wire without barbs and in accordance with aashto m num .
num woven wire for rightofway and barrier fence provide woven wire fabric in accordance with aashto m num for no .
num grade num with stay wires num in num mm apart .
num industrial fence provide industrial fence fabric of the type specified tension wire posts required hardware and fittings in accordance with aashto mnum .
provide grade num posts .
if not specified aluminum or galvanized steel fabric posts hardware and fittings may be used .
alternatively posts braces rails and gate framing members may be steel pipe in accordance with astm a num astm a numm with a yield strength of at least num psi num mpa and with an outside diameter no less than specified for schedule num .
ensure that the outside is coated with at least num ozft² num g m² of zinc at least num microgramsft² num gm² of zinc chromate and acrylic at least num mil num µm thick .
ensure that the inside is coated with a zincrich coating containing at least num percent zinc powder by weight mass .
replace pipe with visible coating damage at no additional cost to the department .
num galvanized steel gates as specified provide galvanized steel gates of the indicated width at least num in num m high and with hinges and fittings .
provide a frame made of numdinch num mm outsidediameter galvanized pipe with all joints welded and braced where necessary .
provide numinch numinch num mm num mm vmesh fabric with doublestrand numgage num mm horizontal wires and at least numgage num mm cross or diagonal wires .
submit alternate or equivalent designs to the engineer for approval before ordering .
num fence and cattle guards num num num num num num provide cattle guard supports and detachable wings fabricated from steel meeting the above requirements or from structural steel in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
concrete footings may be precast .
provide bolts in accordance with astm a num or sae grade num .
num welded grill for welded grills provide units consisting of steel rails of the weight mass specified arcwelded with lowhydrogen electrodes to structural steel beams .
salvaged rails may be used if they are clean rustfree of uniform section and weight mass and at least num percent of the original weight mass .
for structural steel other than rails ensure accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
num nails and spikes provide nails and spikes in accordance with the national design specification published by the american wood council .
when specified provide hotdip galvanized nails and spikes of common diameter and length .
num fence and cattle guards num num num cattle guard units num prefabricated for prefabricated cattleguards ensure the provision and use of crossbar members made from carbonsteel structural tubing in accordance with astm a num grade a or b or from coldformed hightensile lowalloy steel plate with good weldability and in accordance with table num steel plate properties .
table num steel plate properties num mechanical property requirements yield point min .
num psi num mpa min .
tensile strength num psi num mpa num num num fence posts num wood for wood fencing materials provide and use posts cross braces and deadmen cut from sound growing douglas fir lodgepole pine southern yellow pine or ponderosa pine trees .
ensure that posts have been machinepeeled with the outer bark removed completely and no remaining strip of inner bark is wider than num in num mm or longer than num in num mm .
for line posts ensure the wood has no seasoning check wider than d in num mm dry heart sap rot rotten knots or more than one numinch num mm crook measured from end to end .
ensure the same for posts in end and brace panels but allow no crook greater than num in num mm .
ensure that tapering does not exceed num in ft num mmm .
ensure that posts are treated and certificates and reports thereof are submitted in accordance with section num structural timber and lumber .
num steel provide steel posts fittings hardware and other steel appurtenances of standard commercial grade manufactured in accordance with current standard practice and painted with an approved dark green paint .
the top num in num mm of posts may be painted with the suppliers identification paint .
num recycled plastic num general the department will use these definitions in reference to fence posts made from recycled plastic num .
recycled plastic .
plastics made of postconsumer material recovered industrial material or both processed as necessary to make usable products .
num .
postconsumer material .
used products generated by a business or consumer that have been separated from solid waste for collection recycling and redisposition .
num fence and cattle guards num num num num num num num fence and cattle guards num num num .
recovered material .
materials and byproducts recovered or diverted from solid waste not including materials and byproducts generated from and commonly used within an original manufacturing process .
for recycledplastic posts ensure the use of at least num percent recycled plastic by weight mass and of a uniform composition throughout the post with no more than num percent voids do not use posts with a void exceeding num percent of the diameter or side of the post .
provide brown posts that are free of cracking chipping flaking peeling or splintering .
the department will allow only chemicals including fillers and coloring agents designed to inhibit photo degradation biologicalbiochemical decomposition insect infestation or burning .
num certification in addition to meeting the requirements of subsection num manufactured products certifications ensure that for each lot shipped the manufacturer certifies the following num .
the source of the recycled plastic waste including its state of origin and its type consumer or industrial num .
the total percent of recycled plastic in the final product and num .
the quantity and size of posts .
submit certifications to the engineer at least num calendar days before installation .
num testing for each different type of recycledplastic post e.g .
crosssection size and shape the department will use an acceptance lot size of no more than one thousand posts .
provide a sample of at least one additional post per lot or a minimum of one post per project for independent laboratory testing and certification .
the department will not accept posts in a lot until the lot has been approved do not ship lots to the project until the sample has been tested and approved .
ensure that posts are delivered in wrapped bundles of no more than num posts and that each bundle is marked with the lot number .
num num num num num physical requirements num .
dimension and shape .
when providing recycledplastic posts ensure the same dimensions shape and length as specified for wood .
for round posts ensure a minimum diameter within num in num mm of that specified .
num .
straightness .
provide and use recycledplastic posts in accordance with the straightness criteria specified in subsection num wood .
num .
flexural strength .
provide and use recycledplastic posts in accordance with the specifications for flexural strength in the western wood products association wwpa standard grading rules for posts and timbers for select structural grade timber with maximum or extreme fiber stress of at least num psi num kpa .
test posts in accordance with astm d num .
num .
surface finish .
provide and use posts with a homogeneous smooth surface finish relatively free of surface imperfections .
num fasteners for attaching wire fence to recycledplastic posts provide and use fasteners that connect at predrilled pilot holes do not use staples or nails .
num num fence and cattle guards num num guardrail and barrier num num num section num guardrail and barrier num corrugated metal beam rail for rail elements and terminal sections provide and use numgage num mm corrugated steel sheet beams in accordance with aashto m num type num class a .
num guardrail hardware for guardrails and barriers ensure the provision and use of hardware galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating .
for bridge rail connections guardrail median barrier and box beam splice connections provide and use bolts in accordance with astm a num astm a numm provide and use other bolts washers fittings and accessories in accordance with astm a num grade a .
provide and use wire rope or wire cable in accordance with subsection num wire rope or wire cable .
num box beam barrier for box beam barriers provide and use rail elements made from tubing in accordance with astm a num grade a or b provide and use other structural steel elements in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating .
ensure that galvanized bolts thread easily into nuts on the splice plates .
num corrugated beam guardrail selfoxidizing for selfoxidizing guardrail elements terminals anchorages and hardware except reflector tabs and bolts provide and use unpainted ungalvanized blast cleaned dry steel .
provide rail elements made of corrugated steel sheet beams in accordance with aashto m num type iv class a as modified here .
for all components including hardware ensure the provision and use of weathering steel in accordance with table num weathering steel chemical composition requirements .
num num table num weathering steel chemical composition requirements num guardrail and barrier num num num chemical heat analysis carbon num max .
manganese num to num phosphorus num to num sulfur num max .
silicon num to num copper num to num chromium num to num nickel num max .
the department will allow the use of steel not in accordance with table num weathering steel chemical composition requirements if given certification that the proposed alternative steel has a corrosive resistance of at least four times that of carbon steel with a maximum copper content of num percent or twice that of carbon steel with a copper content from num to num percent .
for beam rails ensure the use of sheet steel in accordance with astm a num type num the sheet may be in coils or cut lengths when corrugated .
do not allow foreign material to contact steel surfaces .
ensure that parts are placed during shipment to allow free drainage and air circulation on the surfaces .
provide and use retroreflector tabs nuts and bolts made of steel meeting the requirements in previous paragraphs astm a num astm a numm or other acceptable steel galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating .
num num wyoming box beam end terminal for guardrails num steel components ensure that steel components used in fabricating wyoming boxbeam end terminals wybet are galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating with corners edges and burrs ground smooth before galvanization .
ensure that the inner rail impact head and steel spacer slide smoothly and freely inside the outer rail for their full length of travel .
correct warping caused by welding or fabrication to ensure a loose fit .
instead of galvanization the intermediate spacer may be shop painted with two coats of zincrich paint .
num rubber stops for rubber stops in wybets ensure the provision and use of hard rubber in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii section num for elastomeric bearing pads of rubber commonly used for temporary roadway rumble strips or of an approved equal .
num composite tubes num general for use in wybets ensure the provision of fiberglassandepoxy composite material in the following elements num .
stage num tube .
a numinch num mm diameter tube with a wall thickness of num in num mm .
num .
stage num tube .
a numinch num mm diameter tube with a wall thickness of num in num mm .
cut tubes to the specified length leaving both ends of each tube with neat tulips serrations of the proper dimensions for the specified stage so as to form four symmetric points at each end do not overcut .
num guardrail and barrier num num num num num num general properties for composite tube materials ensure that tubes are manufactured using the pultrusion process that they consist of a glassfiberreinforced resin matrix with a glass to resin ratio of approximately num that the resin consists of isophthallic polyester and that the glass reinforcement includes the following num .
a surface mat used on exterior surfaces for chemical resistance and containment of other reinforcement fibers num .
continuous glass strand rovings used internally for longitudinal strength and num .
continuous strand mats used internally for transverse strength .
ensure also that the composite material is in accordance with table num mechanical property requirements composite material .
table num mechanical property requirements composite material num guardrail and barrier num property requirements ultimate tensile strength longitudinal coupon num psi num mpa transverse coupon num psi num mpa full section in bending num psi num mpa ultimate compressive strength longitudinal coupon num psi num mpa transverse coupon num psi num mpa full section in bending num psi num mpa ultimate shear strength num psi num mpa ultimate breaking strength num psi num mpa modulus of elasticity full beam section in bending num num psi num num mpa barcol hardness num num num num guardrail and barrier property limits average of num test specimens each individual test specimen stage num tube average crush force fa num num kips num num kn num num kips num num kn max .
compressive force p num kips num kn num kips num kn stage num tube average crush force fa num num kips num num kn num num kips num num kn max .
compressive force p num kips num kn num kips num kn num crush force characteristics ensure that the composite tubes for wybets possess static energy dissipation properties in accordance with table num static energy dissipation property limits composite tubes .
table num static energy dissipation property limits composite tubes definitions of the average crush force fa and maximum compressive force p are contained in figure num static crush test pultruded fiberglass tube .
determine the average crush force based on crush forces from num in to num in num mm to num mm of crush determine the maximum compressive force between num in and num in num mm to num mm of crush .
num num num num guardrail and barrier figure num static crush test pultruded fiberglass tube displacementin forcekn displacementmm forcekips numinnummm numinnummm numinnummm num num test procedures ensure the provision and use of composite tubes with the specified energy dissipation properties by using static compressive testing procedures performed as follows num .
using an independent laboratory test at least three randomly selected samples one each from the beginning middle and end of the tubes production run .
num for each test use a numinch num mm length of tube with a tulip cut num in num mm long in one end and caps on both ends .
num .
place the tube in the testing machine such that the crush force will be applied along the tubes longitudinal axis and centered under the loading head .
num .
statically crush the tube at a rate of num inmin num mmmin for a total crush length or displacement of at least num in num mm .
if the testing machine has insufficient stroke to crush the specimen in one continuous application crush in stages with a crush length of at least num in num mm for each stage .
num guardrail posts num general for guardrails ensure that wood posts are cut from sound growing trees of the species and with the ratings indicated for the intended use .
for both wood and metal ensure the provision and use of posts in accordance with table num num guardrail posts .
num guardrail and barrier num num num num guardrail and barrier post designation allowable section allowable material type and grade standard wbeam guardrail post num in num in num mm num mmnum douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num num in num in num mm num mm lodgepole pine p t no .
num ponderosa pine p t no .
num num in num mm round douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num lodgepole pine p t no .
num ponderosa pine p t no .
num w num num num astm a num astm a num steel astm a numm astm a numm steel transition post num in num mm round num douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num lodgepole pine p t no .
num ponderosa pine p t no .
num crt post num in num in num mm num mmnum douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num bct post num in num in num mm num mmnum douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num sas only wybet wybet mb post num num in num in num mm num mmnum douglas firlarch p t no .
num southern yellow pine p t no .
num sas only table num guardrail posts num ensure a minimum stress grade of num psi num mpa extreme fiber bending .
num w num num may be substituted .
num num in num in num mm num mm may be substituted .
num num guardrail and barrier num num num wood posts ensure that wooden posts and blocks for guardrails are treated and certificates and reports thereof submitted in accordance with section num structural timber and lumber .
num round posts provide and use decayfree posts as follows num .
machinepeeled with the outer bark removed and no remaining strip of inner bark wider than num in num mm or longer than num in num mm num .
having no seasoning check wider than num in num mm or deeper than num in num mm for the full post length and no wider than num in num mm or deeper than num in num mm through the bolt hole num .
with knots that are sound and tight allow only one with a maximum num in num mm in diameter per num ft num m of post length num .
without multiple crooks num .
with no more than one halftwist in the grain for the full post length num .
tapered so that no difference in diameters exceeds num in num mm over num ft num m of post length and num .
without scars at the ground line or scars longer than num in num mm or wider than num in num mm trim allowable scars .
num dimensioned posts and blocks for timber posts and blocks provide as rough sawn or surface four sides snums .
num steel posts for steel guardrail posts provide and use in the specified length and section in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and galvanized in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm .
num num num section num water num water num general provide and use clean water free of oil salt acid alkali algae sugar vegetable or other deleterious substances .
num water for concrete for concrete provide and use mixing or curing water in accordance with table num properties of water for concrete do not neutralize by chemical additives .
the engineer may allow the use of water known to be potable .
table num properties of water for concrete num water num num property specification min max chloride ion ppm astm d num method b num hydrogen ion num ph aashto t num acidity method b num num property specification max autoclave expansion aashto t num num num vicat time of setting minutes aashto t num num num initial num final compressive strength lbin² mpa aashto t num num num reduction num if ph is not within range compare mortar specimens prepared from source and distilled water in accordance with table num properties of mortar specimens .
table num properties of mortar specimens num determine difference in results source distilled nearest num .
num determine difference in results source distilled nearest num minute .
num determine the percent reduction in compressive strength as equal to num source distilleddistilled nearest num .
num num structural metals and metal castings section num structural metals and metal castings num structural steel ensure the provision and use of structural carbon steel in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
ensure the provision and use of highstrength lowalloy structural steel in accordance with astm a num grade num or numw astm a numm grade num or numw .
ensure the provision and use of highperformance steel in accordance with astm a num grade hpsnumw astm a numm grade hpsnumw .
on main girders for highway bridges ensure the provision and use of structural steel for wshape rolled beams webs and tension flanges of weldedplate girders and splice plates in accordance with the impact test requirements of astm a num astm a numm table snum for zone num .
the department defines tension flanges as the bottom flanges of simplespan girders and all flanges of continuousspan girders .
num highstrength bolts and fasteners num bolts nuts and washers ensure the provision and use of highstrength bolts nuts and washers as follows num .
bolts .
in accordance with astm a num astm a numm except with a maximum rockwell c hardness of num .
for unpainted astm a num grade numw or hpsnumw astm a numm grade numw or hpsnumw steel use only type num bolts .
mark bolts a num and with a symbol identifying the manufacturer for type num bolts underline the mark as follows a num .
type num bolts may be marked with three radial lines spaced at num degree intervals .
mark metric bolts as described in astm a numm .
num num num num num num num .
nuts .
in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and the following num .
lubricate galvanized nuts with clean lubricant dry to the touch and dyed to contrast with the galvanizing color .
num .
classed and finished in accordance with table num nut class and finish requirements .
table num nut class and finish requirements num structural metals and metal castings bolt type and finish class type num plain uncoated a num c plain class nums type num galvanized a num dh galv .
class nums type num plain weathering a num cnum class numsnum num .
mark nuts with the class shown above and a symbol identifying the manufacturer .
num .
washers .
except loadindicating washers in accordance with astm f num astm f numm and marked with symbols identifying the manufacturer .
mark type num weatheringgrade washers with a num .
num .
loadindicating washers .
type num in accordance with astm f num astm f numm and marked with a symbol identifying the type and manufacturer lot number or private label distribution as appropriate .
use galvanized washers for galvanized bolts .
use epoxycoated washers for type num bolts .
num .
twistoff bolts .
with domed heads and the entire assembly including bolt nut and washer in accordance with astm f num .
use only type num assemblies for unpainted astm a num grade numw or hpsnumw astm a numm grade numw or hpsnumw structural steel .
provide nuts and washers for twistoff bolts from the same manufacturer as the bolts and lubricated in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num num structural metals and metal castings num .
lockpin and collar fasteners .
may be substituted for high strength bolts if they meet the material manufacturing and chemical composition requirements of astm a num astm a numm the mechanical property requirements of the same specification in fullsize tests and have a body diameter and bearing area under the head not less than those provided by the bolt of the same nominal dimensions .
they may differ in other dimensions .
ensure that each fastener provides a solidshank body of sufficient diameter to provide tensile and shear strengths equaling or exceeding that of equivalent astm a num astm a numm bolts .
use lock pins with a coldforged round head on one end an annular breakneck groove and annular pull grooves on the other end and a shank length suitable for the material thickness being fastened provide each fastener with a steel locking collar of proper size for the shank diameter used that when coldswayed into the locking grooves forms a head for the grooved end of the fastener after the pull section has been removed .
provide a flangedtype collar with a tab to retain the collar on the pin during installation that is a standard product of an established lockpinandcollarfastener manufacturer mark fasteners with the grade designation and a symbol identifying the manufacturer .
num .
dimensions .
bolts and nuts in accordance with ansi bnumm and bnumm and table num bolt and nut dimensions .
num table num bolt and nut dimensions num structural metals and metal castings circular washers in mm bolt size d maximum outside diameter minimum diameter of hole thickness minimum maximum e num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num provide hardened circular washers in accordance with astm f num astm f numm and table num hardened circular washer dimensions .
table num hardened circular washer dimensions heavy hexagon structural bolts in mm nut dimensions heavy hexagon nuts in mm bolt size d width across flats f height h thread length t width across flats w height h e num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num num nume num num num nume num nume num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num structural metals and metal castings num testing num .
bolts .
proofload test bolts in accordance with astm f num astm f numm method num at least as frequently as specified in astm a num num astm a numm num .
the department requires wedge tests on fullsize bolts in accordance with astm f num astm f numm num .
test after galvanizing when applicable and as frequently as specified in astm a num num astm a numm num .
when providing galvanized bolts determine the zinccoating thickness by measurements taken on the wrench flats or on top of the bolt head .
num .
nuts .
proofload test nuts in accordance with astm f num astm f numm num at least as frequently as specified in astm a num astm a numm num .
for galvanized nuts test after galvanizing overlapping and lubricating .
when providing galvanized nuts determine the zinccoating thickness by measurements taken on the wrench flats .
num .
washers .
when providing and using galvanized washers perform hardness testing after galvanizing and after the zinc coating has been removed .
measure the zinccoating thickness .
num .
assemblies .
perform rotationalcapacity tests on black or galvanized bolt nut and washer assemblies after galvanizing for galvanized assemblies before shipping .
ensure that each production lot combination of bolts nuts and washers is tested as an assembly and that at least two assemblies are tested per rotationalcapacity lot .
assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
assemble the bolt nut and washer in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device .
ensure a minimum rotation from a snugtight condition num percent of the required installation tension in accordance with table num minimum rotation from snug tight condition .
num table num minimum rotation from snug tight condition num structural metals and metal castings diameter in mm required installation tension kip kn turntest tension kip kn e num num num num num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num minimum rotation bolt length numº num times the diameter of the bolt numº num diameters up to num diameters of the bolt numº num diameters of the bolt ensure that the tension reached at the above rotation is at least num times the required installation tension .
use an installation and turntest tension in accordance with table num installation and turntest tension .
table num installation and turntest tension num num structural metals and metal castings num num after exceeding the required installation tension above take and record one reading of tension and torque .
ensure that the torque value does not exceed the following torque max num pd where torque max measured torque in footpounds newtonmeters p measured bolt tension in pounds kilonewtons d bolt diameter in feet millimeters bolts too short to assemble in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator may be tested in a steel joint compute the maximum torque requirement using a value of p equal to the turntest tension shown in the table above .
examine bolts and nuts for stripping or failure ensure that the nut fingerturns on and off the thread being tested .
assemblies with evidence of stripping fail the test .
num reporting ensure that required test results as well as the location and date of testing are recorded on the appropriate document .
num witnessing tests need not be witnessed by an inspection agency ensure that the manufacturer or distributor performing the tests certifies the accuracy of results recorded .
num additional bolts for testing provide additional bolts for testing by the materials program in accordance with table num required test bolts .
num num table num required test bolts num structural metals and metal castings num num num number of bolts of each length required for project number of additional test bolts required num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num over num num num documentation provide mill test reports mtr showing where the material was melted and manufactured for mild steel used in manufacturing bolts nuts and washers .
for all bolts nuts and washers supplied provide a manufacturercertified test report mctr showing results for required tests .
ensure that the mctr provided by the manufacturer performing rotational capacity tests includes the following num .
lot number of each item tested num .
the rotationalcapacity lot number assigned to each combination of lots tested num .
the results of required rotationalcapacity tests num .
the location and date of testing num .
the manufacturing location of bolt assembly components and num .
a statement that the test results on the mctr meet the requirements .
num num structural metals and metal castings num num num num for bolt assembly components ensure that the distributorcertified test report dctr includes the mctr the rotationalcapacity test may be performed by a distributor instead of a manufacturer with results reported on the dctr .
num shipping ensure that bolts nuts and washers from each rotationalcapacity lot are shipped in the same container .
if there is only one productionlot number for each size of nuts and washers they may be shipped in separate containers .
permanently mark each container with the rotationalcapacity lot number to allow identification at any stage before installation .
ensure the provision and receipt of two signed copies of the appropriate mtr mctr or dctr with each shipment .
num sheet metal ensure the provision and use of sheet metal in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and astm a num astm a numm coating designation gnum znum .
num automaticallyendwelded studs ensure the provision and use of automaticallyendwelded studs in accordance with aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code section num and with mechanical properties in accordance with the requirements for type b studs .
num steel pipe ensure the provision and use of steel pipe in accordance with astm a num .
provide grade b for pipe with a nominal diameter greater than num in num mm for smaller diameters provide type f. num bolts and fasteners other than highstrength bolts ensure the provision and use of bolts and fasteners in accordance with astm a num grade a astm f num class num or sae grade num with coarse threads .
num num num num steel piles for steel piles provide rolled steel sections made from structural steel in accordance with astm a num grade num num or numw astm a numm grade num num numw .
ensure camber and sweep within the allowed mill tolerance .
if used ensure that splicer sections are made of steel meeting the same requirements as the corresponding piles .
when specified provide pile points made of cast steel in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num or astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num the state bridge engineer may approve alternative materials .
num sheet piling provide and use sheet piling made from structural carbon steel in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
num bridge railing ensure the provision and use of structuraltube railing made from structural tubing in accordance with astm a num or astm a num grade a or b .
if astm a num structuraltube is used ensure railing is tested in accordance with astm e num after galvanizing ensure a testing temperature of num ºf num ºc .
ensure six specimens from the longest side of the tube are used to determine the percentage shear area do not use specimens containing a weld .
the department will not accept material in which the average percent shear area is less than num .
provide standard and expansion sleeves made from structural steel in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num and galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating .
provide posts made from structural steel in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
for bridge railing provide anchor bolts in accordance with subsection num highstrength anchor bolts .
provide anchor bolts posts and railing galvanized or cadmiumcoated in accordance with subsection num galvanizing and subsection num galvanized coating .
num num structural metals and metal castings num num num num num num num num num num structural metals and metal castings num num num num num for concrete anchorage provide and use unpainted nongalvanized hardware consisting of steel bars in accordance with astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
num bronze bearing plates when specified provide selflubricating bronze bearing plates made of cast bronze alloy in accordance with aashto m num astm b num copper alloy uns no .
cnum with contact surfaces finished in the direction of movement to a maximum roughness of no .
num num µm in accordance with ansi b num .
ensure that the lubricated surface has trepanned recesses and that hydraulic pressure has been use to press a lubricating compound made of graphite metallic substance and binder into the recesses to form dense nonplastic lubricating inserts comprising at least num percent of the plates total area .
ensure that steel surfaces in contact with bronze plates are coated during assembly with an approved lubricant .
ensure that the coefficient of friction between contact surfaces does not exceed num .
num steel pins and rollers for pins and rollers with diameters equal to or less than num in num mm provide and use in accordance with aashto m num grades num to num inclusive .
ensure a minimum rockwell scale b hardness of num or the development of a minimum tensile strength of num psi num mpa with a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa .
num steel castings for highwaybridge components provide and use steel castings of the class specified in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
num gray iron castings provide gray iron castings in accordance with astm a num class no .
numb true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects affecting their intended use .
ensure that castings are boldlyfilleted at angles with sharp and perfect arises and with clean smooth uniform surfaces .
num num galvanized coating as specified ensure that products made from rolled pressed and forged steel shapes plates bars and c in num mm and thicker strip are zinc hotdipped galvanized coated in accordance with aashto m num .
as specified provide and use iron and steel hardware galvanized in accordance with astm a num astm a numm or astm b num or cadmiumcoated in accordance with astm b num class num type ii or iii ensure that type ii cadmium coating is bronze or brown .
num preformed fabric pads provide and use preformed fabric pads made of multiple layers of cotton duck impregnated and bound with rubber compressed to uniform thickness and in accordance with military specification milcnum .
ensure the use of enough plies to achieve the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing and that finished pads withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of laminations of at least num psi num mpa without detrimental extrusion or reduction in thickness .
num elastomeric bearing pads ensure laminated elastomeric bearings conform with aashto m num appendix xnum .
ensure the use of gradenum numdurometer hardness elastomer .
num welding materials num general for manual shieldedmetal arc welding provide and use electrodes in accordance with aashtoaws anum for e num enum or enum electrodes .
for submerged arc welding provide and use electrodes and fluxes in accordance with aashtoaws anum for flux classifications fnumxnumexxx fnumxnumexxx fnumxnumexxx fnumxnumexxx or fnumxnumexxx .
for fluxcored arc welding provide and use electrodes in accordance with aws anum for enumxtnum enumxtnum enumxtnum or enumxtnum electrodes .
the engineer will approve alternative electrodes if the mctr shows that their mechanical properties tensile strength yield strength elongation and impact properties in accordance with one of the abovelisted classifications .
num num num structural metals and metal castings num num num num num num num num structural metals and metal castings num for welding bare unpainted steel in accordance with astm a num grade numw or hpsnumw astm a numm grade numw or hpsnumw provide and use electrodes in accordance with section num of aashtoaws dnum .
provide a classification of electrodes and electrodeflux combinations that produces weld metal with a minimumimpact strength of num j charpy vnotch at a temperature of num ºf num ºc or less .
provide certified copies of test reports for all tests specified in aashtoaws anum anum anum or anum whichever is applicable made on the electrodes or fluxelectrode combinations of the same class size and brand manufactured using the same process and materials as those provided .
if the electrodes used are of a size for which tests are not required by applicable specifications provide test reports for electrodes of the size nearest and of the same classification and brand .
the tests may be for process qualification or quality control .
ensure that the tests were done less than one year before the manufacture of the electrodes and fluxes provided and that the report includes all pertinent information concerning the required tests .
provide certification that the gas or gas mixture used for fluxcored arc welding is suitable for the intended application and meets the dew point requirement .
when galvanizing weldments after welding provide and use a type or brand of filler metal that will deposit weld metal with a maximum silicon content of num percent to avoid possible weld disintegration during galvanizing .
for submergedarc welding provide and use a flux that is nonhygroscopic dry and free of foreign contamination .
num high performance steel for welding steel in accordance with astm a num grade hpsnumw astm a numm grade hpsnumw the following apply num .
use only submergedarc and shieldedmetal arc processes .
num .
use consumables satisfactory for the lowerstrength steel listed in table num of aashtoaws dnum when welding to astm a num grade num or numw astm a numm grade num or numw steel .
ensure that consumables are in accordance with diffusible hydrogen requirements of the aashtoaws fillermetal specifications optional supplemental moistureresistance designator hnum or hnum .
num num num num num num num num .
for fillet and fullpenetration welds joining pieces of likestrength steels provide and use consumables in accordance with the aashto guide specifications for highway bridge fabrication with hpsnumw steel for matching strength welds .
to use alternate consumables submit a request for approval including documentation of successful welding in accordance with aashtoaws dnum and diffusible hydrogen tests as described in article num of aashtoaws dnum that conclude the deposited weld metal under proposed fabrication shop conditions has a diffusible hydrogen level of hnum or less .
num .
use welding procedures qualified in accordance with article num of aashtoaws dnum .
perform qualification tests for strength toughness and ductility and evaluate results in accordance with article num of aashtoaws dnum .
include ultrasonic testing in accordance with aashtoaws section num part c and evaluate in accordance with table num of aashtoaws dnum .
disregard indications found at the interface of the backing bar .
num highstrength anchor bolts as specified provide and use castin highstrength anchor bolts or threaded anchor rods in accordance with astm a num supply astm a num nuts of appropriate grade and finish to match the anchor bolts aashto m numm or astm f num class num with astm a numm class num nuts .
for groutedin highstrength anchor bolts provide and use swedge bolts or threaded rod in accordance with astm a num grade bnum supply nuts in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
ensure that galvanized bolts have an ultimate tensile strength no greater than num psi num num num kpa .
num anchor bolts other than highstrength provide and use anchor bolts in accordance with astm a num astm f num supply nuts in accordance with astm a num and of a matching grade and finish .
ensure that galvanized bolts are hotdipped .
structural metals and metal castings num num num num num num structural metals and metal castings num num num frames grates and covers use cast or fabricated structural designed for an aashto hsnum loading .
for fabricated grates use structural steel in accordance with subsection num structural steel .
the department will allow the einch num mm diameter cross bars to be fillet welded resistence welded or electroforged to the bearing bars .
num num section num signs and traffic devices num sheet aluminum for sign panels for sign panels ensure the provision of sheet aluminum made as follows num .
using numhnum or numtnum alloy in accordance with astm b num astm b numm num .
kept uncontaminated after cleaning and etching and before the application of retroreflective sheeting num .
surfacetreated with a chemical conversion method num .
anodized or chemicallytreated by an approved process and num .
using chemical immersion baths of adequate capacity for total immersion maintained within limits of operatingsolution strength by reliable control methods .
num aluminum alloy channels and tubing ensure the provision and use of aluminum alloy channels and tubing in accordance with astm b num astm b numm for alloy numtnum .
num retroreflectors ensure the provision and use of a methacrylate lens in accordance with astm d num grade num .
for delineators or markers provide retroreflectors consisting of a round retroreflective unit housed in an embossed frame with a single grommeted mounting hole .
provide lenses that are num .
colorless or of the color specified with approximately num in² num mm² of retroreflective surface and num .
fused under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter and the center mounting hole to an opaque back to form a unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor .
num signs and traffic devices num num num num num num signs and traffic devices ensure the provision and use of a retroreflector housing made num .
of numo aluminum num in num µm thick num .
with embossed reinforcement ribs num .
in diameter approximately num in num mm in depth num in num mm and num .
with a numinch num mm inside diameter aluminum grommet expanded in the retroreflector mounting hole .
num definitions the department will use the following definitions in reference to retroreflectors num .
entrance angle .
the angle at the retroreflector face between a line perpendicular to the face and the direction of light incident on the reflector .
num .
observation angle .
the angle at the retroreflector face between an observers line of sight and the direction of light incident on the retroreflector .
num .
specific luminance .
the candelas returned at the chosen observation angle by a retroreflector with num in² num mm² of retroreflecting surface for each lux of illuminance at the retroreflector this term will be used in reference to optical testing of retroreflectors for letters symbols and accessories .
num .
specific intensity .
the candelas returned at the chosen observation angle by a centermount numinch num mm diameter retroreflector for each lux of illuminance at the retroreflector .
num optical testing optically test retroreflectors using procedures performed as follows num .
position the retroreflector num ft num m from a single uniformly bright light source with an effective diameter of num in num mm operated at normal efficiency .
num num num num num signs and traffic devices num num num num num .
measure the return light using a photoelectric photometer with a minimum sensitivity of num num footcandle num µlxmm of scale division with a receiver aperture diameter of num in num mm and shielded to eliminate stray light .
num .
maintain a distance measured between the centers of the return light source and the aperture of num in num mm for an observation angle of num degree of num in num mm for an observation angle of num degrees and of num in num mm for an observation angle of num degrees .
num .
spin the retroreflector to average the orientation effect .
if using a test distance other than num ft num m modify the source and aperture dimensions and the distance between return light source and aperture in the same proportion as the test distance .
ensure that the specific luminance of crystal retroreflectors for cutout letters symbols and accessories is in accordance with or exceeds table num specific luminance requirements crystal measured while retroreflectors are spinning .
table num specific luminance requirements crystal observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees specific luminance fcin² cdm²lx num num num num num num num num for yellow reflectors ensure a minimum specific luminance equal to num percent of the value for crystal .
ensure that the specific intensity of retroreflectors for delineators or markers is in accordance with or exceeds table num specific intensity requirements measured while the retroreflectors are spinning num num signs and traffic devices num num num table num specific intensity requirements observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees specific intensity fc cdlx crystal yellow num num num num num num num num num num num num num if more than num percent of the samples tested fail to reach the above values test a resample the engineer will reject the lot if more than num percent of the resample fails .
ensure the provision and use of retroflectors that have been tested for adequate sealing against dust and water using procedures performed as follows num .
submerge samples in room temperature water and subject to a vacuum of num in of mercury num kpa for five minutes .
num .
restore atmospheric pressure and leave samples submerged for water intake .
num .
examine for the presence of liquid water or fogging inside the reflector .
num .
if more than num percent of the samples tested fail exhibit the presence of moisture inside the reflector test a resample the engineer will reject the lot if more than num percent of the resample fails .
give the engineer three copies of the manufacturers certification that the retroreflectors provided meet these requirements .
when asked provide at least five samples randomly selected by the engineer from each shipment of each type of retroreflector at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will approve retroreflectors based on the manufacturers certification or tests performed on samples as provided in previous paragraphs .
num num retroreflective sheeting for the type specified provide and use an encapsulated glass bead encapsulated prismatic or nonmetallic microprismatic reflective material precoated with adhesive backing protected by a treated plastic liner and in accordance with aashto m num astm d num .
num temporary traffic control devices for temporary traffic control ensure the provision and use of category i and iii devices made with type iii retroreflective sheeting ensure that category ii reboundable devices are made with reboundable type iii retroreflective sheeting .
num metal delineator posts ensure the provision and use of metal delineator posts of the shape specified rolled from structural steel rerolled rail steel or new billet steel with a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa minimum ultimate tensile strength of num psi num mpa and a weight mass of at least num lbft num kgm .
ensure that posts have been cleaned and painted with two coats of baked black enamel .
to attach retroreflectors to posts provide an openend blind rivet .
for rivet expansion provide a cadmiumplated steel breakstemtype mandrel that leaves the mandrel head in the rivet body .
when specified paint the top num in num mm of posts with a white or silver retroreflective liquid coating consisting of crystal retroreflective elements suspended in a solventdispersed vehicle and with a specific intensity in accordance with table num specific intensity requirements .
table num specific intensity requirements num signs and traffic devices num num num num num observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees specific intensity fcft² cdlx num num num num num num num num num num signs and traffic devices num num num num roadway sign supports for roadway signs ensure the provision and use of steel parts including posts galvanized in accordance with subsection num galvanized coating and subsection num galvanizing .
ensure the provision of steel pipe in accordance with astm a num astm a numm schedule num grade b and of steel plates and shapes in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
for sign posts made of tubularsteel ensure the use of coldrolled sheet steel of the gauge specified and in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and astm a num astm a numm grade a or of hotrolled carbon sheet steel of the gage specified and in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and with a minimum yield of num psi num mpa .
ensure that all coldrolled sheet steel including connecting hardware is hotdipped galvanized in accordance with astm a num astm a numm and astm a num astm a numm coating designation gnum znum if welding after galvanization zinccoat corner welds after scarfing .
ensure that post tubing made of hotrolled carbon sheetsteel is triplecoated with an inline application of hotdipped zinc galvanization .
ensure that the inside surface receives a double inline application of a full zincbased organic coating .
if welding occurs after galvanization zinccoat corner welds after scarfing .
num overhead sign supports for overhead signs ensure the provision and use of structural steel shapes and plates in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
use steel pipe in accordance with astm a num astm a nummgrade b for pipe with a nominal diameter greater than num in num mm and type f for smaller diameters .
the department will allow the use of pipe with the chemical and mechanical properties of astm a num astm a numm and the dimensional tolerances of astm a num astm a numm .
num bolts and fasteners for use with traffic signs and devices ensure the provision of num .
bolts and fasteners in accordance with astm a num or sae grade num num .
highstrength bolts nuts and washers in accordance with subsection num high strength bolts and fasteners num num num num .
countersunk flathead elevator bolts for plywood sign panels num .
coverings over bolt heads on signs of the same material and color as the sign and num .
sign bolts galvanized or plated in accordance with subsection num galvanized coating .
num plywood sign panels and barricades for sign and barricade panels ensure the provision and use of highdensity exteriorgrade aa num overlaid fir plywood of the thickness specified and in accordance with us department of commerce product standard psinum .
num treatedtimber sign posts num general ensure that timber posts for signs are treated and certificates and reports thereof including boring reports submitted in accordance with section num structural timber and lumber .
num dimensional timber posts ensure the provision and use of roughsawn wood cut from live growing trees of lodgepole pine ponderosa pine douglas fir or southern yellow pine graded in accordance with subsection num structural timber and lumber and supplied in accordance with table num dimensional timber post grades .
table num dimensional timber post grades num signs and traffic devices num num num post size grade num in num in num mm num mm no .
num structural light framing num in num in num mm num mm no .
num structural joists and planks num in num in num mm num mm and larger select structural posts and timbers num num signs and traffic devices num num num num round timber posts ensure the provision and use of posts cut from sound seasoned lodgepole pine ponderosa pine douglas fir or southern yellow pine then airdried or artificially seasoned with no reverse crooks and sufficiently straight that a line drawn between the geometric centers of the top and bottom does not fall outside the body of the post .
provide machinepeeled posts with no outer bark and no remaining strip of inner bark wider than num in num mm or longer than num in num mm .
ensure that the sum of the diameter of all knots larger than num in num mm in any numinch num mm section of post does not exceed num in num mm .
ensure that posts are free of rot insectdamaged holes larger than c in num mm and checks wider than num in num mm .
ensure posts are tapered so that no difference in diameters exceeds num in num mm over a length of num ft num m. ensure that shakes measure no more than onehalf the post diameter that shakes on the butt surface are not within num in num mm of the side surface and there is no more than a onehalf twist in the grain in any numfoot num m length of post .
ensure that top and butt surfaces of posts are square .
ensure that numinch num mm posts have a gain measured from the top of the post not exceeding num in num mm per num ft num m of length ensure that larger posts have a continuous gain for the entire post length not exceeding in num mm .
ensure that post sizing is in accordance with section num structural timber and lumber .
num num section num structural timber and lumber num structural timber and lumber ensure the provision and use of structural timber and lumber as specified including species and grade .
when specifying surfaced lumber the department uses nominal sizes in accordance with american lumber standards .
ensure the provision and use of timber and lumber that has been graded before shipment and in accordance with the current standard grading and dressing rules of the west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib wwpa or other agencies approved by the board of review of the american lumber standards committee in accordance with us department of commerce product standard psnum .
provide redwood in accordance with grading requirements of the california redwood association for construction heart .
for treating timber and lumber ensure the use of a facility and method that has been approved by the department unless assay reports for each charge of material are supplied in addition to certifications treating reports and boring reports .
the department does not require treatment of redwood .
ensure that num .
treatment is performed in accordance with american woodpreservers association awpa standards cnum and cnum apply standard cnum for the retention rate num .
products not listed in cnum are treated in accordance with applicable standards num .
the preservative is approved by the awpa for ground contact num .
handling and care are in accordance with awpa standard mnum and num .
only one kind of preservative is used for any particular item on a project e.g .
wood guardrail posts wood fence posts wood sign posts etc .. num structural timber and lumber num num num num num num structural timber and lumber ensure that millwork adzing framing cutting and boring has been completed before pressure treatment .
if field cutting and boring is allowed and performed after treatment ensure that resulting cuts and holes are thoroughly swabbed sprayed or brushed with two coats of a preservative approved by the awpa for field use or repair treat damaged surface areas the same way .
ensure that treatment reports boring reports and assay reports submitted to the department are representative of each shipment .
ensure the provision and use of timber and lumber that has been inspected before shipment that a certificate of inspection is given to the engineer and that each piece inspected and certified is marked accordingly wood to be treated may be unmarked .
ensure that untreated lumber has been seasoned to a moisture content of num percent or less before shipment .
certification or grade marking does not constitute acceptance the engineer will reject material not meeting specifications upon delivery .
stack wood stored at the job site to ensure proper ventilation and elevated off the ground the engineer may reject wood damaged because of improper storage .
provide roughsawn timber or lumber in accordance with table num dimensional requirements roughsawn timber or lumber .
provide posts in accordance with subsection num treatedtimber sign posts .
num num num num num num num table num dimensional requirements roughsawn timber or lumber num structural timber and lumber nominal thicknesswidth in mm allowable thicknesswidth minimumnum in mm maximum in mm num num f num numc num num num nume num num num num num nume num numd num num num nume num numd num num num nume num numd num num num nume num numd num num num nume num numd num num num numd num num num num if the dimension is thickness num percent of the length of the item may have a thickness num in num mm smaller than the indicated minimum tolerance for rough sawn lumber ensure that the remaining num percent of the item length meets specified minimum thickness .
num section num mailbox posts and mounting hardware num mailbox post and mounting hardware ensure the provision and use of mailbox posts and mounting hardware in accordance with table num mailbox post and hardware mounting requirements .
table num mailbox post and hardware mounting requirements num mailbox posts and mounting hardware num item size material type surface finish ubolt clamps commercial hardware commercial astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm single double multiple supports num in num mm od num gage astm a num astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm socket num gage astm a num m dipcoated with rustinhibiting primer fed spec ttpnum wedge num gage astm a num m astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm mounting bracket and angle num gage astm a num m astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm adapter plate num gage astm a num m astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm antitwist plate num gage astm a num m cantilever pipe galvanized .
pressure testing not required astm a num type f schedule num astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numm screw fittings may be steel or malleable iron .
pressure testing not required .
astm a numm or astm a num astm a numm grade num astm a num astm a numm class c or d num section num grout num grout num sandcement grout for sandcement grout provide and use grout composed of portland cement in accordance with subsection num portland cement sand in accordance with subsection num aggregate for mortar and only enough water to allow placing and packing ensure a proportion of cement to sand measured by volume of num .
mix approximately num minutes before use .
num nonshrink grout for nonshink grout provide and use a product in accordance with astm c num .
do not add aluminum .
num epoxy resin grout for epoxy resin grout provide and use a product in accordance with aashto m num type iv grade num use grade num for horizontal holes and vertical and overhead applications .
provide a class of grout suitable for the temperature of the concrete at the time of use .
the engineer may approve the use of other polymer adhesives .
num grout num num num num num hydrated lime num section num hydrated lime num general for hydrated lime provide and use a product analyzed in accordance with astm c num and in accordance with table num chemical composition for hydrated lime .
table num chemical composition for hydrated lime component percent nonvolatile basis calcium oxide cao num max .
active lime content calcium hydroxide caohnum calcium oxide cao num min .
carbon dioxide conum num max .
magnesium oxide mgo num max .
combined iron and aluminum oxides fenumonum and alnumonum num max .
silica sionum and insoluble matter num max .
free water content num max .
num soil stabilization for use in soil stabilization provide and use hydrated lime in accordance with aashto m num aashto m numm except as noted in subsection num general .
num antistripping additive for plant mix pavement as an antistripping additive to plant mix pavement ensure the use of hydrated lime of which no less than num percent passes through a no .
num num µm sieve and num percent through a no .
num num µm sieve when tested by wet sieving methods in accordance with astm c num section num .
num num num section num geocell num geocell construct geocell of polyethylene or high density polyethylene having a depth of num in num mm an expanded cell length of num in to num in num mm to num mm and perforated sides .
ensure perforations that are in staggered horizontal rows .
provide geocell meeting the requirements of table num geocell properties .
table num geocell properties num geocell num property test method value sheet thickness astm d num num mil num mm density astm d num num num lbftnum num num gcm³ environmental stress crack resistance escr astm d num num hour min .
carbon black content astm d num num num short term peel strength u.s. army corps of engineers technical report glnum appendix a num lb num n min .
num num rockfall mesh num num section num rockfall mesh num wire mesh provide rockfall mesh that is hexagonal nonraveling woven doubletwist hotdipped zinccoated galvanized wire with the size of the mesh opening being num in num in num mm num mm nominal .
match the color of the pvc sheath with the surrounding rock slope and as approved by the engineer .
selvedge or bind perimeter edges of wire mesh to prevent unraveling of the mesh .
use wire with a minimum strength at least equal to the mesh for the selvedge and with a diameter greater than that of the mesh wire and as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure rockfall mesh meets the requirements listed in table num rockfall mesh properties .
table num rockfall mesh properties property test method nominal value tensile strength astm a num num psi num mpa galvanized wire diameter astm a num num in num mm zinc coating astm a num num ozftnum num gm² min .
galvanized wire diameter for pvc coated wire astm a num num in num mm zinc coating for pvc coated wire astm a num num ozftnum num gm² min .
pvc coating thickness astm a num num in num mm num lacing and fasteners provide and use fasteners for connecting edges and ends of mesh rolls at overlaps in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
ensure lacing and fasteners meet the requirements listed in table num lacing wire and fasteners .
num num num table num lacing wire and fasteners num anchors for driven and grouted anchors provide num in num mm diameter num ft num m long grade num num threaded bars in accordance with astm a num astm a numm epoxy coat under shop conditions in accordance with aashto m num astm a numaashto m numm astm a numm for corrosion protection .
provide spin adapters for grouted anchors to facilitate installation by rotation without damaging the threads .
when specified for grouted anchors use in num mm diameter zinccoated steel structural wire strand in accordance with astm a num class a splay num in num mm of the wire rope end .
num grout use nonshrink cement grout in accordance with subsection num nonshrink grout to grout drilled anchors .
provide resin grout in cartridge form and with thixotropic and viscous properties to allow mixing of the materials by rotation of the anchor without the mixture running out of the hole or into the joints after mixing .
use resin grout in accordance with table num resin grout properties .
num rockfall mesh num num num property test method nominal value galvanized wire diameter for lacing wire astm a num num in num mm galvanized wire diameter for fasteners astm a num num in num mm pvc coating thickness astm a num num in num mm num property value ultimate compressive strength num psi num mpa min .
ultimate tensile strength num psi num mpa min .
ultimate shear strength when fully cured num psi num mpa min .
table num resin grout properties provide resin cartridges a maximum of num in num mm in length and individually identified as to their respective gel times .
ensure gel time and size of cartridges are as recommended by the manufacturer for the drill hole and anchor size used .
store resin grout as recommended by the manufacturer .
num top support wire rope provide wire rope num in num mm in diameter zinccoated steel structural wire strand in accordance with astm a num class a .
num hardware use heavy duty spherical seating type nuts in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
provide flat or beveled washers as required in accordance with astm f numm .
provide steel bearing plates in accordance with astm a num astm a numm grade num num use dinch num mm flat steel square plates with a side dimension of at least num in num mm .
use lightweight wire rope thimbles weighing approximately num lb num kg per hundred .
use dropped forged steel or cast steel wire rope clips .
ensure thimbles and wire rope clips are galvanized in accordance with astm a num astm a numm .
num rockfall mesh num num num num num num index index symbols numpermitnum a abbreviationsnum acceptacceptancenum acceptance aggregate num asphaltmaterials num finalpayment num addendumnum additivescommercialnum adjudicationnum adjustments firehydrantspayitem num valveboxespayitem num admixturesnum airentraining num airentrainingandother num waterreducingacceleratingorset retarding num adverseweatherdaynum advertisementnum aggregatenum analysis num bedcoursematerial num num blotter num classbbedding num concrete num flexiblepavement num flowablebackfill num num gravelfordrains num maintenancetypea num maintenancetypeb num maintenancetypec num microsurfacing num num mortar num perviousbackfillmaterial num num pitrunfiller num plantmixbase num reclaimedasphaltpavement num recycledplantmixpavements num riprap num num stonefilledgabions num stonemattress num subbaseandbase num wearingcourse num agreementnum airpollutionnum anchorbolts highstrength num setting num annualaveragedailytrafficnum asphalt dustcontrolagent num dustcontrolbrinesolution num dustcontroloil num emulsified num liquidcutback num mastic num performancegradedbinder .
num num num num num num num asphaltbinderpayitemnum authorityofengineernum availablematerialsourcesnum awardnum awarddatenum b backfill culverts num flowable num num pipes num structure num trench num backhoenum payfactor num payitem num baleserosionnum num payitem num barchartmethodnum barricadesnum num barrier boxbeam num payitem num concretenum num num concretetemporary num num payitem num mediannum num num payitem num num index basenum crushed num emulsionstabilized num plantmix num basecoursenum num num batchplantnum num bearingsurfacesnum bedcoursematerialnum num num payitem num benchingrequirementsnum bid num bond num envelope num biddernum bidderdisqualificationnum biddingrequirementsandconditions.num bikepathnum num concpayitem num plantmixpayitem num bins batchplant num storage num blanketerosioncontrolnum num payitem num blendedbasepayitemnum blendedsubbasepayitemnum blotternum num num gradationrequirements num payitem num bluebooknum bluebridgepaintnum boltsandfastenersnum num highstrength num bolttensionnum bond bid num num performance num num bondtestnum borrowareasnum borrowspecialexcavationpayitemnum boxbeamnum num endtermwybetmodpayitemnum endtermwybetpayitem num guardrailendanchtype___pay item num guardrailpayitem num medbarrierendanchtype___pay item num medbarrierendtermwybetpay item num medbarrierpayitem num boxculvert precastconcrete num num precastpayitem num rcremovalofpayitem num bracepanelsnum payitem num breakawaysignsnum bridgenum bridgeapproachbackfillpayitemnum bridgeapproachfillsreinforced num num bridgebarriernum payitem num bridgedeck finishing num repair classiapayitemnum classibpayitemnum classiiapayitemnum classiibpayitemnum bridgelightingsystempayitemnum bridgemedianbarrierpayitemnum bridgerailingnum num modificationpayitem num paintrepairpayitem num payitem num removal num resetpayitem num broadcastingseednum bulldozernum payfactor num payitem num burlapbagcurbsnum num payitem num c cableandconductorsnum num calendardaynum californiatypeprofilograph num num num cambertolerancenum casing removable num removal num castings grayiron num metal num painting num steel num num index catchbasinsnum num type___payitem num category___tcdunitspayitemnum cattleguardnum num num heavydutypayitem num mediumdutypayitem num removalpayitem num swingwingpayitem num cattleguardgrill heavydutyreplacepayitem num mediumdutyreplacepayitem num cattleguardresetnum heavydutypayitem num mediumpayitem num payitem num cement blended num masonry num portlandnum num num shippingandstorage num cementtreatedbasenum centralmixersnum certificationsnum num certifiedpayrollsnum characterofworksignificantchanges .. num chipsealnum payitem num withoutovershoot num withovershoot num chipsealovershootpayitemnum chutesnum claimsnum num classaconcretepayitemnum classbconcretepayitemnum classcconcretepayitemnum cleanwateractnum clearingandgrubbingnum payitem num clearingtreespayitemnum clearzonenum clock solidstatetime num timepayitem num timeremovepayitem num timeresetpayitem num cmparchfesectpayitemnum cmparchpayitemnum cmpfesectpayitemnum cmppayitemnum coconutfiberditchliningpayitem.num cofferdamsnum cofferdamsealsnum coldfeedcontrolsystemnum commercialadditivesnum num commercialsourcenum num commissionnum num compactionnum num num backfilling num baseandsubbase num culvertbackfilling num cutareas num embankmentareas num embankmentswithoutmoistureand densitycontrol num embankmentwithmoistureand densitycontrolnum excavationandembankment num foundationbackfilling num geotextiles num limetreatedsubgrade num plantmix num plantmixleveling num plantmixpavement num plantmixteststrip num plantmixwearingcourse num removal num signdelineatorandreference markerposts num structurefoundation num trenchbackfill num compressedjointmaterialpayitemnum concpoletype___payitemnum concpvmtspallrepairpayitemnum concrete addedwater num aggregate num approachslabs num barrier num num batching num num batchticketformenum num classtable num cofferdam num consistency num curingnum num num curingmaterials num curingprecast num erosioncontrol num evaporationnomograph num falsework num num index finishing num finishingprecast num finishingsurfaces num forms num mixdesign num num mixers num mixing num mixingtime num pavementrepair num payitem num placing num portlandcementpavement num precast num num precastmembers num prestressedprecast num pumping num pvmtpayitem num removeforms num num retempering num slumplimits num structural num surfacefinishtypes num surfaceprecast num temperature num testing num vibrators num num wateradded num num weatherlimitations num concslabreplacementpayitemnum concurrentdelaysnum conditionalawardsnum conduitnum hardware num conduitboringpayitemnum conduitflexiblemetalpayitemnum conduithardwarepayitemnum conduitremovepayitemnum conduitrigidpvcpayitemnum conduitrigidstlpayitemnum conduitsystempayitemnum conesnum conference finish num preconstruction num prepaving num num prepour num connectorkit fusedpayitem num unfusedpayitem num construction maintenanceduring num constructionjointsnum constructionlimitsnum constructionpermitnum constructionstakesnum contourdiversionditchesnum contractnum amendment num num amount num award num completiondate num execution num extension num time num contractionjointsnum num contractornum agreements num cooperation num insurancerequirements num subletting num testing num testingpayitem num num contractorfurnishedsourcesnum contractorstormwatercontrolpay itemnum contractorsurveyingpayitemnum controllingactivitynum corrbeam guardrailendanchtype___pay item num guardrailendanchtype___self oxidizingpayitem num guardrailpayitem num guardrailresetpayitem num guardrailselfoxidizingpayitem num guardrailupgradepayitem num medbarrierpayitem num medbarrierresetpayitem num medbarriertermpayitem num medbarrierupgradepayitem num corrosionresistancenum corrstlsiphon fesectpayitem num pipepayitem num corrugatedbeamnum num num corrugatedmetalunitsnum counterstruckmixernum num index cpmschedulenum num payitem num cracksealing concrete num plantmix num requirementsnum cracksealplantmixpayitemnum criticalactivitynum criticalpathnum criticalpathmethodcpmnum crushedbasenum cushion num payitem num removalpayitem num crushedsubbasepayitemnum crusherrunsubbasepayitemnum crushing plantmixpavements num culvertnum num cleaning num cleaningpayitem num connectingbands num excavationandbackfill num pipeselection num subexcavationpayitem num curbandgutternum type___payitem num curbburlapbagnum num payitem num curbplantmixpayitemnum curbrampsnum curing concrete num num materials num curingcompoundimpervious applicationsnum curvingrolledbeamsandwelded girdersnum cutoffwallconcpayitemnum cuttingbitpvmtpayitemnum cuttingconcretepayitemnum d damageclaimsnum num dateawardnum defaultofcontractnum definitionsandtermsnum delays concurrent num excusable num nonexcusable num delineators num num num num type___payitem num densitycontrolnum num departmentnum departmentfurnishedsourcesnum num departmentstormwatercontrolpay itemnum diagramsbendingnum differingsiteconditionsnum directornum directpaymentnum disinfectinglinesnum disputeresolutionnum disqualificationofbiddersnum ditchnum checks num num contourdiversion num liningnum num num paving num pavingconcpayitem num diversionboxesnum num diversionboxtype___payitemnum doublegutterpayitemnum dowelbarnum endcaps num insertion num releaseagent num retrofit num retrofitconcrete num retrofitpayitem num sleeves num drawings shop num num num num num num num working num num drilledholesnum drilledshaftfoundationpayitemnum drilledshaftfoundationsnum num drillingseedingnum drivenanchorspayitemnum drumsnum dryernum dryexcavationnum payitem num drymulchnum num num payitem num dustcollectionsystemnum dustcontrolnum num index agent num num agentpayitem num brinesolution num oil num e edgedropoffnum elastomericbearingpadsnum num elastomericcompjointsealpayitem num electricalconductorspayitemnum electricaldevicesnum electricalsystempayitemnum electronicbiddingsystemebs .. num num elevatorboltsnum num eliminatedpayitemsnum embankmentconstructionnum employeehealthandsafetynum emulsifiedasphaltnum num num num num num modifiedpayitem num overshootpayitem num payitem num emulsionstabilizedbasenum endanchoragesnum wybet num endpanelspayitemnum endsections num num num num engineernum environmentsurfacewaternum epoxy coatedreinforcedconcretepipe .
num intermediatefieldcoat num masticpaint num epoxyresinnum grout num injection num injectionpayitem num equalemploymentopportunitynum equipmentrentalnum erosionandpollutioncontrolsnum erosionbalesnum num payitem num erosioncontrol agentpayitem num blanket num blanketpayitem num concrete num concretepayitem num nettingpayitem num examinationofdocumentsandwork sitenum excavation borrowspecial num measurement num muck num rock num trench num unclassified num wetdry num excavationandbackfill culverts num electricaldevices num structure num excavationandembankmentnum excavatorpayitemnum excelsiorsedimentlogpayitemnum excusabledelaynum expansionjointsnum num concrete num explosivesnum extensionnum extraandforceaccountworknum extraworknum num f fabric padspreformed num paving num num fabricator certification num failureto completeworkbycompletiondate num executecontract num falsework structuralconcrete num structuralsteel num federalaidcontractsnum fencenum industrial num num siltnum num siltpayitem num stays num wing num fenceindustrialbwtoppayitem.num fenceindustrialpayitemnum fence___payitemnum fencetype___payitemnum fencewing___payitemnum num index fertilizernum num num fertilizertype___payitemnum fertilizertypevpayitemnum fieldcoating asphaltmastic num structuralplatepipe num fieldlaboratorynum payitem num fieldpaintingnum filler caulking num pitrun num preformedexpansionjoint num fillheighttablesnum filteraggregatenum payitem num filteraggregateforriprapnum finalacceptancenum finalinspectionnum finalpaymentnum finishconferencenum firehydrantsnum adjustmentspayitem num payitem num flaggingpayitemnum flashingbeaconsystempayitemnum floodgatesnum flowablebackfillnum aggregate num payitem num flyashnum num fogsealnum payitem num forceaccountnum forceaccountworkpayitemnum foreignmanufacturedmaterialsnum num formedmethodplacingconcretenum formsstructuralconcretenum num framesnum fuelburnernum g gabionsnum num payitem num stonefilled num galvanized coating num steelgates num steelpipepolymericprecoated num galvanizingnum repairof num gatesnum galvstlpayitem num industrial___payitem num ____payitem num railpayitem num resetpayitem num steel num gaugenum geologyprogramnum geotextilenum num num erosioncontrol num ___payitem num glassfiberreinforcedpavingfabric payitemnum gradestakingnum gratesnum gravelfordrainsnum payitem num grindtextureconcpvmtpayitemnum groundrodpayitemnum groutnum num epoxyresin num nonshrink num resinproperties num sandcement num work num groutedanchorsnum payitem num groutedriprapnum guardrailnum corrugatedmetalbeam num hardware num reflectortabs num removal num reset num selfoxidizing num h handplacedriprappayitemnum hardwareclothnum haulingplantnum haulpayitemnum haulroadmaintenancerestoration payitemnum headwallconcpayitemnum headwallsnum heatnumberssteelstructuresnum highwaynum num index monuments num monumentspayitem num holesforfastenersnum holidaysnum hotplantmix approachespayitem num approachessuperpavepayitemnum levelingpayitem num levelingrecyclepayitem num levelingsuperpavepayitem num payitem num recyclepayitem num superpavepayitem num hotpouredelasticsealantnum num hydratedlimenum num chemicalcompositionfor num payitem num subgradepayitem num hydraulicmulchingpayitemnum hydraulicseedingpayitemnum i identifyingplateselectricalnum impermeableplasticmembranenum num payitem num incidentalpaymentnum industrialfencenum num inletadjustmentpayitemnum inletsnum adjusting num curb num metaldrain num inlettype___payitemnum inspectionnum precastconcrete num shop num sourceofsupply num structuralsteel num inspectornum authority num installlightingpolepayitemnum insurancecontractorrequirementsnum intentofcontractnum internationalsystemofunitssinum interpretationofquantitiesnum invitationforbidsnum invoiceworknum irregularbidsnum irrigationnum j jobmixformulanum num num joint elasticsealant num hotpouredelasticsealant num num num longitudinalplantmix num materials num preformedelastomericcompression sealant num num sawing num sealingconcretepavement num siliconesealantnum num num l laboratorynum field num landfillsnum num latexemulsionpaintconcpayitem num lawsnum levelerpavingnum lift num lightingcable___conductorpayitem .. num lightingpolemodifypayitemnum lightingsystemtestsnum lime hydratednum num num hydratedsubgradepayitem num slurryapplication num treatedsubgrade num treatedsubgradeprocessingpay item num liquidateddamagesnum liquidlimitnum num livestockprotectionnum load cellnum num restrictions num loaderpayitemnum loopdetectorsealantpayitemnum loopdetectorshieldedleadincable payitemnum loopdetectorwirenum lot acceptance num areameasurement num num index sizenum num num num sizeaggregategradation num sizerecycledplasticpost num sizessamplingandtesting num volumemeasurement num num weightmassmeasurementnum num lotspartial num num num louveredbackplatepayitemnum lumberstructuralnum luminairenum num payitem num removepayitem num resetpayitem num lumpsumpayitemnum m machineplacedriprappayitemnum mailboxes postsandmountinghardware num removingandresetting num reset___payitem num maintenancestockpilenum type___payitem num maintenancesuspensionsnum majorpayitemnum mandatorymaterialsourcesnum manholenum adjustmentpayitem num type___payitem num mastarmframeworkpayitemnum material availablesources num certification num commercialsources num contractorfurnished num contractortesting num controlof num departmentfurnished num excessnum num num foreignmanufactured num handling num num mandatorysources num rejected num rightsin num storageof num unacceptable num materialsnum materialsprogramnum materialstestingmanualnum measurementandpaymentnum mechanicalsplicespayitemnum mediannum medianbarriernum num num payitem num medianpavingnum concpayitem num plantmixpayitem num metaldraininletnum payitem num metaldrainpipepayitemnum meterswaternum microloopdetectornum payitem num microsurfacingnum num aggregate num aggregatepayitem num emulsifiedasphaltpayitem num microwavedetectorpayitemnum millingmachinenum millingplantmixpayitemnum minorconcretepavingnum mixdesignnum concrete num num microsurfacing num num plantmixwearingcourse num structuralconcrete num superpaveandmarshallplantmixnum mixersstructuralconcretenum num mixing airtemperaturelimitations num concrete num plantmix num timeconcrete num mobilizationnum payitem num modify lightingpolepayitem num servicepointpayitem num signalcontrollercabinetpayitemnum moistureanddensitycontrolnum embankmentswithout num monthlyprogresspaymentnum num mortar pipejoint num specimensproperties num motorgraderpayitemnum muckexcavationnum payitem num num index mulchnum dry num hydraulic num tacktype___payitem num n nails num neatlinesnum nonexcusabledelaynum noticetoproceednum notificationnum o orderlistsreinforcingsteelnum ordinaryfinishnum originalcontracttimenum overburdennum placingpayitem num removalpayitem num overheadsignlightingsystempay itemnum overtimechargesnum p paintnum aluminum num bridgesystemaalkyd num bridgesystembzincrichepoxy andlatex num firstfieldcoat num graytan num latexemulsion num shopprimer num steelstructures num painting field num piles num shop num structuralsteel num num paintrepairnum bridgerailingpayitem num steelpilingpayitem num structuralsteelpayitem num partneringnum patenteddevicesmaterialsand processesnum pavement concretejoints num plantmix num plantmixcommercialmix num repairconcrete num smoothness num texturingnum num num pavementmarkings conflicting num permanent num temporary num pavementstructurenum paversplantmixnum paving fabric num num fabricpayitem num leveler num minorconcrete num payitemnum payment direct num final num incidental num materialonhand num monthlyprogress num royalty num peddetectorpayitemnum pedestrianrailingmodificatonpayitem .
num pedestrianrailingpayitemnum pedestriantrafficsignalnum num pedinstructionsignpayitemnum pedsignalindicationpayitemnum performancebondnum num performancegradedasphaltbinder.num num num num num num num permitslicensesandtaxesnum perviousbackfillmaterialnum num payitem num pile alignment num bearingvalue num hammers num piles bearing num predrilled num steel num pilesplicespayitemnum pilingsheetnum pinsandrollersnum num index pipe aluminumcoated num archfesectpayitem num archpayitem num collarspayitem num corrugatedaluminumalloy num ductileironwater num fesectpayitem num metal num nestablemetal num payitem num plastic num num polymericprecoatedgalvanizedsteel num reinforcedconcrete num siphon num structuralplate num weldedsteelsiphon num pipeandpipearches bituminouscoatedcorrugatedsteel .. num corrugatedsteel num underdrains num pitrunsubbasepayitemnum plansnum plantmix airtemperaturelimitations num capacity num commercialpayitem num pavementcommercialmix num pavements num pavingleveler num scales num wearingcourse num wearingcoursepayitem num plasticfencepostsnum num plasticityindexnum plasticsiphonpipepayitemnum plasticwaterbarrierpayitemnum polefoundationnum poles classification num fiberglass num steel num trafficsignalroadwaylighting num num pollutioncontrolsnum air num polyesterresingroutnum num polymermodifiedemulsifiedasphalt num num pondscrubbernum portableplasticwaterfilledbarriernum portlandcementnum num proportioningmixes num posts delineator num fence num guardrail num reference num signsupports num timber num num posttopframeworkpayitemnum precastboxculvertspayitemnum precastconcretenum precastconcretemembers payitem num tolerance num preconstructionconferencenum predrilledholespayitemnum prefabloopdetectorpayitemnum preferenceforwyomingcitizensnum preformednum preformedcompressionjointnum preformedelastomericcompression sealantnum num preformedexpansionjointfillernum preformedfabricpadsnum preformedflexiblejointsealantsnum prepavingconferencenum num prequalificationofbiddersnum prestressedprecast concbulbtpayitem num concigirderpayitem num conctrideckpayitem num prestressingnum prewettingnum primecoatnum applicationtemperatures num payitem num processinglimetreatedsubgrade payitemnum professionalengineernum professionallandsurveyornum profilegradenum profilemillingplantmixpayitemnum propertyprotectionnum proposalformenum proposalpackagenum proposals combination num submission num num index prosecutionandprogressnum pugmillnum pullboxnum num removepayitem num resetpayitem num type___payitem num q qualitylevelanalysisnum num num quantities altered num changesin num r rail boxbeam num corrugatedbeam num railelementsnum railingbridgenum num num modificationpayitem num paintrepairpayitem num payitem num resetpayitem num railingpedestriannum modificationpayitem num payitem num railwayprovisionsnum rcstockpass fesectpayitem num payitem num reclaimedasphaltpavementnum recycledplantmixpavementnum num referencemarkernum panelspayitem num payitem num referencepostnum reinforcedconc approachslabspayitem num slopepavingpayitem num reinforcedconcretepipercp archfesectpayitem num archpayitem num ellipticalpayitem num elllipticalfesectpayitem num fesectpayitem num payitem num siphonfesectpayitem num siphonpayitem num reinforcedconcretestockpassesnum reinforcingsteel num num num num bars num bending num coated num coatedpayitem num deckslab num orderlists num payitem num placingandfastening num splices num num supportsandties num rejection notification num precastmembers num relayingpipepayitemnum removalof bitcurbpayitem num bridgerailpayitem num ___bridgespayitem num cattleguardspayitem num concretemedianpayitem num concretepavementpayitem num concretepayitem num crushedbasepayitem num curbandgutterpayitem num curbpayitem num doublegutterpayitem num fencepayitem num guardrailandbarrierpayitem num inletspayitem num manholespayitem num pedestrianrailpayitem num pipefesectionpayitem num pipepayitem num rcboxculvertspayitem num sidewalkpayitem num signspayitem num signstructurespayitem num snowfencepanelspayitem num stormsewerpayitem num structuresandobstructionspayitem num surfacingpayitem num remove conduitpayitem num conduitsystempayitem num frameworkpayitem num lightingpolepayitem num luminairepayitem num pedsignalindicationpayitem num num index polefoundationpayitem num pullboxpayitem num servicepointpayitem num signalcontrollerauxeqppayitem num signalcontrollercabinetpayitemnum signalcontrollerpayitem num signalindicationpayitem num singleconductorwirepayitem num timeclockpayitem num replace cattleguardgrillheavydutypay item num cattleguardgrillmediumdutypay item num requiredcontractprovisionsnum reset boxbeamendtermwybetpay item num boxbeamguardrailpayitem num boxbeammedbarrierpayitem num bridgerailingpayitem num cattleguardheavydutypayitem .. num cattleguardmediumdutypayitem num cattleguardpayitem num corrbeamguardrailpayitem num corrbeammedbarrierpayitem .. num fencepayitem num frameworkpayitem num gatespayitem num lightingpolepayitem num luminairepayitem num mailbox___payitem num pedsignalindicationpayitem num pullboxpayitem num signalcontrollerauxeqppayitem num signalcontrollercabinetpay item num signalcontrollerpayitem num signalindicationpayitem num signspayitem num snowfencepayitem num timeclockpayitem num residentnum responsibilitycontractornum num responsivebidnum restarealightingsystempayitem.num retroreflectorsnum rightofwaynum riparianhabitatnum riprapnum aggregate num num grouted num handplaced num handplacedpayitem num machineplaced num machineplacedpayitem num wireenclosed num num wireenclpayitem num roadnum roadbednum roadbedpreparationnum roadclosuregatesnum roadclosuresystempayitemnum roadsidenum roadwaynum roadwaylightingsystempayitem .. num rockcheckdikespayitemnum rockexcavationpayitemnum rockfallmeshnum num payitem num rollers pneumatictired num steelwheel num vibratory num rollertype___payitemnum royaltynum num rubbedfinishnum rumblestripsnum asphaltpayitem num concretepayitem num rumblestripsectionpayitemnum s safetycoverpayitemnum samplingnum aggregates num chipandfogseal num emulsifiedasphalt num microsurfacing num miscellaneousmaterials num paint num performanceby num pgab num plantmix num plantmixpavementcracksealingnum num index pointof num tackcoatprocedures num valvenum num num num sawcutloopdetectorpayitemnum scaling machinepayitem num manualpayitem num schedule barchartmethod num criticalpathmethodcpm num scraperpayitemnum sealcoatnum dates num payitem num sealingcracksconcpvmtpayitem num sealingjointsconcpvmtpayitemnum sedimenttrapsnum seednum seeding hydraulic num payitem num plspayitem num specialplspayitem num time num sequentialchevronnum num payitem num servicepointnum lightingpayitem num signalpayitem num solarpayitem num sheetmetalnum shopdrawings electricaldevices num guardrailandmedianbarrier num precastconcrete num siphons num structuralconcrete num structuralsteel num shoppaintingnum shouldernum barrierpayitem num sidebracketframeworkpayitemnum sidewalknum num concpayitem num plantmixpayitem num signalnum num num cable___conductor___awgpay item num indication___payitem num mountinghardware num signalcontroller auxeqppayitem num auxeqpremovepayitem num auxeqpresetpayitem num cabinetmodifypayitem num cabinetpayitem num cabinetremovepayitem num cabinetresetpayitem num payitem num removepayitem num resetpayitem num significantchangenum signpanels aluminumpayitem num plywoodpayitem num signpost rndtubularstlpayitem num sqtubularstlpayitem num stlpipebreakawaypayitem num woodpayitem num wood___rndpayitem num signsnum andtrafficdevices num breakaway num overhead num resetpayitem num signsupport stlbreakawaypayitem num stloverheadpayitem num silicafumemodifiedconcretepayitem num siltfencenum num payitem num singleconductorwirepayitemnum siphonpipenum num siphonsnum slidegatenum num payitem num slipformmethodnum num num slopedrainsnum slopepaving reinforcedconcpayitem num repairmodificationpayitem num slotteddrainsnum payitem num snowfencenum repairpayitem num resetpayitem num woodpayitem num sod num num index soddingnum num payitem num sodiumchloridenum payitem num sourceofsupplymaterialsinspectionnum sources contractorfurnished num departmentfurnished num materialchanges num specialcurbtype___payitemnum specialprovisionsnum specialtyitemnum specificationsnum specifiedcompletiondatenum specifiedorasspecifiednum speltercoatingrepairnum num num spillwayplantmixpayitemnum splicingkitpayitemnum splitsamplenum standarddeviationmethodnum standardplansnum standardspecificationsnum standbytimenum statenum stateprojectsnum stationnum staysfencenum steel pilinghppayitem num posts num reinforcingnum num num num sheetpilingsm___payitem num shopassembling num structuralnum num num steelmiteredendsme archsectpayitem num archsectwgratepayitem num sections num sectpayitem num sectwgratepayitem num stiffenersstructuralsteelnum stillingbasinsnum stlbreakawaysignsupportpayitem num stloverheadsignsupportpayitemnum stlpoletype___payitemnum stockpassesnum num stockpile aggregate num maintenance num maintenanceaggregate num stockpiled___payitemnum stormdrainsnum stormwaterpollutionpreventionplan swpppnum straighteningrolledbeamsandwelded girdersnum streetnum stressrelievingstructuralsteelnum strippingmaterialnum structuralconcretenum num structuralplatepipenum archpayitem num payitem num structuralplatestockpasspayitemnum structuralsteelnum num num paintrepairpayitem num payitem num subbasenum num aggregatenum num num crushedpayitem num crusherrunpayitem num payitem num pitrunpayitem num treatment num subcontractnum subcontractornum num subexcavationnum culvertpayitem num trenchpayitem num subgradenum hydratedlimepayitem num limetreated num limetreatedprocessingpayitem num removal num sublettingofcontractnum substantialcompletionnum substructurenum superintendentnum superstructurenum supplementarydocumentnum supplementaryspecificationnum supports overheadsign num signroadway num suretynum surfacecoursenum surfacetolerances bridgedeck num curbandgutter num minorconcretepaving num num index plantmixpavements num plantmixwearingcourse num slabreplacement num surfacewaternum surveymanualnum suspensionofworknum t tackcoatnum applicationtemperatures num payitem num taperplantmixnum tcdunits category___payitem num temperature chipandfogsealapplication num fieldwelding num liquidasphaltapplication num placingconcrete num plantmixlimitations num precastconcretecuring num tackcoatapplication num unmodifiedasphaltbinders num temporaryconcretebarriernum num payitem num temporaryconcreteterminalpayitem .. num temporarycovercropnum temporaryguardrailpayitemnum temporarytrafficcontrolnum num payitem num tensioncalibratornum terminationfordefaultnum testmethodsnum testsection chipseal num dowelbarretrofit num microsurfacing num num teststrippayitemnum texturing concretepavementrepairnum num portlandcementconcrete num thrustblockspayitemnum tiebarsnum timberandlumbernum num timbertreatednum time delaytotravelingpublic num workingdayextensions num num timeclockpayitemnum topsoil borrowpayitem num placingpayitem num storingpayitem num traffic controlandroadwaylighting num devicetests num trafficcontroldevicetcd category___tcdunitspayitemnum trafficcontrolmaintenancenum trafficsignalsystempayitemnum trashguard___payitemnum trashguardsnum traveledwaynum tremienum trenchingandbackfillingpayitemnum trenchsubexcavationpayitemnum triangularsiltdikenum payitem num truckmixersnum truckpayitemnum tubingaluminumnum tubularmarkersnum tubularsteelsignpostsnum tunnellightingsystempayitemnum twistofffastenersnum u ultrasonicweldtestingnum unclassifiedexcavationpayitemnum underdrainpipe nonperfpayitem num perfpayitem num underdrainsnum plasticpipe num num steelpipe num underpasslightingsystempayitem num unitbidpricenum upgrade boxbeamguardrailpayitem num boxbeammedbarrierpayitem num corrbeamguardrailpayitem num corrbeammedbarrierpayitem .. num guardrail num utilityproceduresnum num index v valueengineeringcontractorproposal vecpnum num valveboxesnum adjustmentspayitem num payitem num vanefeedernum vehicledetectorsnum volumetricmeasurementsnum w wagesnum washerloadindicatornum num wateringnum waterlinesnum watermeternum waterpayitemnum waterstopnum waveanalysisforpilesnum weatheradversedaynum weightloadrestrictionsnum weldedstlsiphonpipepayitemnum weldedstudsnum welding electrodecertificationconformance num materials num weldingandexaminationnum wetexcavationpayitemnum wetlandsnum wettedaggregatenum wingfencenum wireenclriprappayitemnum wirefencenum wireropenum num woodenpostsnum num num worknum changesinthecharacter num unacceptable num workernum requirements num workingdaynum workingdrawingsnum num wybet boxbeamendtermmodpayitem num boxbeamendtermpayitem num boxbeamendtermresetpayitem num boxbeammedbarrierendtermpay item num endterminalnum num num
